1
Chapter 1 General Provisions
1.01 Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code
1.02 Definitions
1.03 Repeal of Ordinances
1.04 Ordinances Repealed not Re-enacted
1.05 Jurisdiction
1.06 Responsibility for Acts
1.07 Penalties
1.08 Separability of Provisions
1.09 Effective Date
1.10 Copies on File
1.01 WISCONSIN RAPIDS MUNICIPAL CODE
(1) Title. This code of ordinances may be known and cited as the Municipal Code of the City of Wisconsin
Rapids, Wisconsin.
(2) Amendments, Additions, and Deletions. Any ordinance which is an amendment or addition to this code
shall be incorporated as part of this code. Any reference to the Municipal Code of Wisconsin Rapids
includes such amendments or additions. Ordinances amending, adding to, or repealing portions of this
code shall be passed as authorized in Section 62.11(4) of the Wisconsin Statutes and kept by the city
clerk in a book entitled "Ordinances". The code shall be brought up to date on a periodic basis as
authorized by the common council.
(3) Numbering of Sections. Each section number of this code shall consist of two component parts
separated by a period, the figure before the period referring to the chapter number and the figure after
the period referring to the position of the section within the chapter.
(4) Number Additions. The decimal system shall be used for all additions or amendments to this code.
When a chapter or section is to be added, the new chapter or section shall be given a decimal
character.
1.02 DEFINITIONS
(1) Terms used in this code, unless specifically defined in the code, have the meanings prescribed by the
Wisconsin Statutes for the same terms.
(2) Terms used in this code have the following meanings:
(a) City: The City of Wisconsin Rapids, Wisconsin
(b) County: Wood County
(c) State: The State of Wisconsin
(d) Council: The Common Council of the City of Wisconsin Rapids
(e) Person: Any natural individual, firm, partnership, trust, estate, club, association, or
corporation. As applied to partnerships or associations, the word includes the partners or
members thereof. As applied to corporations, it includes the officers, agents, or employees
thereof who are responsible for the act referred to. The singular includes the plural and the
plural includes the singular. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
(f) Ordinance: The ordinances of the City of Wisconsin Rapids and all amendments thereto,
including this code.
(g) This Code: The Municipal Code of the City of Wisconsin Rapids
(h) Wisconsin Statutes: The 1993-94 edition thereof; and when later editions are published, the
latest publication thereof.
1.03 REPEAL OF ORDINANCES
(1) All general ordinances, or parts thereof, heretofore adopted by the council and not included in this
code are repealed, except the following which are hereby continued in full force and effect:
2
(a) Ordinances authorizing contracts or the issue of municipal notes or bonds
(b) Ordinances levying taxes or making special assessments
(c) Ordinances appropriating funds or establishing salaries
(d) Ordinances granting franchises or rights to corporations
(e) Ordinances relating to the establishment, dedication, opening, grade, naming improvements,
altering, widening, or vacating of any streets, alleys, or sidewalks, parks, or public grounds
(f) Ordinances respecting the annexation of territory to the city, or the conveyance or acceptance
of real property or easements in real property, or the location of shore lines
(g) Ordinances authorizing or relating to particular public improvements
(h) Any other special ordinances not in conflict with the provisions of this code
(2) Zoning ordinances are amended in certain minor respects only, but not in substance, to read as set
forth in this code.
(3) The provisions of this code, so far as they are the same in substance as those of heretofore existing
ordinances, are continuations of such ordinances and not new enactments. Any act done, offense
committed, or right occurring or acquired, or liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment incurred prior
hereto shall not be affected, but may be enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted, or inflicted as fully
and to the same extent as if the above repeal had not been effective.
1.04 ORDINANCES REPEALED NOT RE-ENACTED
No ordinance, or part of ordinance, heretofore repealed shall be considered re-ordained or re-enacted by virtue
of these ordinances, unless specifically re-enacted. The repeal of any curative or validating ordinances shall not
impair or effect any cure or validation already effected thereby.
1.05 JURISDICTION
Unless otherwise provided in this code, this code applies to acts performed within the corporate limits of the
City of Wisconsin Rapids. Provisions of this code also apply to acts performed outside the corporate limits and
up to the limits prescribed by law where the law confers power on the city to regulate such particular acts
outside the corporate limits.
1.06 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ACTS
Every person concerned in the commission of any act prohibited by this code, whether he directly commits the
act, or prosecutes, counsels, aids, or abets in its commission, may be prosecuted, and on conviction is
punishable as if he had directly committed such act.
1.07 PENALTIES
(1) Standard Penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this code for any particular
provision, section, or chapter, any person violating any provision of this code, or any rule or regulation
adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, or any provision of any code adopted herein by reference,
shall upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $200.00 and the costs of
prosecution. In default of immediate payment of such forfeiture and costs such person shall be
committed to the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid. Every commitment shall limit the
duration of such imprisonment to a definite term not exceeding 90 days.
(2) Each Day a Violation. Each act of violation and every day upon which a violation occurs or continues
constitutes a separate offense.
(3) Applicability. The penalty provided by this section or any section of this code applies to the amendment
of any section of this code or any code adopted herein by reference to which the penalty relates
whether or not such penalty is re-enacted in the amendatory ordinance, unless otherwise provided in
the amendment.
(4) Reference to Sections. Reference to any section of this code shall be understood also to refer to and
include the penalty section relating hereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(5) Failure of Officers to Perform Duties. The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject such officer or employee to the penalty imposed for
violation of this code, unless a penalty is specifically provided.
(6) Service charge. Any person who shall fail or neglect to comply with any lawful order of the code official
3
or his/her designee issued pursuant to the provisions of this code may be assessed a service charge
for compliance inspections in excess of one. Service charges that are not paid within 30 days shall be
entered on the tax roll as a special charge against said lot or parcel of land pursuant to the provisions
of Section 66.0627 of the Wisconsin Statutes for collection and settlement under Chapter 74 of the
Wisconsin Statutes. Service charges are independent of other penalties, and the payment of such
service charges shall not relieve any person from complying with the requirements of this code or any
other code adopted by the City, or from any additional penalties proscribed herein. (MC#1103)
1.08 SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS
Each section, paragraph, sentence, clause, and provision of this code is separable and if any provision is held
unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this code nor any part
thereof, other than that part affected by such decision.
1.09 EFFECTIVE DATE
This code of ordinances, having been published in book form under the authority of the common council, as
provided by law, shall take effect the day following publication of the ordinances adopting this code.
1.10 COPIES ON FILE
Copies of this code shall be kept available at the city clerk's office for public inspection.
1
Chapter 2 City Administration
2.01 Form of Government; General Structure
2.02 Mayor
2.03 Number of Alderpersons
2.04 Common Council
2.05 Duties of the Treasurer
2.06 Duties of the Clerk
2.07 Duties of the Attorney
2.08 Other City Officers
2.09 Other Committees, Commissions and Boards
2.10 Health Department
2.11 Emergency Government
2.12 Municipal Reserve Fund-Charter Ordinance 105
2.13 Vacancy in Offices
2.14 Public Construction by the City
2.15 Maintenance and Destruction of and Access to City Records
2.16 Disposal of Abandoned Property
2.17 Citations Authorized
2.18 General Property Tax Collection
2.19 Hotel/Motel Room Tax
2.20 Municipal Court
2.21 Financial Procedure; Alternative System of Approving Claims
2.22 Underpayments and Overpayments
2.23 Franchise Fee
2.01 FORM OF GOVERNMENT; GENERAL STRUCTURE. (Charter Ordinance #1143)
The corporate authority of the City of Wisconsin Rapids is vested in its mayor and common council, in
accordance with its founding charter ordinances and Chapters 62 and 66 of Wisconsin Statutes, as appropriate.
Officers are and shall be a mayor, a finance director (who shall also perform the statutory duties of treasurer), clerk,
attorney, engineer, assessor, board of police and fire commissioners, chief of police, chief of the fire department, an
alderperson from each aldermanic district, and such other officers or boards as are created by law or by the council.
The mayor is elected for a two-year term. The clerk, attorney, and municipal judge are elected for four-year terms.
Alderpersons are elected for two-year terms. Other officers are appointed as provided by law. (Charter Ordinance
#1192) Whenever three (3) or more candidates file nomination papers for a city office, a primary to nominate
candidates for the office shall be held.
2.02 MAYOR
(1) The mayor shall be the chief executive officer. The mayor shall take care that city ordinances and state laws
are observed and enforced and that all city officers and employees discharge their duties.
(2) The mayor shall give information and make recommendations that the mayor deems advantageous to the city,
and, when present, shall preside at the meetings of the common council.
(3) The mayor shall have veto power in accord with statutes.
(4) The mayor shall be the head of the fire and police departments, in accord with appropriate state statutes.
2.03 NUMBER OF ALDERPERSONS (CHARTER ORDINANCE #880)
(1) The City of Wisconsin Rapids hereby elects, pursuant to the provisions of Section 62.09(1)(b) of the Wisconsin
Statutes to change the number of alderpersons in the City of Wisconsin Rapids as hereinafter provided in this
ordinance.
(2) There shall be one alderperson from each of the eight (8) aldermanic districts in the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
The eight (8) aldermanic districts shall be determined by the Common Council during the reapportionment
process following the decennial census.
(3) The first four (4) vacancies in the office of alderperson shall be filled in the Spring Election of 2002 when
2
alderpersons from even-numbered districts shall be elected for a term of two years. Thereafter, four (4)
alderpersons from odd-numbered districts shall be elected in the odd-numbered years for terms of two years,
and four (4) alderpersons from even-numbered districts shall be elected in even-numbered years for terms of
two years and until their successors are elected and qualified.
(4) This is a Charter Ordinance and shall take effect upon publication, unless, within 60 days after its passage and
publication, a referendum election, as provided by Section 66.01 of the Wisconsin Statutes, shall be filed; in
which event this ordinance shall not take effect until it shall have the electors voting thereon.
2.04 COMMON COUNCIL (MC#918)
(1) Meetings.
(a) Regular and Special. Regular meetings of the common council shall ordinarily beheld on the third
Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. The council president may schedule the regular meeting at
another date and/or time if a quorum cannot be obtained or if the interests of the City require it.
Following a regular city election, the new council shall first meet on the third Tuesday in April. The
council shall not meet on the date of a legal holiday, but shall meet as close as practicable to that
time, as scheduled and called by the council president. The council may adjourn from time to time.
The mayor may call a special meeting at any time by notifying members in a manner likely to give each
member notice of the meeting and providing the notice at least six hours before the time set for the
meeting. Such notice shall specify the object of the meeting and the business to be transacted, and no
business may be transacted at a special meeting except that for which said meeting was called. (MC
#1229)
(b) Presiding Officer; Order of Business. The mayor shall preside at all meetings, when present, and in his
absence, the council president shall preside. In case of the absence of the mayor and the council
president, the clerk shall call the council to order and thereupon the council shall elect one of its own
council members president pro tem. The presiding officer shall call the meeting to order at the
appointed time. The order of business shall be fixed by the council, in accord with adopted rules of
order.
(c) Appointment of Committee, Commission, and Board Members. All committees, shall be appointed by
the mayor, unless otherwise directed by the Wisconsin Statutes, and all standing committees shall be
appointed annually at the reorganization meeting after the election. Committee members shall elect
their own chairperson and secretary. All special committee, commission, and board members shall be
appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the common council, unless otherwise provided.
The names of all prospective appointees to special committees, commissions, and boards shall be
presented to the alderpersons at least three days before the common council action, approval, or
confirmation. The rule shall be subject to suspension as provided by Section 2.03(4).
(d) Election by Council. In elections by the common council, the candidate receiving a majority of the votes
cast shall be elected.
(2) Committees of the Common Council.
(a) Standing Committees; Matters Referred. The standing committees of the common council are:
(1) Public Works Committee
(2) Finance and Property Committee
(3) Human Resources Committee
Each council member shall be on at least one committee, to be assigned by the mayor at the
reorganization meeting. Each committee shall have three members. Each committee shall elect its
own chairperson and secretary. (MC #1101)
(b) Standing Committee Responsibilities. The areas of responsibility of the three standing committees are:
(1) Finance and Property Committee: Responsible for overall policy relating to city finances and
city-owned property. Deals with taxation, budgeting, accounting, borrowing, claims, grants,
licensing, insurance, real estate, buildings, equipment, materials, purchasing, and special
events on public property.
(2) Human Resources Committee: Responsible for overall policy relating to the city’s employees.
Deals with wage/salary and benefit plans, labor negotiations, employee grievances, review of
disciplinary actions, personnel policies, organizational structure, staffing levels, and safety.
(3) Public Works Committee: Responsible for overall policy relating to public works programs and
3
projects and city rights of way. Deals with water and sewer projects, street- and sidewalkrelated
projects, sewer, street and sidewalk maintenance programs, garbage and recycling
matters, dedications and vacations of rights of way, special assessments, street names,
parking and traffic control, and street lighting.
(c) Time of Committee Meetings. Committee meetings shall be held when necessary but must be held at
least once a month.
(d) Substitution of Alderpersons. An alderperson may appoint another alderperson to take his/her place at
any committee meeting subject to the committee chairperson's approval for which the substitution is
made.
(3) Common Council Procedures
(a) Two-thirds of the alderpersons shall be a quorum, unless otherwise set by state law.
(b) Matters Considered to be in Writing. All matters, except motions, presented to the common council for
its consideration must be in writing. All reports, before being presented to the common council, shall
have thereon a file number to be assigned by the clerk.
(c) Matters Referred to Committee. No matter shall be acted upon by the common council except upon
the recommendation of the appropriate committee, commission, or board, except that the common
council shall have direct authority in regard to matters relating to zoning, the official map, annexation,
general legislative recommendations, and matters not directly related to the areas of responsibility of
the three standing committees.
(d) Reading and Passage of Ordinances. All ordinances shall have one reading. No ordinance, except an
ordinance relating to parking and traffic regulations, shall be passed at the meeting in which it is
introduced, unless by a unanimous vote of all members voting. A majority vote of all the members of
the common council shall be necessary for the passage of an ordinance. (MC#967)
(e) Suspension of Rules. A vote of two-thirds of the members voting will suspend any rule of the common
council except the rules established by subsections (c) and (d) above.
(f) Parliamentary Procedure
(1) The rules of parliamentary practice comprised in Roberts Rules of Order shall govern the
parliamentary procedure in the conduct of all common council meetings for the City of
Wisconsin Rapids and the city attorney, or other designated person, shall act as
parliamentarian.
(2) In the event of a question on parliamentary procedure, action on the issue before the
common council shall be held in abeyance until the matter is clarified with a quotation from
Roberts Rules of Order by the parliamentarian.
(3) Abstentions are not counted when determining a quorum.
(g) Amendment of Rules. These rules may be amended or altered, or new rules adopted by a majority of
all the members elected at any meeting of the common council on the report of a committee to which
the subject has been referred at a previous meeting.
2.05 DUTIES OF THE TREASURER
(1) The treasurer shall collect all appropriate taxes and receive and pay out city monies according to law.
(2) The treasurer shall maintain suitable books, open to public inspection and file verified reports to the common
council of monies received and disbursed and of the condition of the treasury.
(3) The treasurer shall take no compensation except the salary fixed by council and shall deposit immediately
upon receipt the funds of the city in the public depository designated by the common council.
(4) The treasurer may appoint a deputy, who shall receive compensation as determined by the council.
2.06 DUTIES OF THE CLERK
(1) It shall be the duty of the clerk, in addition to his other duties, to be present at and to keep correct minutes of
the proceedings of each meeting of the common council; make a correct record of same and furnish the mayor
and alderpersons with copies; engross all ordinances and bylaws and record the same in a book of ordinances;
furnish the committees with copies of resolutions and other matters that may be referred to them; and to do
such other clerical duties as may be prescribed by the common council.
(2) The clerk shall publish the substance of every official action of the common council at every general or special
meeting thereof in a newspaper published and of general circulation in the city.
4
(3) The clerk shall draw and sign all orders upon the treasury and preserve all receipts as prescribed by statute
and shall keep a full account thereof in appropriate books.
(4) The clerk shall publish appropriate notices as prescribed by law and keep all records and papers in the clerk's
office open to inspection at reasonable hours.
(5) The clerk shall keep a record of licenses and permits granted and record all bonds, in appropriate books.
(6) The clerk may appoint a deputy, who is to be compensated as the council shall provide.
2.07 DUTIES OF THE ATTORNEY
(1) The attorney shall conduct all the law business in which the city is interested, and shall, when requested by city
officers, give written legal opinions, which shall be filed with the clerk.
(2) The attorney shall draft ordinances, bonds and other instruments as may be required by city officers.
(3) The attorney shall examine the tax and assessment rolls and other tax proceedings, and advise the proper city
officers in regard thereto.
(4) The attorney may appoint an assistant, who shall be compensated according to city ordinance.
(5) The common council may employ and compensate special counsel to assist in or take charge of any matter in
which the city is interested.
2.08 OTHER CITY OFFICERS
(1) Comptroller and street commissioner; offices dispensed with.
(a) The City of Wisconsin Rapids hereby elects, pursuant to the provisions of Section 62.09(1)(b) of the
Wisconsin Statutes, to dispense with the offices of the comptroller and street commissioner.
(b) Comptroller Duties Performed by Mayor. The mayor of Wisconsin Rapids shall perform the duties
designated by the statutes of the State of Wisconsin to be performed by the comptroller.
(2) Assessor (Charter Ordinance 113)
(a) The City of Wisconsin Rapids hereby elects, pursuant to the provisions of Section 62.09(3)(b) of the
Wisconsin Statutes, that the manner of selection of the assessor shall be as hereinafter provided in
this ordinance.
(b) The assessor shall be elected by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of all the members of the common
council from an eligible list, after examination.
(c) The assessor so selected shall hold office for an indefinite term, subject to termination at any time, as
provided in Section 17.12(1)(c) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(d) This is a charter ordinance and shall take effect 60 days after its passage and publication, unless
within such 60 days, a referendum petition, as provided by Section 66.01 of the Wisconsin Statutes
shall be filed; in which event, this ordinance shall not take effect until it shall have been submitted to
a referendum of the electors and approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon. (Passed
November 6, 1945)
(3) City Engineer (MC#125)
(a) One of the engineers hired by the common council shall be appointed as city engineer by the common
council upon the joint recommendation of the mayor and the Human Resources Committee. (MC#920)
(b) The city engineer so appointed shall hold office for an indefinite term, subject to termination at any
time at the pleasure of the common council.
(c) The city engineer shall perform all of the duties required of him as set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes,
together with such other duties as shall be required by the common council and the director of public
works. (MC#813)
(d) The city engineer shall participate on committees, commissions, and boards, as directed by this code.
(MC#813)
(4) Fire Chief. The chief of the fire department shall have command of the fire department of the city under the
direction of the mayor, and shall obey all lawful written orders of the mayor or common council.
(5) Police Chief. The chief of police shall have command of the police force of the city under the direction of the
mayor, and shall obey all lawful written orders of the mayor or common council.
(6) Purchasing Agent - REPEALED by MC#920
(7) Director of Public Works (MC#813)
(a) The director of public works shall be appointed by the common council upon the recommendation of
the mayor and Human Resources Committee. (MC#920)
5
(b) The director of public works shall be a registered professional engineer in the State of Wisconsin.
(c) The director of public works shall be responsible for maintaining and improving the city's infrastructure
and facilities, and for the direction of the public works department, including:
(1) the engineering division
(2) the park, recreation, and forestry division
(3) the street division
(4) the waste water treatment division
(d) The director of public works shall participate on committees, commissions, and boards, as directed by
this code, except that the director may appoint staff members to various committees, commissions,
and boards to serve as full members, with membership, privileges, and responsibilities equal to those
of the director.
2.09 OTHER COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
(1) Annexation Committee - REPEALED by MC#920
(2) Board of Building Appeals. There shall be a board of building appeals as set forth in Chapter 14 of the
Municipal Code.
(3) Board of Electrical Examiners - REPEALED by MC#926
(4) Board of Housing Appeals. There shall be a board of housing appeals as set forth in Chapter 9 of the Municipal
Code.
(5) Board of Public Works. The duties prescribed in Section 62.14 of the Wisconsin Statutes shall be performed,
as applicable, by the Public Works Committee and the Finance and Property Committee of the Wisconsin
Rapids Common Council. (MC#920)
(6) Board of Review.
(a) Membership. The board of review of the City of Wisconsin Rapids, Wisconsin, shall be made up of five
residents of the city, none of whom shall occupy any public office or be publicly employed. (102)
(b) Appointment and Terms of Office. Said members shall be appointed by the mayor of said city with the
approval of the common council and shall hold office as members of said board for five years and until
their successors are appointed and qualified, the first appointments to be for one, two, three, four, and
five years respectively.
(c) Full Length Terms. Every year hereafter, one member of said board shall be appointed for a five-year
term at the regular April meeting of the common council, said term to begin May 1st and shall expire
five years later on May 1. (MC#469)
(d) Alternate Members. There shall be three alternate members of the Board of Review, to serve on board
as needs arise. Said alternate members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the
common council for five-year terms, except that the first three alternates shall be appointed for
respective three-, four-, and five-year terms beginning May 1, 2004. (MC#987)
(e) Vacancies to be filled. Any vacancy that might occur on said board shall be filled at the following
council meeting. Said appointment to be made for the unexpired term of said vacated member.
(f) Work Schedule. The work schedule for the board of review of the City of Wisconsin Rapids shall be a
minimum of two hours or as otherwise required by Wisconsin Statutes. The first session of the board
shall begin at 8:30 a.m. Subsequent sessions shall be scheduled, as necessary, by the board.
(MC#865)
(g) The rate of pay for the board of review members shall be $25.00 for each four-hour period, or portion
thereof, not to exceed $75.00 per day (three periods), or actual wages lost, whichever is greater.
(MC#865)
(7) Board of Zoning Appeals. There shall be a zoning board of appeals as set forth in Chapter 11 of the Municipal
Code.
(8) Circus and Carnival Licensing Board - REPEALED by MC#920
(9) Code Review Committee - REPEALED by MC #926
(10) Ethics Board. There shall be an ethics board as set forth in Chapter 26 of the Municipal Code.
(11) Housing Authority. There shall be a housing authority as established by appropriate federal and state
regulations to administer public and subsidized housing in Wisconsin Rapids.
(12) Industrial Development Commission
(a) Creation and Membership. There is hereby created by the City of Wisconsin Rapids an industrial
6
development commission consisting of six members; five of whom shall be appointed by the mayor
subject to the confirmation by the common council. The term of office of each member shall be as
herein-after provided and shall expire on April 30 of each year, except as otherwise provided. The
membership of the commission shall consist of the follows:
(1) the mayor for his term in office;
(2) one member of the common council for one year;
(3) four citizen members for a term of four years each, except when said commission is first
constituted, said members shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, and four years. All
members of this commission shall serve without compensation. A majority of this commission
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
(b) Organization. The commission shall meet annually as soon after May 1 as possible and selection shall
be made from its membership of a chairperson and secretary.
(c) Powers and Duties.
(1) This commission shall have complete charge, supervision, and management of all lands
designated as an industrial park by the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
(2) The commission shall adopt such rules and regulations to govern the organization and
conduct of its work as it shall deem advisable. The commission shall make recommendations
to the common council for the development and improvement of the industrial park and as to
such restrictions upon the use of said lands as it deems advisable. The commission shall
make contracts with sales agents for the disposition of lands in the industrial park at such
prices as shall be determined by the common council.
(d) Finances.
(1) All expenditures of the commission shall be made by orders of the city clerk, drawn upon the
city treasurer to pay bills that have been audited and approved by the commission, and the
common council. The commission shall not contract any liability in excess of the budget for
said commission authorized by the common council and such gratuities as shall be received
by the commission.
(2) All receipts of any kind and all monies that may be received by the commission shall be in the
name of the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
(e) Budget and Report to Council. Prior to the first day of October of each year, the commission shall
submit to the common council an estimate of the expenditures for the succeeding year. Such amount,
as shall be approved by the common council, shall be included in the city budget. Said commission
shall submit to the council, for its regular monthly meeting, a report on the activities of the commission
during the preceding month. (MC#54)
(13) Library Board (MC#605)
(a) Chapter 43 of the Wisconsin Statutes, entitled "Libraries", is hereby incorporated by reference as said
chapter relates to municipal libraries.
(b) The mayor shall appoint to the library board as one of its nine members an alderperson to serve during
his/her term of office or until another alderperson is appointed to replace the alderperson member.
Said appointment shall be confirmed by the common council.
(14) Municipal Board of Canvassers. A municipal board of canvassers is hereby created pursuant to the provisions
of Section 7.53(2)(a) of the Wisconsin Statutes, to canvass publicly the returns of every local election in
accordance with the provisions of Section 7.53 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The board shall be composed of the
city clerk and two members of the city hall staff or other qualified electors appointed by the city clerk. If the
clerk’s office is vacant, if the clerk cannot perform his or her duties, or if the clerk is a candidate at an election
being canvassed, an alderperson shall substitute as a third qualified elector on the board. (MC#1023)
(15) Municipal Parking Board - REPEALED by MC#926
(16) Police and Fire Commission. The city's police and fire commission shall operate under the provisions of Section
62.13 of the Wisconsin Statutes, without the optional powers as set forth in 62.13(6).
(17) Park and Recreation Commission.
(a) Creation and Membership. There is hereby re-created in the City of Wisconsin Rapids, a park and
recreation commission consisting of nine members, six of whom shall be appointed by the mayor
subject to confirmation by the common council. The term of office of each member shall be as
hereinafter provided and shall expire April 30 of each year, except as otherwise provided. The
7
membership of the commission shall consist of the following:
(1) Two members of the common council for their terms of office. One common council member
shall be appointed by the mayor and the other by the common council.
(2) Five citizen members for a term of five years each, except when said commission is first
constituted, said members shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four, and five
years, thereafter for a term of five years.
(3) The mayor and superintendent of schools shall be ex officio members.
All members of this commission shall serve without compensation. The majority of the commission
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. (MC#561)
(b) Organization. The commission shall meet annually as soon after May 1 as possible and selections
shall be made from its membership a chairperson and secretary.
(c) Powers and Duties.
(1) This commission shall have complete charge, supervision, and management of all public
parks, municipal swimming pools, recreational buildings and grounds upon which the same
are situated and adjacent to, public playgrounds, public ice rinks, public centers, and similar
public property and functions as shall be assigned to said commission by the common council
for the development, maintenance, and operation of all public recreational facilities and
activities as it shall from time to time determine are for the best interest of the city and its
inhabitants.
(2) The commission shall adopt such rules and regulations to govern the organization and
conduct of its work as it shall deem advisable. Whenever possible and practicable, the
commission shall utilize city employees, equipment, and facilities.
(3) The commission shall have the authority to hire the park superintendent and the recreation
director and make recommendations concerning their respective salaries to the Human
Resources Committee of the Wisconsin Rapids Common Council. The commission may hire
temporary help to assist in its recreation programs. The wages of employees working for the
park and recreation department who are members of Local Union 1075 shall be determined
by the Human Resources Committee of the common council. (MC#920)
(d) Finances.
(1) All expenditures shall be made by orders of the city clerk, drawn upon the city treasurer to pay
bills that have been audited and approved by the commission, and presented to the city clerk.
The commission shall not contract any liability in excess of the budget for said commission
authorized by the common council and such other income shall be received by the
commission.
(2) All receipts of any kind and all monies that may be received by the commission as donations,
gifts, legacies, bequests, etc., shall, unless otherwise provided by the terms of such
donations, gifts, legacies, and bequests, be deposited in the treasury of the city and the city
treasurer shall act as treasurer of said commission without additional compensation.
(e) Budget and Report to Council. Prior to October 1 each year, the commission shall submit to the council
an estimate of the expenditures during the ensuing year. Such amount, as shall be approved by the
common council, shall be included in the city budget. (MC#554)
(f) Municipal Zoo.
(1) Establishment and Location. A municipal zoo is hereby established and created for the City of
Wisconsin Rapids. The location of the municipal zoo shall be on city-owned property lying
north and west of the sewage disposal plant in the City of Wisconsin Rapids, described as
follows: "That area located north and west of the disposal plant fence and south of Gaynor
Avenue, between the disposal plant driveway and the Chicago and Northwestern right-of-way.
The south line of said area shall be a line running due west from the most northerly corner of
the sludge bed to the Chicago and Northwestern right-of-way, excepting therefrom the
following portion thereof which shall be maintained by and be the responsibility of the park
board: beginning at the intersection of the south line of Gaynor Avenue and the westerly line
of the disposal plant driveway, running southwesterly along the westerly line of said driveway
to the northwesterly fence of the disposal plant, run thence northwesterly along said fence, as
extended to a road which lies about 50 feet west of the west line of Government Lot #1,
8
Section 24, Township 22 North, Range 5 East, thence run north along said road to the south
line of Gaynor Avenue, thence run east along the south line of Gaynor Avenue to the point of
beginning." (141-A)
(2) The management of the municipal zoo shall be vested in the park and recreation commission
of the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
(3) The erection of pens, buildings, and landscaping of the zoo shall be vested in the park and
recreation commission.
(4) An annual report to the common council of said city, on the operation of the zoo, shall be
made by the park and recreation commission at the time of budget requests.
(5) The mayor and common council shall provide in the annual budget the sum necessary for the
management and upkeep of the zoo for the ensuing year.
(6) The acquisition of birds or animals that are native to Wisconsin by gift, exchange, or purchase,
shall be subject to the approval of the park and recreation commission. The acquisition of
birds or animals that are not native to Wisconsin shall be subject to the express consent of
the common council. (MC#49)
(18) Planning Commission.
(a) Creation and Membership. A planning commission for the City of Wisconsin Rapids, Wisconsin, is
hereby created under the authority of Section 62.23, Wisconsin Statutes. The commission shall
consist of seven members as follows:
(1) The mayor, who shall be its presiding officer;
(2) The city engineer;
(3) One member of the park and recreation commission;
(4) One alderperson who shall be elected by a two-thirds vote of the common council each April.
(5) Three citizens. Citizen members shall be persons of recognized experience and qualifications,
and shall receive no compensation.
(b) Organization of Commission. As soon as possible after their appointment, the members of the
planning commission shall organize by the election of a vice chairperson, secretary, and such other
officers as may, in their judgment, be necessary. All the members of the planning commission shall
serve as such without compensation.
(c) Powers and Duties.
(1) The common council shall refer to the planning commission for the consideration and report
before final action is taken by the council, the following matters:
(a) The location and architectural design of any public building
(b) The location of any statue or other memorials; the location, extension, alteration,
ornamentation, or parking on any street, park, playground, or other memorial or
public grounds.
(c) The location and character of land and buildings for relieving congestion, for garden
suburbs, or for vacation camps for children within or without the city.
(d) All plats of lands in the city or within three miles thereof.
(2) The common council may refer to the planning commission the construction or carrying out of
any public work not expressly within the province of other boards or commissions to the city
and may delegate to the planning commission all powers which the said council deems
necessary to complete such in all details.
(3) The planning commission shall, upon request of the common council, recommend a district
plan and regulations governing the locations of industries and of buildings designed for
specific uses, the size of buildings hereafter erected; and the area of yards, courts, and other
open spaces and such regulations are declared to be for public health, safety, and welfare.
Tentative recommendations shall first be formulated and public hearings held thereon.
(d) Employment of Expert Advice. The planning commission may employ expert advice upon the
authorization of the common council, and an appropriation by the common council, therefore, and may
have made maps showing the proposed additions to or changes in the plan of the city.
(e) Written Record. The planning commission shall keep written records of its proceedings which shall be
open to inspection at all times.
(19) Redevelopment Authority.
9
(a) There shall be a redevelopment authority as defined by resolution passed on January 14, 1969 and
appropriate federal and state regulations to administer programs designed to stimulate development
in areas determined to be populated by persons of low and moderate income.
(b) The authority shall consist of seven resident freeholders as commissioners of the authority. The
commissioners who are first appointed shall be designated by the mayor to serve the following terms:
two for one year, two for two years, one for three years, one for four years, and one for five years from
the date of their appointment. Thereafter the term of office shall be for five years. A commissioner
shall hold his office until a successor has been appointed and qualified. No more than two of such
commissioners shall be officers of the city, and at least one shall be an alderperson who shall serve
ex-officio, for his term in office.
(c) The commission is hereby authorized to exercise the powers found in Section 66.431 of the Wisconsin
Statutes, known as the "Blight Elimination and Slum Clearance Act", and any and all other statutes
applicable.
(20) Telecommunications Advisory Commission. There shall be a telecommunications advisory commission as set
forth in Chapter 30 of the Municipal Code.
(21) Wastewater Treatment Commission.
(a) Membership. There is hereby created a commission to be known and designated as the Wisconsin
Rapids Wastewater Treatment Commission. The commission shall consist of:
(1) Five members from the City of Wisconsin Rapids, including the chairperson of the Public
Works Committee
(2) One member from the Village of Biron when it is served by the Wisconsin Rapids wastewater
treatment system
(3) the city engineer (or his authorized agent) (MC#962)
The Village of Biron representative and the city engineer (or his authorized agent) shall be an ex officio
member thereof. The members of said commission, representing the City of Wisconsin Rapids, shall
be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation of the common council at the regular meeting in
May of each year, or at any time thereafter when an appointment shall be required to fill a vacancy.
The member from the Village of Biron shall be appointed or elected by the village board of public
officials. The chairperson of the public works committee may designate a member of said committee
to substitute for him in said commission in case of his absence. (MC#962)
(b) Terms of Office. The membership of said commission shall be for a term of five years commencing
June 1 of the year in which said appointment is made. Commissioners appointed to fill a vacancy
created as a result of resignation, death, or otherwise shall be for the unexpired term of the
commissioner being replaced. Each commissioner so appointed thereafter, or now holding over, shall
continue to perform the duties of his office until his successor has been duly appointed and confirmed
by the council.
(c) Offices of Commission. The members of said commission shall choose a chairperson at their first
meeting of each year after June 1, who shall preside at the meetings. The waste water treatment
superintendent shall act as secretary of the commission and as supervisor of the waste water
treatment plant and complete sanitary sewer system of the City of Wisconsin Rapids subject, however,
to the supervision and control of said commission. (MC#962)
(d) Compensation. Members of said commission shall receive compensation as authorized and approved
by the Human Resources Committee and the common council, excepting alderpersons serving on the
commission who are not entitled to compensation. Membership thereon may be from either the
common council or from the general citizenry of the City of Wisconsin Rapids. Non-alderperson
members of said commission shall receive said compensation for all duly authorized meetings
conducted during the month. The member of the commission from the Village of Biron shall receive
compensation as authorized and paid by the Village of Biron. (MC#920)
(e) Duties of Commission. Said commission shall have the entire charge, management, operation, and
maintenance responsibility of the waste water treatment plant, lift stations, and sanitary waste water
system in the City of Wisconsin Rapids, including monitoring of the sewer use program. In addition
hereto, the commission shall have charge of employing and supervising the necessary personnel for
the operation of the waste water treatment plant, lift stations, sanitary waste water system, all subject,
however, to the general control and direction of the common council. (MC#962)
10
(f) Rules and Regulations of Personnel. Said wastewater treatment commission shall formulate rules and
regulations for all personnel under the supervision and control of the commission and shall make such
additions or corrections thereto from time to time as they deem advisable.
(g) Collection of Sewer Use Fee. The commission shall employ the services of the water works and lighting
department for the billing and collecting of the sewer use fee and shall compensate said department
an amount not to exceed the actual cost of billing and collecting.
(h) Handling of Funds. All receipts from the sewer use fee, other receipts of any kinds, and all monies that
may be received by the commission shall be deposited in the sewer use fee account with the treasurer
of the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
(I) Budget and Report to the Council. Prior to October 1 of each year, the commission shall subject to the
council an estimate of the expenditures during the ensuing year. An amount equal to the revenue
derived through the sewer use fee, as approved by the common council, shall be included in the
operation budget of the wastewater treatment commission. The commission shall make reports to the
common council from time to time on the operation and maintenance of the wastewater treatment
plant and complete sanitary sewer system, and shall at least twice a year, at the regular meeting of
the common council, in June and December, make and file a written report fully setting forth all facts
of the operation and financial condition of the sewer use fee account.
(j) Revising Sewer Use Fee. The commission shall review the sewer use fee ordinance yearly to determine
proper rate structure and other changes deemed necessary to comply with state and federal laws and
regulations. Changes to said ordinance shall be recommended and submitted to the common council
for review and approval by the governing body. (MC#256)
(22) Water Works and Lighting Commission (MC#680)
(a) There is hereby created a board of commissioners as provided in section 66.0805 of the Wisconsin
Statutes parts of which are incorporated herein. The board shall consist of five commissioners, elected
by the common council for a term beginning on the first day of October. Each commissioner shall be
appointed for a five year term, and commissioners may serve a maximum of two terms. All
commissioners shall be residents of the City of Wisconsin Rapids. The compensation of
commissioners shall be determined by the common council, however a commissioner may not receive
any increase during his or her term in which the increase was granted. (MC#1156)
(b) There shall be appointed by the common council, at each year's reorganization meeting of the council,
two alderpersons as non-voting members to the water works and lighting commission for one-year
terms with no additional compensation. The water works and lighting commission shall notify nonvoting
members of all meetings and said non-voting members shall have the right to attend closed
meetings.
(c) The board of commissioners shall choose from among their number a president and a secretary. They
may request the services of the director of public works (or his authorized agent) and human
resources director, may employ and fix the compensation of such subordinates as shall be necessary.
They may make rules for their own proceedings and for the government of their department providing
such rules are not in conflict with state statutes or city ordinances. (MC#920)
(d) The board of commissioners shall take charge and management of the utility, to appoint a manager
and fix compensation of same, and to supervise the operation of the utility under the general control
and supervision of the common council.
(e) The powers and duties of the water works and lighting commission shall be as prescribed by Section
66.068 of the Wisconsin Statutes, together with acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto,
and in conformance with this ordinance together with such directives of the common council as may
from time to time be issued.
(f) The commission shall have such general powers in construction, extension, improvements and
operation of the utility as may be designated. Actual construction of watermains and extensions shall
be under the supervision of the public works committee of the common council.
(g) The board of commissioners shall submit its budget estimates for the succeeding year to the common
council prior to the first day of October of each year. The finance committee shall review the estimates
and report its findings to the common council. The council shall adopt an operating budget for the
Water Works and Lighting Commission prior to the last day of November.
(h) The board of commissioners may make expenditures in accordance with the approved budget without
11
reference to the common council unless such expenditure exceeds budgeted amounts in any account
or is for a purpose other than that for which said funds were budgeted. In all such cases, except where
an emergency exists or where immediate payment is otherwise required by law, the board of
commissioners shall request of the common council authority to reallocate funds for the stated
purpose indicated. It shall require a two-thirds vote of the common council to approve such actions.
(Wisconsin Statutes Section 65.90)
(I) Departmental expenditures if approved by the commission shall be paid by the city treasurer as
provided under Wisconsin Statute Section 66.042. Utility receipts are to be turned over to the city
treasurer at least once a month.
(j) The board of commissioners shall submit to the common council a semi-annual report in writing of the
financial condition of their department, said report to be submitted to the common council at its
regular meetings in January and July of each year.
(23) Other committees, boards commissions, and subcommittees may be formed as required by law or necessity to
accomplish a public purpose not contrary to any provision of this Municipal Code. Such bodies may include, but
not be limited to, a senior centers committee, an Americans with Disabilities Act advisory committee, a
hazardous materials subcommittee, a public access advisory board, a school crossing guard committee, and a
clock/bell memorial committee.
(24) ADA Advisory Subcommittee (MC#686)
(a) Creation and Membership. There is hereby created by the City of Wisconsin Rapids an ADA (Americans
with Disabilities) Advisory Subcommittee to advise the common council on matters pertaining to ADA
compliance. Such ad hoc committee is to serve at the pleasure of the common council as the need for
compliance with the ADA dictates.
(b) Membership and appointment. The subcommittee shall consist of one alderperson representative of
the council's Finance and Property Committee, one alderperson representative of the council's Human
Resources Committee, and three citizen members. The alderperson members shall be appointed
annually by the Finance and Property and Human Resources Committees at, or shortly thereafter, the
annual reorganizational meeting of the council. The citizen members shall be appointed by the mayor,
subject to confirmation of the council at the reorganizational meeting. Terms of the citizen members
shall be for three years, except that, when first constituted under this ordinance, one citizen member
shall serve a one-year term, one citizen member shall serve a two-year term, and one citizen member
shall serve a three-year term. (MC#920)
(25) MAYOR’S YOUTH COUNCIL
(a) Membership and appointment. The Mayor’s Youth Council shall consist of approximately 30 junior high
and high school citizen members who shall be selected by the Mayor. Terms shall commence on
October 1 for a two-year term. In addition, at the discretion of the Mayor, Mayor’s Youth Council
advisors may be appointed to the Council as a nonvoting member to assist the Council by supplying
direction and organizational guidance.
(b) Organization and meetings The Council shall organize by rotating roles consisting of discussion leaders
and note-taker. The Council will have three permanent sub-committees: Legislative, Recreation, and
Community. The Council may form ad hoc sub-committees as it deems necessary. The Council may
adopt bylaws and other rules for the orderly conduct of its business.
(c) Functions and duties. The Council shall advise the Mayor, City Council, and other City officials on
matters involving youth, their role, and their place in the City of Wisconsin Rapids. City Council Student
Observers will report monthly to the City Council on the activities of the Council.
2.10 HEALTH DEPARTMENT
(1) The City of Wisconsin Rapids shall operate its health department under the provisions of Chapter 141 of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) The powers and duties thereof shall be vested in a health officer to be appointed by the mayor.
(a) The mayor shall appoint the health officer of the City of Wisconsin Rapids for a two year term, as
provided by Chapter 141 of the Wisconsin Statutes, subject to the approval of the common council,
and his duties shall be as designated in accordance with local ordinance, state statutes, and the
administrative rules of the state board of health and shall receive such compensation as the council
may fix.
(3) The mayor shall appoint a deputy health officer subject to confirmation by the common council and shall
12
receive such compensation as the common council may fix including actual and necessary expenses.
(a) The deputy may do all of the acts required to be done by the health officer and he shall, in case of
vacancy, the sickness, or absence of the health officer, act in his place.
(b) Duties. The deputy health officer, under the direction of the health officer and/or the mayor shall:
(1) Make an annual sanitary survey and maintain continuous sanitary supervision over the city
(2) Make a sanitary inspection periodically of all school buildings and places of public
assemblage, and report thereon to those responsible for the maintenance thereof
(3) Promote the spread of information as to the causes, nature, and prevention of prevalent
diseases and the preservation and improvement of health
(4) Enforce the health laws and the rules of city related thereto
(5) Keep and deliver to a successor a record of all official acts
(6) Report to the health officer, mayor, and common council as required. A monthly report of
activities shall be reported to the common council.
(7) Shall provide supportive services to the chief housing official in the administration and
enforcement of Chapter 9, the Municipal Housing Code.
(8) Shall provide services as provided for in Chapter 20 of the Municipal Code concerning
licenses, permits, and business regulations.
(9) Shall provide services as provided for in Chapter 21 of the Municipal Code concerning
nuisances.
(10) Shall provide services as provided for in Chapter 22 of the Municipal Code concerning
fermented malt beverages.
(11) Shall provide services as provided for in Chapter 23 of the Municipal Code concerning
intoxicating liquor.
(12) Shall provide services as provided for in Chapter 24 of the Municipal Code concerning mobile
homes and mobile home parks.
(13) Shall provide services as provided for in Chapter 25 of the Municipal Code concerning
offenses against public welfare, safety, morals, and peace.
(14) The deputy health officer shall have all authority reasonably required to insure compliance
with those areas of the municipal code defined to be within the jurisdiction of the health
officer and/or deputy health officer.
2.11 EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT
(1) Policy and Purpose.
(a) To ensure that the City of Wisconsin Rapids will be prepared to cope with emergencies resulting from
enemy action and with emergencies resulting from natural disasters, an emergency government
organization is created to carry out the purpose set out in the Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) Definitions. As used in this ordinance:
(1) Enemy Action means any hostile action taken by a foreign power which threatens the security
of the State of Wisconsin.
(2) Emergency Government means all those activities and measures designed or undertaken:
(a) to minimize the effects upon the civilian population caused by enemy action;
(b) to deal with the immediate emergency conditions which could be created by such
enemy action; and
(c) to effectuate emergency repairs to, or the emergency restoration of, vital public
utilities and facilities destroyed or damaged by such enemy action
(3) Natural Disaster means extraordinary misfortunes affecting the city, natural or man-made, not
included in the term "enemy action".
(2) City Emergency Government Committee.
(a) There is hereby an emergency government committee composed of as many members as may be
determined by the common council, by resolution, who shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the
confirmation of the common council, and who shall serve without compensation. The chairperson shall
be elected by the committee annually at its first meeting after the council reorganization meeting, and
the deputy emergency government director shall serve as secretary of the committee.
(b) Duties of City Emergency Government Committee. The city emergency government committee shall be
13
an advisory and planning group and shall advise the city emergency government director and the
common council on all matters pertaining to civil defense. It shall meet upon call of the chairperson.
(c) The city's emergency government committee shall implement this ordinance by entering into
agreements with the county and other participating municipalities as hereinafter defined.
(3) County Municipal Emergency Government Director and Deputy.
(a) Joint Director. There is hereby created an office of city emergency government director. The county
emergency government director shall also hold the office of emergency government director of the City
of Wisconsin Rapids, and in addition to his duties as county emergency government director, he shall
have the additional duties and responsibilities of a municipal emergency government director as set
out in the Wisconsin Statutes and such other duties as may be given him by the emergency
government committees of the county, City of Wisconsin Rapids, and other participating municipalities.
(b) Appointment. The director shall be nominated by the county emergency government committee and
the emergency government committees of each of the participating municipalities acting jointly. He
shall be appointed by the county board and the governing body of each participating municipality. The
county/municipal emergency government director shall be a full-time position and he shall hold office
at the pleasure of the county board and the governing body of each municipality.
(c) The county/municipal emergency government director shall be considered to be an employee of the
county not under civil service and he shall be entitled to all the rights, privileges, and benefits that
county employees have.
(d) A deputy director of emergency government for the City of Wisconsin Rapids is hereby created. The
deputy director shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the common council, and
shall receive such salary as may be authorized by the common council. He shall take and file any
official oath.
(e) Assistant directors may be appointed by the director, subject to the approval of the emergency
government committee, as may be deemed necessary, and such appointees shall received such
compensation, if any, as may be determined by the common council.
(f) A custodian is hereby appointed for the security use, and maintenance of all surplus property as
provided by regulations, said custodian to be the recipient department head, or his/her successor in
office. (MC#76)
(4) Sharing of Costs. The county board shall provide offices, office furniture, and such stenographic help as may be
necessary for the position of county/municipal emergency government director and the cost thereof, including
salaries, wages, necessary expenses, and other employee benefits shall be initially borne 100% by Wood
County. However, the agreement required by Section 2.18(2)(c) shall provide for the fair share of the costs of
this program to be borne by each individual participating municipality to the county.
(5) Joint Action. Whenever it is deemed necessary, be it either the county emergency government committee or the
municipal emergency government committee, a joint meeting shall be held to decide such matters as may
arise.
(6) Duties of the County/Municipal Emergency Government Director.
(a) The director, in his capacity as county director, subject to the control and direction of the emergency
government committee and under general supervision, shall:
(1) Develop and promulgate civil defense plans for the county, consistent with the state plan of
emergency government;
(2) Coordinate and assist the development of municipal civil defense plans within the county, and
integrate such plan with the county plan;
(3) Direct the county emergency government program;
(4) Direct county-wide emergency government training programs and exercises;
(5) Advise the state director of all emergency government planning for the county and render
such reports as may be required by the state director.
(6) In the case of a state of emergency proclaimed by the governor, direct the county emergency
government activities and coordinate the municipal emergency government activities within
the county, subject to the coordinating authority of the state director; and
(7) Perform such other duties relating to civil defense as may be required by the county board.
(b) The director, in his capacity as city director, subject to the control and directions of the governing body
of the participating municipality shall:
14
(1) Direct the city emergency government organization;
(2) Develop and promulgate emergency government plans for the city, consistent with the state
plan of emergency government and which meet the minimum standards for compliance as
required by the state director;
(3) Direct city emergency government training programs and exercises;
(4) Direct participation of the city in such emergency government training programs and exercises
as may be required on the county level or by the state directors.
(5) Cause the emergency government plans for the city to be filed with the plans of other
municipalities in the county, as well as, reports required on the county level;
(6) In case of a state of emergency proclaimed by the governor, direct the activities of the city
emergency government organization with the participating municipalities.
(7) Other Emergencies.
(a) In the event the governor determines that an emergency exists out of natural or man-made disasters,
then the county civil defense organization, including the county/municipal director may be employed
by the county board and the governing body of each participating municipality to cope with the
problem of the emergency.
(b) In the event of an emergency affecting only the County of Wood, when the county board may employ
the county emergency government organization, the county/municipal director, the facilities, and
others resources of said organizations to cope with the problems of local public emergencies except
where restrictions are imposed on property donated by the federal government. No such emergency
declaration shall extend beyond 60 days, or the next meeting of the respective county board, city
council, or village board, whichever occurs first.
(c) In the event of an emergency affecting only the City of Wisconsin Rapids, then the common council or
mayor may employ the city emergency government organization, the county emergency government
organization, the city director, the facilities, and other resources of said organization to cope with the
problems of local public emergencies except where restrictions are imposed on property donated by
the federal government.
(8) Penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
government organization in the enforcement of any order, rules, regulation, or plan issued pursuant to this
ordinance, or to do any act forbidden by any order, rule, regulation, or plan issued pursuant to the authority
contained in this ordinance. For a violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance, he shall forfeit not less
than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, and in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned in the county jail
for a period not exceeding 90 days.
(9) Ratification of County Ordinances. A joint action ordinance of the board of supervisors of Wood County
providing for a county/municipal joint action emergency government defense plan of organization adopted by
said county board, which is similar to this ordinance, is hereby ratified and accepted by the City of Wisconsin
Rapids; and this ratification and acceptance of the joint action ordinance shall constitute a mutual agreement
between the City of Wisconsin Rapids and the County of Wood, as provided by Section II(C) of said joint action
ordinance and Section 2.18(2)(c) of this ordinance.
2.12 MUNICIPAL RESERVE FUND (Charter Ordinance 105)
(1) There is hereby established in the City of Wisconsin Rapids, a fund, separate and distinct from every other
fund, and designated as the "Municipal Reserve Fund". The source of said fund shall be such moneys or
securities, from any source whatsoever as the common council may, by resolution and by a two-thirds vote,
from time to time direct to be paid into said fund.
(2) The city treasurer shall keep a separate record, relating to such fund, including an accurate account of the
transaction, investments, earnings, and expenditures, and shall make a report annually to the common council
at their regular meeting in March of each year.
(3) The Finance and Property Committee of the common council shall from time to time recommend to the
common council the investment of said fund, or part thereof, as it accrues. Disbursements, investments, sales,
or transfers of any securities held in said fund shall be, by resolution of the common council, on checks or city
orders, be signed by the mayor, the city clerk, and the city treasurer. (MC#920)
(4) All interest or income earned by said fund on its investments shall, when it accrues, be added to said fund to
augment the same for the purposes for which the fund is provided, unless otherwise provided by a majority
15
vote of the common council.
(5) Said Municipal Reserve Fund, or any part thereof, may be expended for any municipal purpose with the
consent of four-fifths of the members of the common council.
(6) The city treasurer shall keep all cash on hand, belonging to said reserve fund, in a separate account in one of
the depositories in the city and shall be designated by the finance committee of the common council. The said
Finance and Property Committee shall also designate a suitable, safe depository wherein the city treasurer
shall keep all bonds or other securities in which said fund shall be invested. (MC#920)
(7) This is a charter ordinance and shall take effect 60 days after its passage and publication, unless within such
60 days a referendum petition shall be filed, as provided by Section 66.01 of the Wisconsin Statutes, in which
event, this ordinance shall not take effect until submitted to a referendum, and approved by a majority of the
electors voting thereon. (Passed October 6, 1942)
2.13 VACANCY IN OFFICES
(1) Means of Offices Becoming Vacant. Any appointive public office, including membership upon any board of
commissions of the City of Wisconsin Rapids shall become vacant upon the happening of any one of the
following events:
(a) The death of the incumbent.
(b) The incumbent's resignation.
(c) The incumbent's removal.
(d) The incumbent ceasing to be a resident of the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
(e) The incumbent's conviction, by a state or United States court, of and sentence for treason, felony, or
other crime whatsoever nature punishable by imprisonment in any jail or prison for one year or more,
or his conviction by any such court of and sentence for any offense involving a violation of his official
oath, in either case whether on not sentenced to imprisonment. A vacancy so created shall in no case
be affected by a stay or execution of judgment. Reversal of the judgment against such officer shall
forthwith restore the person to office, if the term for which he was appointed has not expired, but in
any event, shall entitle him to the emoluments of the period for which he was convicted and
sentenced; but pardon shall not restore him to office or entitle him to any of the emoluments thereof.
(f) The decision of a competent tribunal declaring void his appointment or adjudging him.
(g) The neglect or refusal of any person appointed or reappointed to any office to take and file his official
oath or to execute or renew his official bond, if required, or to file the same or either thereof in the
manner and within the time prescribed by law.
(h) The death or declination in writing of any person appointed to fill a vacancy or for a full term before he
qualified, or his death, or such declination before the time when, by law, he should enter upon the
duties of his office to which he was appointed.
(i) On the happening of any other event which is declared by any special provision of law to create a
vacancy. (199)
2.14 PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION BY THE CITY (MC #1234)
(1) The common council may provide that any class of public construction, or any part thereof, may be done
directly by the city without submitting the same for bids. This ordinance is drafted to incorporate the provisions
of Section 62.15(1) of the Wisconsin Statutes. (MC#119)
(2) Special Assessment Procedures are defined as follows:
(a) In addition to other methods provided by law, special assessments for any public work or improvement
or any current service may be levied in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
(b) Whenever the governing body shall determine that any public work or improvement or any current
service shall be financed in whole or in part by special assessments levied under this ordinance, it
shall adopt a resolution specifying this intention and the time, either before or after completion of the
work or improvement, when the amount of the assessments will be determined and levied, the
number of annual installments, if any, in which assessments may be paid, the rate of interest to be
charged on the unpaid balance and the terms on which any of the assessments may be deferred while
no use of the improvement is made in connection with the property.
(c) The provisions of §66.0703, Stats., shall apply to special assessments levied under this ordinance
except that, when the governing body determines by resolution that the hearing on the assessments
16
be held subsequent to the completion of the work or improvement or the rendering of the service, the
report required by §66.0703(4), Stats., shall contain a statement of the final cost of the work, service
or improvement in lieu of an estimate of the cost.
(d) Notice of the time and place of the public hearing on any special assessment proposed to be levied
and notice of the final assessment and terms of payment thereof shall be given in the manner
prescribed by §66.0703(7) and (8)(d), Stats.
(e) Any person against whose property a special assessment is levied under this ordinance may appeal
therefrom in the manner prescribed by §66.0703(12), Stats, within 40 days of the date of the final
determination of the governing body.
2.15 MAINTENANCE AND DESTRUCTION OF AND ACCESS TO CITY RECORDS (MC#294)
(1) Definitions.
(a) Authority means any of the following city entities having custody of a city record: an office, elected official,
agency, board, commission, committee, council, department, or public body corporate and politic
created by constitution, law, ordinance, rule, or order; or a formally constituted sub-unit of the
foregoing.
(b) Custodian means that officer, department head, division head, or employee of the city designated
under subsection (3) or otherwise responsible by law to keep and preserve any city records or file,
deposit or keep such records in his or her office, or is lawfully in possession or entitled to possession
of such public records and who is required by this section to respond to requests for access to such
records.
(c) Record means any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual, or electromagnetic
information is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical form or characteristics, which has been
created or is being kept by any authority. "Record" includes, but is not limited to, handwritten, typed, or
printed pages, maps, charts, photographs, films, recordings, tapes (including computer tapes), and
computer printouts. "Record" does not include drafts, notes, preliminary computations, and like
materials prepared for the originator's personal use or prepared by the originator in the name of a
person for whom the originator is working; materials which are purely the personal property of the
custodian and have no relations to his or her office; materials to which access is limited by copyright,
patent or bequest; and published materials in the possession of an authority other than a public library
which are available for sale, or which are available for inspection at a public library.
(2) Duty to Maintain Records.
(a) Except as provided under subsection (7), each officer and employee of the city shall safely keep and
preserve all records received from his or her predecessor or other persons and required by law to be
filed, deposited, or kept in his or her office or which are in the lawful possession or control of the
officer or employee or his or her deputies, or to the possession or control of which he or she or they
may be lawfully entitled as such officers or employees.
(b) Upon the expiration of an officer's term of office, or an employee's term of employment, or whenever
the office or position of employment becomes vacant, each such officer or employee shall deliver to
his or her successor all records then in his or her custody and the successor shall receipt therefore to
the officer or employee, who shall file said receipt with the city clerk. If a vacancy occurs before the
successor is selected or qualifies, such records shall be delivered to and receipted for by the clerk, on
behalf of the successor, to be delivered to such successor upon the latter's receipt.
(3) Legal Custodians.
(a) Each elected official is the legal custodian of his or her records and the records of his or her office, but
the official may designate an employee of his or her staff to act as the legal custodian.
(b) Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the city clerk or the clerk's designee shall act as legal custodian for
the common council and for any committees, commission, boards, or other authorities created by
ordinance or resolution of the common council.
(c) For every authority not specified in subsection (a) of (b), the authority's chief administrative officer is
the legal custodian for the authority, but the officer may designate an employee of his or her staff to
act as the legal custodian.
(d) Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in his or her absence or the
absence of his or her designee.
17
(e) The legal custodian shall have full legal power to render decisions and to carry out the duties of an
authority under Section 19.11, Wisconsin Statutes, and this section. The designation of a legal
custodian does not affect the powers and duties of an authority under this section.
(4) Public Access to Records.
(a) Except as provided in subsection (6), any person has a right to inspect a record and to make or receive
a copy of any record as provided in Section 19.35(1), Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) Records will be available for inspection and copying during all regular office hours.
(c) If regular office hours are not maintained at the location where records are kept, the records will be
available for inspection and copying upon at least 48 hours' advance notice or intent to inspect or
copy.
(d) A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those available to city employees to
inspect, copy, or abstract a record.
(e) The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may impose other reasonable
restrictions on the manner of access to an original record if the record is irreplaceable or easily
damaged.
(f) A requester shall be charged a fee to defray the cost of locating and copying records as follows:
(1) The cost of photocopying shall be $.25 per page. Said cost has been calculated not to exceed
the actual, necessary, and direct cost of reproducing.
(2) If the form of a written record does not permit copying, the actual and necessary cost of
photographing and photographic processing shall be charged.
(3) The actual full cost of providing a copy of other records not in printed form on paper, such as
films, computer printouts, and audio or video tapes, shall be charged.
(4) If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost thereof shall be charged.
(5) There shall be no charge for locating a record unless the actual cost therefore exceeds
$50.00, in which case the actual cost shall be determined by the legal custodian and billed to
the requester.
(6) The legal custodian shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees and may require a cash
deposit to assure payment, if such estimate exceed $5.00.
(7) Elected and appointed officials of the City of Wisconsin Rapids shall not be required to pay for
public records they may reasonably require for the proper performance of their official duties.
(8) The legal custodian may provide copies of a record without charge or at a reduced charge
where he or she determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public interest.
(g) Pursuant to Section 19.34, Wisconsin Statutes, and the guidelines therein listed, each authority shall
adopt, prominently display, and make available for inspection and copying at its offices, for the
guidance of the public, a notice containing a description of its organization and the established time
and places at which the legal custodian, from whom, and the methods whereby, the public may obtain
information and access to records in its custody, make requests for records, or obtain copies of
records, and the costs thereof. Each authority shall also prominently display at its offices, for the
guidance of the public, a copy of subsection (4) through (6) of this ordinance. This subsection does not
apply to members of the common council.
(5) Access Procedures.
(a) A request to inspect a copy of a record shall be made to the legal custodian. A request shall be
deemed sufficient if it reasonably describes the requested record or the information requested.
However, a request for a record without a reasonable limitation as to subject matter or length of time
represented by the record does not constitute a sufficient request. A request may be made orally, but
a request must be in writing before an action to enforce the request is commenced under Section
19.35, Wisconsin Statutes. Except as provided below, no request may be refused because the person
making the request is unwilling to be identified or to state the purpose of the request. No request may
be refused because the request is received by mail, unless prepayment of the fee is required under
subsection (4)(f)(.6). A requester may be required to show acceptable identification whenever the
requested record is kept at a private residence or whenever security reasons or federal law or
regulations so require.
(b) Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall as soon as practicable and without delay, either fill
the request or notify the requester of the authority's determination to deny the request in whole or in
18
part and the reasons therefore. If the legal custodian, after conferring with the city attorney,
determines that a written request is so general as to be unduly time consuming, the party making the
request may first be required to itemize his or her request in a manner which would permit reasonable
compliance.
(c) A request for a record may be denied, as provided in subsection (6). If a request is made orally, the
request may be denied orally, unless a demand for a written statement of the reasons denying the
request is made by the requester within five business days of the oral denial. If a written request is
denied in whole or in part, the requester shall receive a written statement of the reasons for denying
the request. Every written denial of a request shall inform the requester that if the request for the
record was made in writing, then the determination is subject to review, upon petition for a writ of
mandamus under Section 19.37(1), Wisconsin Statutes, or upon application to the attorney general or
a district attorney.
(6) Limitations on Right to Access.
(a) As provided in Section 19.36, Wisconsin Statutes, the following records are exempt from inspection
under this section:
(1) Records specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal law or authorized to be
exempted from disclosure by state law;
(2) Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law enforcement purposes if
federal law or regulations require exemption from disclosure or if exemption from disclosure is
a condition to receipt of aids by the state;
(3) Computer programs, although the material used as input for a computer program or the
material produced as a product of the computer program is subject to inspection; and
(4) A record or any portion of a record containing information qualifying as a common law trade
secret.
(5) Income and expense information pursuant to Section 70.47(7)(af), Wisconsin Statutes, or any
successor statute thereto, except that the information may be revealed to and used by
persons in the discharging of duties imposed by law; in the discharge of duties imposed by
office including, but not limited to, use by the assessor in performance of official duties of the
assessor’s office and use by the board of review in performance of its official duties; or
pursuant to order of a court. Income and expense information provided to the assessor under
Section 70.47(7)(af), unless a court determines that it is inaccurate, is, per Section
70.47(7)(af), not subject to the right of inspection and copying under Section 19.35(1),
Wisconsin Statutes. (MC#868)
(b) As provided in Section 43.30, Wisconsin Statutes, public library circulation records are exempt from
inspection under this section.
(c) In responding to a request for inspection or copying of a record which is not specifically exempt from
disclosure, the legal custodian, after conferring with the city attorney, may deny the request, in whole
or in part, only if he or she determines that the harm to the public interest resulting from disclosure
would outweigh the public interest in full access to the requested record. Examples of matters for
which disclosure may be refused include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Records obtained under official pledges of confidentiality which were necessary and given in
order to obtain the information contained in them.
(2) Records of current deliberations after a quasi-judicial hearing.
(3) Records of current deliberations concerning employment, dismissal, promotion, demotion,
compensation, performance, or discipline of any city officer or employee, or the investigation
of charges against a city officer or employee, unless such officer or employee consents to
such disclosure.
(4) Records concerning current strategy for crime detection or prevention.
(5) Records of current deliberations or negotiations on the purchase of city property, investing of
city funds, and other city business whenever competitive or bargaining reasons require
nondisclosure.
(6) Financial, medical, social, or personal histories or disciplinary data of specific persons which,
if disclosed, would like have a substantial adverse effect upon the reputation of any person
referred to in such history or data.
19
(7) Communications between legal counsel for the city and any officer, agent, or employee of the
city, when advice is being rendered concerning strategy with respect to current litigation in
which the city or any of its officers, agents, or employees is or is likely to become involved, or
communications which are privileged under Section 905.03, Wisconsin Statutes.
(d) If a record contains information that may be made public and information that may not be made
public, the custodian of the record shall provide the information that may be made public and delete
the information that may not be made public from the record before release. The custodian shall
confer with the city attorney prior to releasing any such record and shall follow the guidance of the city
attorney when separating out the exempt material. If in the judgment of the custodian and the city
attorney there is no feasible way to separate the exempt material from the non-exempt material
without unreasonable jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt material, the entire record shall be
withheld from disclosure.
(7) Destruction of Records. (MC#647)
(a) City officers may destroy the following non-utility financial records of which they are the legal
custodians and which are considered obsolete, after completion of any required audit by the bureau of
municipal audit or an auditor licensed under Chapter 442, Wisconsin Statutes, but no less than seven
years after payment or receipt of any sum involved in the particular transaction, unless a shorter
period has been fixed by the state public records board pursuant to Section 16.61(3)(e) and then after
such shorter period:
(1) Payment statements, deposit books, slips, and stubs.
(2) Bonds and coupons after maturity.
(3) Canceled checks, duplicates, and check stubs.
(4) License and permit applications, stubs, and duplications.
(5) Payroll and other time and employment records of personnel included under the Wisconsin
Retirement Fund.
(6) Receipt forms.
(7) Special assessment records.
(8) Vouchers, requisitions, purchase orders, and all other supporting documents pertaining
thereto.
(b) City officers may destroy the following utility records of which they are legal custodians and which are
considered obsolete after completion of any required audit of the bureau of municipal audit or an
auditor licensed under Chapter 442, Wisconsin Statutes, subject to state public service commission
regulations, but not less than seven years after the record was effective unless a shorter period has
been fixed by the state public records board pursuant to Section 16.61(3)(a), Wisconsin Statutes, and
then after such a shorter period, except that water stubs, receipts of current billings, and customers'
ledgers may be destroyed after two years.
(1) Assessment rolls and related records including board of review minutes.
(2) Contracts and papers relating thereto.
(3) Correspondence and communications.
(4) Financial reports other than annual financial reports.
(5) Insurance policies.
(6) Justice dockets.
(7) Oaths of office.
(8) Reports of boards, commissions, committees, and officials duplicated in the official common
council minutes.
(9) Resolutions and petitions.
(10) Voter records.
(c) City officers may destroy the following police department records of which they are legal custodians
and which are considered obsolete, in less than seven years, as approved by the state public records
board, pursuant to Section 16.61(3)(e), Wisconsin Statutes. These listed records may be destroyed
under the following time table:
(1) Officer's electronic taped reports of incident complaints, after they have been reduced to
written form.
(2) Tapes of statements given to police, six months or when reduced to written form and signed.
20
(3) Tapes of police telephone recordings, six months.
(4) Written warning violations, one year.
(5) Parking violation tickets and related correspondence, one year.
(6) Uniformed traffic citations, one year after disposition.
(7) City ordinance citations, one year after disposition.
(8) Police teletype messages, one year.
(d) Destruction After Request for Inspection. No requested record may be destroyed until after the request
is granted or 60 days after the request is denied. If an action is commenced under Section 19.37,
Wisconsin Statutes, the requested record may not be destroyed until a court order is issued and all
appeals have been completed. (See Section 19.35(5), Wisconsin Statutes)
(e) Destruction Pending Litigation. No record subject to pending litigation shall be destroyed until the
litigation has been resolved.
(f) Unless notice is waived by the state historical society, at least 60 days' notice shall be given the state
historical society prior to the destruction of any records as provided by Section 19.21(4)(a), Wisconsin
Statutes. The State Historical Society of Wisconsin (SHSW) has waived the 60-day statutory notice
under Section 19.21(5)(d), Wisconsin Statutes, for the records marked "W" which designates "waived
notice". The SHSW must be notified prior to destruction of records marked "N" designating "nonwaiver".
"N/A" indicates that notification is not applicable and applies to all records designated for
permanent retention by the office of origin.
(g) Any tape recordings of a governmental meeting of the city may be destroyed, erased, or reused no
sooner than 90 days after the minutes of the meeting have been approved and published if the
purpose of the recording was to make minutes of the meeting.
(h) Limitation. This section shall not be construed to authorize the destruction of any public record prior to
the time prescribed by statutes or state administration regulations where such time periods conflict
with those stipulated herein.
(8) Preservation through Microfilm. Any city officers, or the director of any department or division of city
government may keep and preserve public records in his or her possession by means of microfilm or other
photographic reproduction method. Such records shall meet the standards for photographic reproduction set
forth in Section 16.61(7)(a) and (b), Wisconsin Statutes, and shall be considered original records for all
purposes. Such records shall be preserved along with other files of the department or division and shall be
open to public inspection and copying according to the provisions of state law and of subsections (4) through
(6) of this ordinance.
(9) Severability. The provisions of this ordinance are severable. If a section, subsection, paragraph, sentence,
clause, or phrase shall be adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the decision shall not
affect the validity of this ordinance.
2.16 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED PROPERTY (MC#739)
(1) Section 66.28 of the Wisconsin Statutes, entitled "DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED PROPERTY", is hereby
incorporated by reference and made a part of this code as is fully set forth therein.
(2) Sections 170.07, 170.08, 170.09, 170.10, and 170.105, pertaining to lost and found chattels, are hereby
incorporated by reference and are made a part of this code as are fully set forth therein.
2.17 CITATIONS AUTHORIZED (MC#451)
The Common Council of the City of Wisconsin Rapids hereby authorizes the use of citations to be issued for violations of
ordinances including ordinances for which a statutory counterpart exists.
2.18 GENERAL PROPERTY TAX COLLECTION (MC#474)
(1) The provisions of 74.12, Wisconsin Statutes, are adopted and incorporated by reference into this chapter, and
real estate taxes, personal property taxes, and special assessments shall be paid accordingly.
(a) Special assessments placed in the tax roll shall be paid in full on or before January 31 of each year
commencing in 1990.
(b) Personal property taxes shall be paid in full on or before January 31 of each year commencing in
1990.
(c) Real estate taxes shall be paid in full in three equal installments as follows:
21
(1) 1st installment: on or before January 31 of each year
(2) 2nd installment: on or before April 30 of each year
(3) 3rd installment: on or before July 31 of each year
(d) If the total real property tax is less than $150.00, it shall be paid in full on or before January 31 of
each year.
2.19 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM TAX (MC#509)
(1) Definitions. In this section:
(a) Economic Development means the broadening and strengthening of the economy of the city by
supporting and assisting private and/or public organizations in their efforts to foster the expansion of
existing commercial or industrial enterprises and to initiate efforts to attract new enterprises.
(b) Hotel or Motel means a building, or group of buildings, in which the public may obtain
accommodations for a consideration, including, without limitation, such establishments as inns,
motels, tourist homes, tourist houses or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses, summer camps,
apartment hotels, resort lodges and cabins, and any other building or group of buildings in which
accommodations are available to the public except accommodations rented for a continuous period of
more than one month and by corporations for charitable or educational purposes provided that no part
of the net earnings of such corporations and associations inures to the benefit of any private shareholder
or individual.
(c) Gross Receipt has the meaning as defined in Sections 77.51(4)(a), (b), and (c), Wisconsin Statutes, in
so far as applicable. (MC#1003)
(d) Recreational Purposes shall be interpreted broadly to encompass all leisure activities and pursuits for
all people, from the youngest to the oldest, and shall include, but not be limited to, funding for athletic
activities, cultural activities, amusements, and pastimes, as well as parks, facilities, and equipment for
any of these.
(e) Tourism means the promotion of conventions, vacations, festivals, special events, and attractions,
either through direct funding or advertising.
(f) Transient means any person residing for a continuous period of less than one month in a hotel, motel,
or other furnished accommodations available to the public.
(2) Imposition of Tax. Pursuant to Section 66.0615, Wisconsin Statutes, a tax is hereby imposed on the
privilege and service of furnishing, at retail, of rooms or lodging to transients by hotelkeepers, motel
operators, and other persons furnishing accommodations that are available to the public, irrespective
of whether membership is required for the use of the accommodations, but such tax shall apply only if
such services are subject to the Wisconsin sales tax imposed by Sections 77.52 through 77.62,
Wisconsin Statutes. Such tax shall be at the rate of 8% of the gross receipts from such retail furnishing
of rooms or lodgings. Such tax shall not be subject to the selective sales tax imposed by Section
77.52(2)(a)(1), Wisconsin Statutes. (MC#1003)
(3) Tax Monies.
(a) Collection of Tax. The city treasurer shall be the administrator of the tax collection. The tax imposed for
the months of July, August, and September of 1990, and for each calendar quarter hereafter is due
and payable on the last day of the month next succeeding the calendar quarter for which imposed. A
return shall be filed with the city treasurer by those furnishing, at retail, such rooms and lodging, on or
before the same date on which such tax is due and payable. Such return shall show the gross receipts
of the preceding calendar quarter from such retail furnishing of rooms or lodging, the amount of taxes
imposed for such period, and such other information as the city treasurer deems necessary. Every
person required to file such quarterly return shall, with his first return, elect to file an annual calendar
year or fiscal year return. Such annual return shall be filed within 90 days of the close of each such
calendar or fiscal year. The annual return shall summarize the quarterly returns, reconcile, and adjust
for errors in the quarterly returns, and shall contain certain such additional information as the city
treasurer requires. Such returns shall be made on forms as prescribed by the city treasurer. All such
returns shall be signed by the person required to file a return or his duly authorized agent, but need
not be verified by oath. The city treasurer may, for good cause, extend the time for filing any return, but
in no event longer that one month from the filing date.
(b) Distribution of Tax. Commencing with the calendar year 1991, the room tax collection shall be
22
allocated as follows:
(1) The monies collected shall go into a special revenue fund to be used for recreational purposes
and to promote economic development and tourism as determined by the common council.
(a) The common council shall evaluate all requests and/or suggestions for specific use
of the special revenue fund in any of the categories in Section 2.19(3)(b)(1).
(MC#920)
(b) The common council shall develop such policies as may be necessary to accept such
request and/or suggestions. Policies, as derived, shall be submitted to the common
council for approval. (MC#920)
(2) The Finance and Property Committee of the common council shall appropriate money from
the special revenue fund for the requests and/or suggestions approved by the common
council. (MC#920)
(c) The monies that have accumulated in the special revenue fund prior to and/or during each calendar
quarter shall be allocated during the second month following the end of the calendar quarter,
according to the appropriations approved by the common council under procedure allowed in
2.19(3)(b). This allocation may include funds to be used for a future named or unnamed project. The
percentages in the three categories listed in Section 2.19(3)(b)(1) shall remain flexible to allow for
variation from year to year as determined by the common council, but shall not be less than 3% for any
one of the three categories. (MC#1003)
(4) Permit Required. Every person furnishing rooms or lodging under subsection (2) shall file with the city clerk an
application for a permit for each place of business. Every application for a permit shall be made upon a form
prescribed by the city clerk and shall set forth the name under which the applicant transacts or intends to
transact business, the location of his place of business, and such other information as the city clerk requires.
The application shall be signed by the owner, if a sole proprietor, and if not a sole proprietor, by the person
authorized to act on behalf of such sellers. At the time of making an application, the applicant shall pay a
one-time fee, to the city treasurer, of $5.00 for each permit.
(5) Permit Regulations. After compliance with subsection (4) and subsection (14) by the applicant, the city clerk
shall grant and issue to each applicant a separate permit for each place of business within the city. Such
permit is not assignable and is valid only for the person in whose name it is issued and for the transaction of
business at the place designated therein. It shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at the place for which
issued.
(6) Suspension or Revocation of Permits. Whenever any person fails to comply with this section, the city clerk may,
upon 10 days' notification and after affording such person the opportunity to show cause why his permit should
not be revoked, revoke or suspend any or all of the permits held by such person. The city clerk shall give to
such person written notice of the suspension or revocation of any of his permits. The city clerk shall not issue a
new permit after the revocation of a permit unless he is satisfied that the former holder of the permit will
comply with the provisions of this section. A fee of $10.00 shall be imposed for the renewal or issuance of a
permit which has been previously suspended or revoked.
(7) Liability for Tax. If any person liable for any amount of tax under this section sells out his business, or stock of
goods, or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover
such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the city treasurer that he has been paid, or a
certificate stating that no amount is due. If a person subject to the tax imposed by this section fails to withhold
such amount of tax from the purchase price as required, he shall become personally liable for payment of the
amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the price of the accommodations valued in money.
(8) Office Audit. The city treasurer may, by office audit, determine the tax required to be paid to the city or the
refund due to any person under this section. This determination may be made upon the basis of the facts
contained in the return being audited or on the basis of any other information within the city treasurer's
possession. One or more such office audit determinations may be made of the amount due for any one or for
more than one period.
(9) Field Audit. The city treasurer may, by field audit, determine the tax required to be paid to the city or the refund
due to any person under this section. The determination may be made upon the basis of the facts contained in
the return being audited or upon any other information within the city treasurer's possession. The city treasurer
is authorized to examine and inspect the books, records, memoranda, and property of any person in order to
verify the tax liability of that person or of another person. Nothing herein shall prevent the city treasurer from
23
making a determination of tax at any time.
(10) Estimated Assessment. If any person fails to file a return as required by this section, the city treasurer shall
make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts under subsection (2). Such estimate shall be made for
the period for which such person failed to make a return and shall be based upon any information which is in
the city treasurer's possession or may come into his possession. On the basis of this estimate, the city
treasurer shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the city, adding to this sum a penalty
equal to 5% thereof. One or more such determinations may be made for one or more than one period.
(11) Interest. All unpaid taxes under this section shall bear interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the due date
of the return until the first day of the month following the month in which the tax is paid or deposited with the
city treasurer. All refunded taxes shall bear interest at 12% per annum from the due date of the return until the
first day of the month in which said taxes are refunded. An extension of time within which to file a return shall
not operate to extend the due date of the return for purposes of interest computation. If the city treasurer
determines that an overpayment of tax has been made intentionally, or by reason of carelessness or neglect, or
if the tax which was overpaid was not accompanied by a complete return, he shall not allow any interest
thereon.
(12) Late Filing Fee. Delinquent tax returns shall be subject to a $10.00 late filing fee. The tax imposed by this
section shall become delinquent if not paid:
(a) In the case of timely filed return, within 30 days after expiration of an extension period if one has been
granted.
(b) In the case of no return filed or a return filed late, by the due date of the return.
(13) Non- or Late-filing Penalty. If due to negligence, no return is filed, or a return is filed late, or an incorrect return
is filed, the entire tax finally determined shall be subject to a penalty of $25.00, exclusive of interest or other
penalties. If a person fails to file a return when due, or files a false or fraudulent return with the intent in either
case to defeat or evade the tax imposed by this section, a penalty of $25.00 shall be added to the tax required
to be paid, exclusive of interest and other penalties.
(14) Security Required. In the event any person has been guilty of two or more violations of the provisions of
subsections (12) or (13) of this section, the city clerk shall require such person to place with the city treasurer
security in the amount of $20.00 per rental unit, but in no case less than $500.00 total. If any such person
fails or refuses to place such security, the city clerk may revoke his permit. If any taxpayer is thereafter
delinquent in the payment of the taxes imposed by this section, the city treasurer may, upon 10 days' notice,
recover the taxes, interest, and penalties from the security placed with the him by such taxpayer. No interest
shall be paid by the city to any person for the deposit of such security.
(15) Records. Every person liable for the tax imposed by this section shall keep or cause to be kept such records,
receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the city treasurer requires.
(16) (a) Confidentiality. All tax returns, schedules, exhibits, writings, or audit reports relating to such returns, on
file with the city treasurer, are deemed to be confidential, except the city treasurer may divulge their
contents to the following and no other:
(1) The person who filed the return
(2) Officers, agents, or employees of the Federal Internal Revenue Service or the State
Department of Revenue
(3) The assessor, city attorney, city clerk, mayor, and Finance and Property Committee
chairperson. (MC#920)
(4) Such other public officials of the City of Wisconsin Rapids as may be deemed necessary by
the city treasurer
(b) No person having an administrative duty under this section shall make known in any manner, the
business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records of any person on
whom the tax is imposed by this section, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses,
expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or
copy thereof to be seen or examined by any person, except as provided in subsection (16)(a).
(17) Tax Collection Fee. Any person, firm, corporation, or association which collects and remits the tax imposed by
this section shall be entitled to a collection fee of 2% of the tax so collected. The fee shall be itemized on the
tax return and shall be retained from the amount collected and remitted.
(18) Penalty. Any person who is subject to the tax imposed by this section who fails to obtain a permit as required in
subsection (4), or who fails or refuses to permit the inspection of his records by the city treasurer after such
24
inspection has been duly required by the city treasurer, or who fails to file a return as provided in this section,
or who violates any other provisions of this section, shall be subject to a forfeiture not to exceed $250.00 each
day, or portion thereof, that such violation continues, and each day in violation is deemed to constitute a
separate offense.
(19) Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect on July 1, 1990 after passage and publication, pursuant to law.
2.20 MUNICIPAL COURT (MC#709)
(1) Pursuant to Chapter 755 of the Wisconsin Statutes, a municipal court shall be established for the City of
Wisconsin Rapids.
(2) Election. The municipal judge shall be elected at large in the spring election commencing with the 1996 Spring
Election and thereafter every two years. The term will begin on May 1 of the year elected.
(3) Bond; Oath. The municipal court judge shall execute and file with the clerk of the circuit court for Wood County
the oath, as prescribed by Section 256.02 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and a bond in the penal sum of $2,000,
as prescribed by Section 62.09(4) of the Wisconsin Statutes. Notification of compliance shall be provided by
the clerk of the circuit court for Wood County to the city clerk of Wisconsin Rapids.
(4) Municipal Court Staff.
(a) The municipal court judge shall be assisted by a municipal court clerk to be selected in accordance
with current city procedures, and approval of the municipal court judge. The clerk shall, upon entering
the duties of his/her office, take the oath as prescribed by Section 19.01 of the Wisconsin Statute.
Wages, hours, and conditions of employment shall be set by the common council.
(b) The municipal judge shall be assisted by a bailiff while the court is in session. The bailiff shall be a
serving police officer designated by the chief of police at his/her discretion.
(5) Salary. The municipal court judge shall receive an annual salary to be set by the common council. The salary
shall be paid commencing on May 1st for each term of office and shall not be raised nor decreased during the
term of office. No salary shall be paid to the judge for any time during the term of office for which the judge has
not executed and filed his or her official bond and oath as required in Section 2.20(3) above.
(6) Jurisdiction.
(a) The municipal judge shall have jurisdiction provided by state law, including but not limited to, because
of enumeration, that provided by Chapters 755 and 800 of the Wisconsin Statutes and exclusive
jurisdiction of violations of City of Wisconsin Rapids ordinances.
(b) The municipal judge shall have concurrent jurisdiction with juvenile court of children 12 years of age or
over who allegedly violated a municipal ordinance.
(c) The municipal judge shall have concurrent jurisdiction with juvenile court of children any age who are
alleged to be truant.
(d) The municipal judge is hereby authorized to issue orders to the clerk of the municipal court to all
witnesses and/or interpreters for required attendance upon trial of cases before the court. The clerk
shall cause such warrants to be issued to require attendance before the court.
(e) The municipal judge may issue civil warrants to enforce matters which are under the jurisdiction of the
municipal court. The municipal judge is also authorized to issue inspection warrants under sub-section
66.122 and 66.123 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(f) The municipal judge may impose such forfeitures as may be enumerated in the Wisconsin Statutes
and the City of Wisconsin Rapids ordinances. Court fees, as set by the common council, may also be
imposed.
(g) Contempt of Court and Penalty. The municipal judge may punish for contempt as provided in Section
800.12 Wisconsin Statutes and may impose forfeiture therefore not to exceed $50.00 or in default
thereof, a jail sentence not to exceed seven days.
(h) Chapter 48 of the Wisconsin Statutes, entitled "Children's Code", and Chapter 938 of the Wisconsin
Statutes, entitled "Juvenile Justice Code", are hereby incorporated by reference as these chapters'
provisions pertain to the municipal court. (MC#797)
(7) Procedures.
(a) Sessions of the municipal court shall be held in the city hall council chambers at the times and dates
set by the common council except under extraordinary circumstances for which the judge may order
special sessions at his/her discretion.
(b) Court procedures and rules of evidence shall be in accordance with Wisconsin Statutes including but
25
not limited to Chapters 66, 755, and 800.
(c) All forfeitures and fees received by the court shall be paid to the city treasurer on a daily basis.
(8) Absence of Judge.
(a) In case of illness, absence, or vacation, for a period not to exceed 30 days, the chief judge of the
district shall designate another municipal judge of the county to perform the judge's duties.
(b) A permanent vacancy in the office of municipal judge shall be filled pursuant to Section 8.50 of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
2.21 FINANCIAL PROCEDURE; ALTERNATIVE SYSTEM OF APPROVING CLAIMS (MC#733)
(1) Payments may be made from the city treasury after the city clerk audits and approves each claim as a proper
charge against the treasury, and endorses his or her approval on the claim after having determined that the
following conditions have been complied with:
(a) That funds are available therefor pursuant to the budget approved by the Common Council.
(b) That the item or service covered by such claim has been duly authorized by the proper official,
department head or board, committee or commission.
(c) That the item or service has been actually supplied or rendered in conformity with such authorization.
(d) That the claim is just and valid pursuant to law. The clerk may require the submission of such proof
and evidence to support the foregoing as in that officer's discretion may be deemed necessary.
(2) The clerk shall file with the Common Council not less than monthly a list of the claims approved, showing the
date paid, name of claimant, purpose and amount.
(3) The Common Council shall authorize an annual detailed audit of the city's financial transactions and accounts
by a public accountant licensed under Chapter 422 of Wisconsin Statutes and designated by the governing
body.
(4) The clerk shall be covered by a fidelity bond of not less than $10,000.
(5) The authority of this ordinance does not apply to claims referenced in Chapter 893.80 of Wisconsin Statutes.
(6) This ordinance is adopted under the provisions of 66.044 of the Wisconsin Statutes, which precludes the claim
procedure required by State Statutes 61.25(6), 61.51, 62.09(10), 62.11, and 62.12, and other relevant
provisions, except 893.80.
2.22 UNDERPAYMENTS AND OVERPAYMENTS.
City departments, including municipal court, may retain overpayments of fees, licenses, payments, and similar
charges when the overpayment is $4.00 or less, unless such refund is specifically requested in writing. Underpayments
of not more than $4.00 may be waived when the administrative cost of collection would exceed the amount of
underpayment. (MC#1065)
2.23 FRANCHISE FEES. (MC#1178)
All cable and other telecommunications franchise fees shall be placed into the city's general fund or a special
revenue fund, for the purpose of the community access media operating budget, unless said funds are directed
otherwise by the Common Council in a budget or other resolution. The amount the City receives in franchise fees shall
be as allowed by law and as set by the Common Council by resolution.
1
Chapter 3 Compensation of Officers and Employees
3.01 Salaries of City Officials
3.02 Mileage Allowance
3.03 Expense Allowance and Acting Mayor Salary
3.04 Salaries Paid Biweekly
3.05 Written Requests to the City Clerk
3.06 Requests by Representatives
3.07 Charter Ordinance 109 - Wisconsin Municipal Retirement Fund
3.08 City Employee Residence Requirement
3.01 SALARIES OF CERTAIN CITY OFFICIALS (MC#1152)
(1) The salary of the assistant city Attorney, deputy city clerk, and deputy city treasurer shall be set by the council
annually.
(2) The salary of alderpersons shall be $490 per month.
3.02 MILEAGE ALLOWANCE
The officers and employees shall be granted a mileage allowance as established by the common council. The mileage
allowance rates shall be kept on file with the city clerk.
3.03 EXPENSE ALLOWANCE AND ACTING MAYOR SALARY
(1) (a) Alderpersons of the City of Wisconsin Rapids shall be allowed expenses in an amount of not more than
$500.00 in any calendar year for city-related educational purposes. Mileage at the current rate in effect
at the time of travel is to be paid, in addition to the expense allowance set forth above. (MC#740)
(b) All employees of the City of Wisconsin Rapids, not covered in Section 3.03(1)(a) above, shall be
authorized to attend events for educational-related purposes, provided funds are established in the
annual budget. (MC#740)
(c) All travel outside of the State of Wisconsin must be authorized by Common Council prior to travel.
(MC#740)
(2) An officer or employee of the City of Wisconsin Rapids may withdraw his expense allowance in advance of the
conference or convention which he is going to attend; however, he shall submit an expense statement to the city
clerk and return any money not expended after he returns from the conference or convention.
(3) Payment of actual and necessary expenses of an alderpersons, including loss of wages or salary, incurred while
traveling outside of the city in performance of his duties, is also authorized and shall not be considered part of
the $350.00 expense referred to in section (1) and (2) above.
(4) The president of the common council, when serving as "acting mayor", pursuant to Section 62.09(8)(e) of the
Wisconsin Statutes, as amended, shall be compensated for his service and time at a salary based upon his or her
loss of wages or salary while serving in said capacity. The compensation paid to the acting mayor shall not
exceed the salary of the mayor. If the acting mayor is not employed, his compensation shall be determined by the
common council.
3.04 SALARIES PAID BIWEEKLY (MC#385)
The annual salary of each elected or appointed officer and all other non-represented employees shall be divided into
equal payments and paid biweekly. Employees terminating employment during the calendar year, or new employees
hired during the year will have their annual salary adjusted on a prorated basis for that portion of the year in which they
were actually employed.
3.05 WRITTEN REQUEST TO THE CITY CLERK
All the employees of the City of Wisconsin Rapids shall submit, in writing, to the city clerk for presentation to the
Wisconsin Rapids Common Council any and all requests for wage adjustments, together with reasons for adjustments set
out therein, on or before August 1 of each year. (112)
2
3.06 REQUESTS BY REPRESENTATIVES
All requests for wage adjustments shall be submitted, in writing, either by the individual employee or by his department
head, pursuant to a written request by the employee to the respective department head, or by the respective business
representative of any group or groups of city employees. (112)
3.07 WISCONSIN RETIREMENT FUND
The City of Wisconsin Rapids shall include eligible city personnel under the provisions of the Wisconsin Retirement Fund,
as set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes and any subsequent amendments. The city's original declaration to participate in
the Wisconsin Retirement Fund was set forth in Charter Ordinance No. 109, passed on May 2, 1944.
3.08 CITY EMPLOYEE RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT
(1) The following City of Wisconsin Rapids law enforcement, fire, and emergency personnel shall be
required to reside within 15 miles of the boundaries of the City of Wisconsin Rapids within 12
months of their date of hire, or within the time limit set forth in said employee’s employment
agreement.
a. All sworn Fire Department personnel
b. All sworn Police Department personnel
c. The following Department of Public Works personnel:
1. Park and Buildings Supervisor
2. Public Works Director
3. Public Works Superintendent
d. The following Water Works and Lighting Commission personnel:
1. Electrical Superintendent
2. Linemen
3. Meter Service Techs
4. Water Superintendent
5. Water Service Techs
(2) All employees in section (1) above shall be required, as a condition of their employment, to
continue to reside within 15 miles of the boundaries of the City of Wisconsin Rapids as long as
they remain employed by the city.
(3) City of Wisconsin Rapids employees shall abide by any state statutes that require residency within
the jurisdictional limits of the City of Wisconsin Rapids or any provision of state or local law that
requires residency in the State of Wisconsin.
1
Chapter 4 Wards, Voting Districts, and Polls
4.01 Voting Districts (Wards)
4.02 Election Board
4.03 Polls
4.04 Poll Hours
4.05 Ward Boundaries
4.06 Compensation of Election Workers
4.01 VOTING DISTRICTS.
(1) Pursuant to Section 62.08(1) of the Wisconsin Statutes, Wisconsin Rapids' wards, as defined in Section 4.06 of the
Municipal Code, shall be combined into aldermanic districts as follows: (MC#1128)
(a) Aldermanic District #1 shall consist of Wards 1 and 4.
(b) Aldermanic District #2 shall consist of Wards 2 and 3.
(c) Aldermanic District #3 shall consist of Wards 5, 6, 22, and 23.
(d) Aldermanic District #4 shall consist of Wards 10, 12, 24, and 28
(e) Aldermanic District #5 shall consist of Wards 7, 8, and 9.
(f) Aldermanic District #6 shall consist of Wards 11, 13, 14, 26, 27, and 29
(g) Aldermanic District #7 shall consist of Wards 18, 19, 20, and 21.
(h) Aldermanic District #8 shall consist of Wards 15, 16, 17, and 25.
(2) Areas annexed to the city after passage of this ordinance shall be assigned by ward to the nearest contiguous
aldermanic district as part of the appropriate annexation ordinance.
(3) Combining Wards. To accommodate administration of individual elections, the city clerk is hereby granted the
authority to combine wards as necessary.
4.02 ELECTION BOARD.
At the regular council meeting in December of each even-numbered year, the mayor shall nominate persons for an
election board for each of the election voting districts for the City of Wisconsin Rapids. Each such board shall consist of
inspectors of election. The number per district shall be determined as necessary by the city clerk to adequately staff each
election. The council shall immediately approve or disapprove such nominations. If they disapprove any such nominee, the
mayor shall immediately nominate another person. The nominees shall be chosen from a list as provided by the State
Statutes. Additional inspectors shall be likewise nominated by the mayor for those voting districts for which it may be
deemed necessary. For a vacancy caused by sickness, or any other reason, the city clerk shall appoint a substitute which
shall be in effect for that day only.
4.03 POLLS.
Polling places shall be as set by resolution of the Common Council. (MC #1213)
4.04 POLL HOURS.
The polls at any election shall be open from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., as provided by Section 6.78, Wisconsin State
Statutes.
4.05 WARD BOUNDARIES.
The boundaries of the City of Wisconsin Rapids' wards shall be as follows:
(1) Ward 1 consists of census block numbers: 551410112001007, 551410112001001, 551410111003021,
551410111003020, 551410111003019, 551410111003018, 551410112001008, 551410111003011,
551410111004043, 551410111003017, 551410112001006, 551410112001005, 551410111004056,
551410112001015, 551410111003013, 551410111004059, 551410111004057, 551410111004044,
551410111003016, 551410111004042, 551410111004040, 551410111004060, 551410111004039,
551410111004037, 551410111003003, 551410111003002, 551410111004041, 551410111003033,
551410111003034, 551410111003014, 551410111004055, 551410111003032, 551410111004038,
551410111004054, 551410111004036, 551410111004053, 551410111003030, 551410111003031,
2
551410111003036, 551410111003044, 551410111004058, 551410111004035, 551410111004009,
551410111004034, 551410111004045, 551410111004010, 551410111004046, 551410111004033,
551410111004048, 551410111004047, 551410111004032, 551410111004049, 551410111004030,
551410111004031, 551410111003015, 551410111003022, 551410111004050, 551410111004029,
551410111004011, 551410111004012, 551410111004013, 551410111004023, 551410111004022,
551410111004051, 551410111004021, 551410111003038, 551410111003039, 551410111003040,
551410111003043, 551410111004008, 551410111004014, 551410111004015, 551410111004016,
551410111004052, 551410111004020, 551410111003037, 551410111003035, 551410111004003,
551410111004007, 551410111004017, 551410112002000, 551410111003042, 551410111004025,
551410111004026, 551410111004024, 551410111004019, 551410111004004, 551410111004018,
551410111004068, 551410111004028, 551410111004006, 551410111004069, 551410111004027,
551410112002049, 551410111004005, 551410111004067, 551410111003041, 551410112002047,
551410112002050, 551410111004061, 551410112002044, 551410111004065, 551410111004066,
551410112002048, 551410111004062, 551410111003023, 551410111003027, 551410112002045,
551410111003026, 551410111004001, 551410111004002, 551410111003024, 551410111003025,
551410111003028, 551410111004064, 551410112002046, 551410111004063, 551410111002054,
551410111004070, 551410111002055, 551410111004000, 551410111002053, 551410111002052,
551410111003029, 551410111002048, 551410111002051, 551410111002050, 551410111002046,
551410111002049, and 551410111002047, and is more particularly described as:
Beginning at the intersection of the extension of the north right-of-way of Chase Street and the west bank
of the Wisconsin River; then north along said west bank of to the intersection of said west bank and the north city
limits; then west along the north city limits to the west city limits; then south along the west city limits to the point
where the intersection of said west limits and the centerline of the Fox Valley and Western Railroad; then east along
said railroad center line to the point of intersection with the north right-of-way of West Grand Avenue; then east
along said north right-of-way to a point of intersection with the easterly right-of-way of West Riverview Expressway;
then south along the easterly right-of-way to a point of the intersection with the north right-of-way of Goggins Street;
then east along said north right-of-way to a point intersection with the east right-of-way of 7th Avenue South; then
south along said east right-of-way to a point of intersection with the north right-of-way of Chase Street to the point
of beginning.
(2) Ward 2 consists of census block numbers: 551410112001026, 551410112001020, 551410112001014,
551410112001036, 551410112001027, 551410112001055, 551410112001028, 551410112001029,
551410112001030, 551410112001038, 551410112004021, 551410112001054, 551410112001053, and
551410112001039, and is more particularly described as:
Beginning at the south right-of-way of West Grand Avenue and the west right-of-way of 25th Avenue South;
then south along said west right-of-way to a point of intersection with the center line of the Wisconsin Central
Railroad; then southwest along said center line to a point of intersection with the west city limits; then north along
said west city limits to a point of intersection with the center line of the Fox Valley and Western Railroad; then
northeast along said center line to a point of intersection with the south right-of-way of West Grand Avenue; then
easterly along said south right-of-way to the point of beginning.
(3) Ward 3 consists of census block numbers: 551410112001051, 551410112003023, 551410112001037,
551410112003022, 551410112003021, 551410112001045, 551410112001042, 551410112001043,
551410112003017, 551410112001044, 551410112001021, 551410112001023, 551410112001046,
551410112001025, 551410112001047, 551410112004006, 551410112004007, 551410112001041,
551410112001040, 551410112004008, 551410112004005, 551410112004020, 551410112004009,
551410112001024, 551410112004004, 551410112003033, 551410112004002, 551410112004003,
551410112001022, 551410112004010, 551410112004011, 551410112004013, 551410112003031,
551410112002017, 551410112002032, 551410112002018, 551410112002038, 551410112002033,
551410112002039, 551410112004012, 551410112004000, 551410112003032, 551410112004019,
551410112002019, 551410112002016, 551410112002034, 551410112002031, 551410112002040,
551410112002037, 551410112004018, 551410112004014, 551410112002036, 551410112002041,
551410112004001, 551410112003027, 551410112004015, 551410112004016, 551410112004017,
551410112002027, 551410112002042, 551410112003030, and 551410112003028, and is more
particularly described as:
Beginning at the intersection of the south right-of-way of West Grand Avenue and the west right-of-way of
3
19th Avenue South; then south along said west right-of-way to a point of intersection with the south right-of-way of
Chase Street; then east along said south right-of-way to a point of intersection with the west right-of-way of 17th
Avenue South; then south along said west right-of-way to a point of intersection with the extension of the north
right-of-way of Gaynor Avenue; then east along said extension to a point of intersection with the west bank of the
Wisconsin River; then southwesterly along said west bank to a point of intersection with the south city limits; then
west along the south city limits to the southwest corner of the city limits; then north along the west city limits to a
point of intersection with the center line of the Wisconsin Central Limited Railroad; then northeast along said center
line to a point of intersection with the extension of the east right-of-way of 25th Avenue South; then north along said
east right-of-way and extension thereof to a point of intersection with the south right-of-way of West Grand Avenue;
then southeaster along said south right-of-way to the point of beginning. Ward 3 also includes Powers Island.
(4) Ward 4 consists of census block numbers: 551410112002015, 551410112002035, 551410112002030,
551410112002020, 551410112002021, 551410112002014, 551410112002028, 551410112002029,
551410112002022, 551410112002013, 551410112002043, 551410112002026, 551410112002012,
551410112002025, 551410112002011, 551410112002010, 551410112002023, 551410112002009,
551410112002024, 551410112002007, and 551410112002008, and is more particularly described as:
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of the Wisconsin Central Railroad and the south right-of-way
of West Grand Avenue; then west along said south right-of-way to a point intersection with the east right-of-way of
19th Avenue South; then south along said east right-of-way to a point intersecting with the north right-of-way of
Chase Street; then east along said north right-of-way of Chase Street to a point of intersection with the east right-ofway
of 17th Avenue South; then south along said east right-of-way to a point of intersection with the center line of
the Wisconsin Central Railroad; then northeast along said center line to the point of beginning.
(5) Ward 5 consists of census block numbers: 551410112003029, 551410112003006, 551410112003019,
551410112003020, 551410112003034, 551410112003007, 551410112003035, 551410112003008,
551410112003010, 551410112003009, 551410112003005, 551410112002004, 551410112003012,
551410112002005, 551410112003014, 551410112003015, 551410112002006, 551410112003004,
551410112002051, 551410112003011, 551410112003003, 551410112002052, 551410112003002,
551410112002001, 551410112002002, 551410112003013, 551410112003000, 551410112002003, and
551410112003001, and is more particularly described as:
Beginning at the south right-of-way of West Grand Avenue and the west right-of-way of West Riverview
Expressway; then southwest along said west right-of-way to a point of intersection of the extension of the north
right-of-way of Hale Street; then easterly along said north right-of-way and extension thereof to a point of
intersection of the west right-of-way of 7th Avenue south; then south along said west right-of-way to a point of
intersection with the south right-of-way of Chase Street; then east and southeast along said south right-of-way to a
point of intersection of the east right-of-way of 1st Avenue South; then northeast along said east right-of-way to a
point of intersection with the extension of the north right-of-way of Chase Street; then southeast along said
extension to a point of intersection with the west bank of the Wisconsin Rapids; then southwest along said west
bank to a point of intersection with the north extension of the north right-of-way of Gaynor Avenue; then west along
said extension to a point of intersection with the east right-of-way of 17th Avenue South; then north along said east
right-of-way to a point of intersection with the center line of the Wisconsin Central Limited Railroad; then northeast
along said center line of railroad to a point of intersection with the south right-of-way of West Grand Avenue; then
southeast along said south right-of-way to the point of beginning. Ward 5 also includes Lyon Island and the island
north of Lyon Island and west of Belle Island.
(6) Ward 6 consists of census block numbers: 551410113003008, 551410113003000, 551410113003055,
551410113003009, 551410113003007, 551410113003054, 551410113003001, 551410113003046,
551410113003010, 551410113003041, 551410113003040, 551410113003045, 551410113003039,
551410113003042, 551410113003038, 551410113003047, 551410113003011, 551410113003044,
551410113003043, 551410113003004, 551410113003037, 551410113003035, 551410113003003,
551410113003012, 551410113003021, 551410113003036, 551410113003002, 551410113003013,
551410113003052, 551410113003051, 551410113003032, 551410113003005, 551410113003048,
551410113003014, 551410113003029, 551410113003022, 551410113003031, 551410113003017,
551410110005010, 551410113003015, 551410113003023, 551410113003033, 551410113003006,
551410110005011, 551410113003016, 551410113003024, 551410113003030, 551410113003034,
551410110005043, 551410113003026, 551410113003020, 551410113003018, 551410110005042,
551410110005012, 551410110005044, 551410113003019, 551410113003025, 551410110005041,
4
551410110005045, 551410113003053, 551410113003050, 551410113003049, and 551410113003027,
and is more particularly described as:
Beginning at the intersection of the north right-of-way of East Riverview Expressway and the west right-ofway
of Lincoln Street; then north along said west right-of-way to a point of intersection with the southerly right-ofway
of East Jackson Street; then northwesterly along said southerly right-of-way to a point of intersection with the
east bank of the Wisconsin River; then southwesterly along said east bank to a point of intersection with the north
right-of-way of East Riverview Expressway; then southeasterly along said north right-of-way to the point of beginning.
Ward 6 also includes Belle Island.
(7) Ward 7 consists of census block numbers: 551410113002010, 551410113002005, 551410113002003,
551410113002009, 551410113002006, 551410113003028, 551410113002008, 551410113002007,
551410113002002, 551410113002001, 551410113002004, 551410113002000, 551410114003045,
551410114003048, 551410114002036, 551410114002033, 551410114002040, 551410114002039,
551410114002032, 551410114002013, 551410114002012, 551410114003047, 551410114002034,
551410114002031, 551410114002014, 551410114003049, 551410114002041, 551410114002011,
551410114002038, 551410114002037, 551410114003046, 551410114003050, 551410114002042,
551410114002043, 551410114002030, 551410114002015, 551410114002035, 551410114002010,
551410114003052, and 551410114003051, and is more particularly described as:
Beginning at the east right-of-way of Lincoln Street and the south right-of-way of East Grand Avenue; then
east along said south right-of-way to a point of intersection with the west right-of-way of 11th Street South; then
south along said west right-of-way to a point of intersection with the south right-of-way of East G Street; then east
along said right-of-way to a point of intersection of the west right-of-way of 12th Street South; then south along said
west right-of-way to a point of intersection with the north right-of-way of East Riverview Expressway; then
northwesterly along said north right-of-way to a point of intersection of Lincoln Street; then northerly along said east
right-of-way to the point of beginning.
(8) Ward 8 consists of census block numbers: 551410110005009, 551410110005007, 551410110005013,
551410110003032, 551410110005008, 551410110005021, 551410110005020, 551410110005014,
551410110005015, 551410110005040, 551410110005046, 551410110005022, 551410110005023,
551410110005019, 551410110003029, 551410110005006, 551410110005047, 551410110005004,
551410110005005, 551410110003030, 551410110003050, 551410110005024, 551410110005018,
551410110005039, 551410110005016, 551410110005048, 551410110005003, 551410110003031,
551410110005000, 551410110003054, 551410114001032, 551410114001012, 551410114001011,
551410110005038, 551410110005025, 551410110005026, 551410110005027, 551410110005017,
551410110005002, 551410110003051, 551410110003047, 551410110003049, 551410114001031,
551410114001013, 551410114001010, 551410110005037, 551410110005034, 551410110005033,
551410110005028, 551410110005029, 551410110003048, 551410114001030, 551410114001014,
551410114001009, 551410110005036, 551410110005035, 551410110005032, 551410110005031,
551410110005030, 551410110005001, 551410110006016, 551410110004041, 551410110006017,
551410110004040, 551410110006018, 551410110006015, and 551410110004042, and is more
particularly described as:
Beginning at the north right-of-way of East Grand Avenue and the easterly right-of-way of East Jackson
Street; then northwesterly along said easterly right-of-way to the point of intersection with the east bank of the
Wisconsin River; then northeasterly along said east bank and also along the Stora Enso dam to a point of
intersection with the center line of the Fox Valley and Western Railroad; then southeast along said center line to a
point of intersection with the extension of the west right-of-way of 12th Street North; then south along said west
right-of-way and extension thereof to a point of intersection with the south right-of-way of Franklin Street; then east
along said south right-of-way to a point of intersection with the west right-of-way of 13th Street North; then south
along said west right-of-way to a point of intersection with the north right-of-way of Baker Street; then west along
north right-of-way to a point of intersection with the west right-of-way of 11th Street North; then south along said
west right-of-way to a point of intersection of the north right-of-way of East Grand Avenue; then west along said
north right-of-way to the point of beginning. Ward 8 also includes any islands lying south of the Stora Enso dam and
north of the Jackson Street Bridge.
(9) Ward 9 consists of census block numbers: 551410110003002, 551410110003023, 551410110003025,
551410110003026, 551410110003028, 551410110003024, 551410110003046, and 551410110003027,
and is more particularly described as:
5
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of the Fox Valley and Western Railroad and the east bank of
the Wisconsin River; then northeast along said east bank to a point of intersection of the center of Quinnell's Creek;
then southeast along said center of creek to a point of intersection of the west right-of-way of 1st Street North; then
southwest along said west right-of-way to the point of intersection of the south right-of-way of Pleasant View Drive;
then southeast along said south right-of-way to a point of intersection with the west right-of-way of 2nd Street North;
then southwesterly along said west right-of-way to a point of intersection of the north right-of-way of Ash Street;
then northwest along said north right-of-way to a point of intersection of the west right-of-way of 1st Street North;
then southwest along said west right-of-way to a point of intersection of the center line of Fox Valley and Western
Railroad; then northwest along said center line to the point of beginning. Ward 9 also includes un-named islands
lying north of the Fox Valley and Western Railroad, and south of the city limits, and between the east bank of Big
Island and the east bank of the Wisconsin River.
(10) Ward 10 consists of census block numbers: 551410110003038, 551410110003043, 551410110003044,
551410110003052, 551410110003045, 551410110003053, 551410110003034, 551410110004039,
551410110004023, 551410110004022, 551410110003036, 551410110004019, 551410110003033,
551410110003037, 551410110003035, 551410110004044, 551410110004024, 551410110004021,
551410110004020, 551410110003012, 551410110003014, 551410110003016, 551410110004009,
551410110004016, 551410110004025, 551410110004026, 551410110003003, 551410110003020,
551410110004028, 551410110004027, 551410110004012, 551410110003010, 551410110003042,
551410110003011, 551410110004018, 551410110004015, 551410110004030, 551410110004017,
551410110003055, 551410110003019, 551410110004013, 551410110003004, 551410110004014,
551410110003056, 551410110003040, 551410110004011, 551410110006007, 551410110003041,
551410110003017, 551410110003018, 551410110003039, 551410110003013, 551410110003015,
551410110003021, and 551410110003022, and is more particularly described as:
Beginning at the intersection of the east right-of-way of 1st Street North and the center line of the Fox Valley
and Western Railroad; then southeast along said center line to a point of intersection with the east right-of-way of
12th Street North; then south along said east right-of-way to a point of intersection with the north right-of-way of
Franklin Street; then east along said north right-of-way to a point of intersection with the west right-of-way of 14th
Street North; then north along said west right-of-way to a point of intersection with the north right-of-way of Apricot
Street; then east along said north right-of-way to a point of intersection with the east right-of-way of 16th Street
North; then south along said east right-of-way to a point of intersection with the north right-of-way of Franklin Street;
then east along said north right-of-way to a point of intersection with the west right-of-way of Baker Drive; then
northeast along the west right-of-way of Baker Drive/Plover Road to a point of intersection with the city limits
boundary as it meanders north and west to a point of intersection with the east bank of the Wisconsin River; then
southwest along said east bank to a point of intersection with the center of Quinnell's Creek; then southeast along
said creek to a point of intersection with the easterly right-of-way of 1st Street North; then southwest along said
easterly right-of-way to a point of intersection with the north right-of-way of Pleasant View Drive; then southeast
along said north right-of-way to a point of intersection with the east right-of-way of 2nd Street North; then
southwesterly along said east right-of-way to a point of intersection with the south right-of-way of Ash Street; then
northwest along said south right-of-way to a point of intersection with the east right-of-way of 1st Street North; then
southwest along said east right-of-way to the point of beginning.
(11) Ward 11 consists of census block numbers: 551410110006019, 551410110006014, 551410110004043,
551410110006020, 551410110006013, 551410110004029, 551410110006012, 551410110006021,
551410110006011, 551410110004031, 551410110006022, 551410110006009, 551410110004032,
551410110006008, and 551410110004010, and is more particularly described as:
Beginning at the east right-of-way of 13th Street North and the north right-of-way of Baker Street; then east
along said north right-of-way to a point of intersection with the south right-of-way of Franklin Street; then west along
said south right-of-way to a point of intersection with the west right-of-way of 16th Street North; then north along
said west right-of-way to a point of intersection of the south right-of-way of Apricot Street; then west along said
south right-of-way to a point of intersection with the east right-of-way of 14th Street North; then south along said
east right-of-way to a point of intersection with the south right-of-way of Franklin Street; then west along said south
right-of-way to a point of intersection of the east right-of-way of 13th Street North; then south along said east rightof-
way to the point of beginning.
(12) Ward 12 consists of census block numbers: 551410110004003, 551410110006005, 551410110002035,
551410110004005, 551410110004008, 551410110004004, 551410110004006, 551410110002034,
6
551410110002033, 551410110004007, 551410110004036, 551410110006004, 551410110004038,
551410110004037, 551410110004035, 551410110004034, 551410110006003, 551410110006002,
551410110006000, 551410110006050, 551410110002032, 551410110002036, 551410110004000,
551410110004002, 551410110004033, 551410110002029, 551410110004001, 551410110006001,
551410110002042, 551410110002040, 551410110002057, 551410110002044, 551410110002041,
551410110002037, 551410110002038, 551410110002043, 551410110002045, 551410110002039,
551410110002028, 551410110002027, 551410110002026, 551410110002020, 551410110002019,
551410110002056, 551410110002015, 551410110002017, 551410110002018, 551410110002016, and
551410110002024, and is more particularly described as:
Beginning at the north right-of-way of Washington Street and the west right-of-way of 64th Street North;
then north along said west right-of-way to a point of intersection with the city limits boundary; then follow the city
limits boundary westerly to a point of intersection with the easterly right-of-way of Plover Road; then southerly along
said easterly right-of-way to a point of intersection with the city limits boundary; then following the city limits
boundary as it meanders to the west to the point of beginning, excluding the lands described in Section 4.05(24),
which were annexed by Ordinance #1110 (McDonald annexation). (MC#1128)
(13) Ward 13 consists of census block numbers: 551410114003053, 551410114003032, 551410114003055,
551410114003058, 551410114003022, 551410114002022, 551410114003023, 551410114001020,
551410114001003, 551410110006023, 551410114002003, 551410114001024, 551410114003033,
551410114003054, 551410114002025, 551410114002023, 551410114002002, 551410114001021,
551410114001002, 551410110006039, 551410110006010, 551410114003036, 551410114003034,
551410114002024, 551410114002001, 551410114001022, 551410110006040, 551410110006041,
551410114001001, 551410114003035, 551410114003021, 551410114002000, 551410114001023,
551410114001000, 551410110006049, 551410110006006, 551410114003007, 551410110006047,
551410110006048, 551410114003018, 551410110006052, 551410114003059, 551410110006054,
551410114003019, 551410114003012, 551410114003003, 551410114003008, 551410114003020,
551410110006055, 551410114003015, 551410114003060, 551410114003010, 551410114003009,
551410114003004, 551410114003001, 551410114003011, and 551410114003017, and is more
particularly described as:
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of 16th Street North and the north right-of-way of Baker
Street; then northeast along the north right-of-way of Baker Street which turns into Baker Drive to a point of
intersection with the north right-of-way of Washington Street; then east along the extension of the north right-of-way
of Washington Street to a point of intersection with the extension of the north/south city limits boundary line; then
south along the city limits boundary and extension thereof; then continue to follow the city limits boundary as it
meanders southerly to the intersection of the center line of Grove Avenue and center line of 16th Street; then north
along the center line of 16th Street to the point of beginning.
(14) Ward 14 consists of census block numbers: 551410114002028, 551410114002029, 551410114002044,
551410114002016, 551410114002009, 551410114001029, 551410114001015, 551410114001008,
551410110006038, 551410110006029, 551410110006028, 551410114002027, 551410114002017,
551410114002008, 551410114001028, 551410114001016, 551410114001007, 551410110006037,
551410110006030, 551410110006027, 551410114002026, 551410114002018, 551410114002007,
551410114001027, 551410114001017, 551410114001006, 551410110006036, 551410110006031,
551410110006026, 551410114002020, 551410114002019, 551410114002006, 551410114001026,
551410114001018, 551410114001005, 551410110006035, 551410110006025, 551410110006032,
551410114002021, 551410114002005, 551410114001025, 551410114001019, 551410114002004,
551410114001004, 551410110006034, 551410110006033, and 551410110006024, and is more
particularly described as:
Beginning at the north right-of-way of Chestnut Street and the east right-of-way of 11th Street South; then
north along said east right-of-way to a point of intersection of the south right-of-way of Baker Street; then east along
the south right-of-way to a point of intersection of the west right-of-way of 16th Street North; then south along said
west right-of-way to a point of intersection of the north right-of-way of Chestnut Street; then west along said north
right-of-way to the point of beginning.
(15) Ward 15 consists of census block numbers: 551410114002045, 551410114003043, 551410114003028,
551410114003027, 551410114003029, 551410114003026, 551410114003042, 551410114003030,
551410114003025, 551410114003031, and 551410114003024, and is more particularly described as:
7
Beginning at the intersection of the east right-of-way of 11th Street South and the south right-of-way of
Chestnut Street; then east along the said south right-of-way to a point of the intersection with the west right-of-way
of 16th Street South; then south along said west right-of-way to a point of intersection with the north right-of-way of
East Riverview Expressway; then northwest along said north right-of-way to a point of intersection with the east
right-of-way of 12th Street South; then north along said east right-of-way to a point of intersection with the north
right-of-way of East G Street; then west along said north right-of-way to a point of intersection with the east right-ofway
of 11th Street South; then north along said east right-of-way to the point of beginning.
(16) Ward 16 consists of census block numbers: 551410114003057, 551410114004001, 551410114004013,
551410114004002, 551410114004012, 551410114004014, 551410114004005, 551410114004003,
551410114004000, 551410114004015, 551410114004011, 551410114004004, 551410114004010,
551410114003056, 551410114003044, 551410114004006, 551410114003068, 551410114004009,
551410114004019, 551410114003069, 551410114004008, 551410114004007, and 551410114004020,
and is more particularly described as:
Beginning at the intersection of the east right-of-way of 8th Street South and the south right-of way of East
Riverview Expressway; then southeast along said south right-of-way to a point of intersection with the west right-ofway
of 16th Street South; then south along said west right-of-way to a point of intersection with the north right-ofway
of Grove Avenue; then west along said north right-of-way to a point of intersection of the west right-of-way of
12th Street South; then south along said west right-of-way to a point of intersection with the north right-of-way of
Grove Avenue; then west along said north right-of-way to a point of intersection with the west right-of-way of 9th
Street South; then south along said west right-of-way to a point of intersection with the north right-of-way of Sweat
Avenue; then west along said north right-of-way to a point of intersection with the east right-of-way of 8th Street
South; then north along said east right-of-way to the point of beginning.
(17) Ward 17 consists of census block numbers: 551410114004036, 551410114004035, 551410114005029,
551410114005012, 551410114005015, 551410114004025, 551410114004026, 551410114005013,
551410114005016, 551410114005011, 551410114004034, 551410114004024, 551410114004016,
551410114004023, 551410114004017, 551410114005010, 551410114004033, 551410114004018,
551410114005026, 551410114004022, 551410114005038, 551410114005035, 551410114004021,
551410114005037, 551410114005031, 551410114005036, 551410114004028, 551410114005014,
551410114005009, 551410114004032, 551410114004027, 551410114005034, 551410114005032,
551410114004029, 551410114004031, 551410114004030, 551410114005008, 551410114005007,
551410114003066, 551410114005004, 551410114005005, 551410114005033, 551410114005006,
551410114005019, 551410114005018, 551410114005021, 551410114005022, 551410115002026,
551410115002031, 551410115002033, 551410115002030, 551410114003067, 551410115002027, and
551410115002032, and is more particularly described as:
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of 8th Street South and the center line of Sweat Avenue;
then east along the center line of Sweat Avenue to a point of intersection of the center line of 9th Street South; then
north along the center line of 9th Street South to a point of intersection of the center line of Grove Avenue; then east
along the center line of Grove Avenue to a point of intersection of 12th Street South; then north along the center line
of 12th Street South to a point of intersection with the center line of Grove Avenue; then east along the center line
of Grove Avenue to a point of intersection with the city limits boundary; then south along the city limits boundary;
then continue to follow the city limits boundary as it meanders to Griffith Avenue; then continue to follow the city
limits boundary as it meanders north and west from Griffith Avenue to a point of intersection with the center line of
8th Street South; then north along the center line of 8th Street South to the point of beginning, excluding the lands
described in Section 4.05(25), which were annexed by Ordinance #1113 (Rosewood annexation). (MC#1128)
(18) Ward 18 consists of census block numbers: 551410113001067, 551410113001017, 551410113001025,
551410113001018, 551410113001038, 551410113001027, 551410113005008, 551410113001020,
551410113001021, 551410113001019, 551410113005021, 551410113005007, 551410113001039,
551410113001072, 551410113001071, 551410113001069, 551410113001066, 551410113001063,
551410113001070, 551410113001031, 551410113001032, 551410113001065, 551410113001035,
551410113001034, 551410113001033, 551410113001064, 551410113001073, 551410114005060,
551410114005061, 551410114005053, 551410114005052, 551410114005059, 551410114005048,
551410114005066, 551410114005058, 551410114005057, 551410114005050, 551410114005054, and
551410114005063, and is more particularly described as:
Beginning at the east right-of-way of Lincoln Street and the south right-of-way of Airport Avenue; then east
8
along said south right-of-way to a point of intersect ion of the center line of 8th Street South; then south along said
center line to a point of intersection of the city limits boundary being a point south of Two Mile Avenue; then follow
the city limits boundary as it meanders south and east to the center line of Lakewood Lane; then continue to follow
the city limits boundary as it meanders north and east to a point of intersection with the south right-of-way of Two
Mile Avenue; then east along said south right-of-way to a point of intersection with the east right-of-way of Lincoln
Street; then north along said east right-of-way to the point of beginning.
(19) Ward 19 consists of census block numbers: 551410113001003, 551410113004020, 551410113004027,
551410113004021, 551410113005017, 551410113001004, 551410113005018, 551410113004022,
551410113004019, 551410113004026, 551410113005016, 551410113005019, 551410113001083,
551410113004023, 551410113005015, 551410113005020, 551410113001007, 551410113005014,
551410113001016, 551410113004024, 551410113005010, 551410113005011, 551410113001015,
551410113005009, 551410113001013, and 551410113001014, and is more particularly described as:
Beginning at the center line of 1st Street South and the south right-of-way of Pepper Avenue; then east
along the said south right-of-way to a point of intersection of the west right-of-way of Sampson Street; then south
along said west right-of-way to a point of intersection with the south right-of-way of Glenwood Heights; then east
along the said south right-of-way to a point of intersection of the west right-of-way of Lincoln Street; then south
along the said west right-of-way to a point of intersection of the center line of Two Mile Avenue; then west along
said center line to a point of intersection of the city limits boundary; then follow the city limits boundary as it
meanders west and south to 1st Street South; then follow the city limits boundary north to the point where the city
limits goes west; then go north along the center line of 1st Street South to the point of beginning.
(20) Ward 20 consists of census block numbers: 551410113002023, 551410113002016, 551410113002015,
551410113002011, 551410113002019, 551410113002020, 551410113002031, 551410113005001,
551410113005013, 551410113005003, 551410113002030, 551410113005006, 551410113002014,
551410113002018, 551410113002017, 551410113002021, 551410113002024, 551410113002022,
551410113005005, 551410113005004, 551410113005000, 551410113002029, 551410113005002,
551410113002025, 551410113002013, 551410113002028, 551410113002012, 551410113002026, and
551410113002027, and is more particularly described as:
Beginning at the east right-of-way of Lincoln Street and the south right-of-way of East Riverview
Expressway; then east along said south right-of-way to a point of intersection of the west right-of-way of 8th Street
South; then south along said west right-of-way to a point of intersection of the north right-of-way of Airport Avenue;
then west along said north right-of-way to the point of intersection of the east right-of-way of Lincoln Street; then
north along said east right-of-way to the point of beginning.
(21) Ward 21 consists of census block numbers: 551410113004001, 551410113004016, 551410113004000,
551410113004031, 551410113004025, 551410113005012, 551410113004032, 551410113004013,
551410113004030, 551410113004017, 551410113004028, 551410113004018, 551410113004014,
551410113004015, and 551410113004029, and is more particularly described as:
Beginning at the east right-of-way of Sampson Street and the south right-of-way of Miller Avenue; then east
along said south right-of-way to a point of intersection with the west right-of-way of Lincoln Street; then south along
the said west right-of-way to a point of intersection of the north right-of-way of Glenwood Heights; then west along
the said north right-of-way to a point of intersection of the east right-of-way of Sampson Street; then north along
said east right-of-way to a point of beginning.
(22) Ward 22 consists of census block numbers: 551410113003081, 551410113003069, 551410113004005,
551410113003082, 551410113004009, 551410113003056, 551410113004004, 551410113004006,
551410113004010, 551410113003080, 551410113003083, 551410113004011, 551410113004003,
551410113004007, 551410113003079, 551410113003078, 551410113004012, 551410113004002,
551410113003068, 551410113004008, 551410113003057, 551410113003087, 551410113003077,
551410113003067, 551410113003065, 551410113003058, 551410113003076, 551410113003066,
551410113003059, 551410113003064, 551410113003070, 551410113003084, 551410113003075,
551410113003063, 551410113003060, 551410113003085, 551410113003074, 551410113003071,
551410113003086, 551410113003073, 551410113003072, 551410113003061, and 551410113003062,
and is more particularly described as:
Beginning at the east right-of-way of 1st Street South and the south right-of-way of East Riverview
Expressway; then easterly along said south right-of-way to a point of intersection with the west right-of-way of
Lincoln Street; then south along said west right-of-way to a point of intersection with the north right-of-way of Miller
9
Avenue; then west along said north right-of-way to a point of intersection with the west right-of-way of Sampson
Street; then south along said west right-of-way to a point of intersection with the north right-of-way of Pepper
Avenue; then west along said north right-of-way to a point of intersection with the east right-of-way of 1st Street
South; then north along said east right-of-way to the point of beginning.
(23) Ward 23 consists of census block numbers: 551410112003016, 551410112003018, 551410113001000,
551410113001001, 551410113001008, 551410113001010, and 551410113001009, and is more
particularly described as:
Beginning at the intersection of the east bank of the Wisconsin River and the south right-of-way of East
Riverview Expressway; then southeasterly along said south right-of-way to a point of intersection with the west rightof-
way of 1st Street South; then south along said west right-of-way to a point of intersection with the city limits; then
follow the city limits boundary to the west to the intersection of the east bank of the Wisconsin River; then
northeasterly along said east bank to the point of beginning. Ward 23 includes Witter Island, Garrison Island,
Edwards Island, and that portion of Gardner Island which is in the city limits. It also includes any un-named islands
lying north of Gardner Island and south of Witter Island.
(24) Ward 24. Beginning at the northwest corner of Lot 1 of Wood County Certified Survey Map No. 6353, said survey
map is located north of Norton Street a distance of 297.00 feet and adjacent to the east right-of-way of 32nd Street
North, then east along the north line of said Lot 1 to the northeast corner of said Lot 1 also intersecting the city
limits, then north along the north-south city limits line to the point where the city limits runs west, then west along
the city limits and extension thereof to the east right-of-way of 32nd Street North, then south along said east right-ofway
to a point where said east right-of-way runs east, then east along east right-of-way of 32nd Street North to the
point of beginning. (MC#1128)
(25) Ward 25. Being all of Lots 83, 84, 85, 86, and 87 of Rosewood Estates 4th Addition, City of Wisconsin Rapids.
(MC#1128)
4.06 COMPENSATION OF ELECTION WORKERS
Election workers shall be paid as determined by the Common Council (MC #1213)
1
Chapter 5 Water and Sewers
5.01 Extensions, Council Order
5.02 Contents of Petitions and Resolutions
5.03 Charges For Water and Sewer Extensions
5.04 Procedure For Lien For Charges
5.05 Sewer and Water Stub Taps
5.06 Where Stub Taps Are Not Required
5.07 Charges For Sewer and Water Stub Taps
5.08 Regulating The Tapping of Sewers
5.09 Requiring Sewer and Water Connections
5.10 Construction of Privies and Cesspools
5.11 Area In Which Water Service Is To Be Extended Beyond the City Limits
5.12 Improvements Eligible For Installment Payments
5.13 Minimum and Maximum Assessments Eligible For Installment Payments
5.14 Installment Assessment Notice
5.15 Assessments Included in Installments
5.16 Procedure For Installment Payment
5.17 Interest On Installments
5.18 Bonds, Plans, and Specifications
5.19 Outdoor Water Usage Restrictions
5.01 EXTENSIONS, COUNCIL ORDER
Extension of water mains and sewers will be made in units of one block, when it is determined by the common council to be
in the best interest of the public or necessary for public health and safety. (208)
5.02 CONTENTS OF PETITIONS AND RESOLUTIONS
All petitions requesting and all resolutions ordering sewer and water extensions shall include the following provisions: "It is
agreed that the front foot charge shall be figured on the rate set by resolution in effect on the date that this project of sewer
and/or water extension is commenced. Each block shall be considered a separate project."
5.03 CHARGES FOR WATER AND SEWER EXTENSIONS
(1) Water mains and sewer extensions shall be assessed according to the front footage of a lot abutting such streets
where water mains and/or sewer extensions serve said lots except: (MC#120)
(a) Property abutting upon streets shall be assessed in relation to frontage of the lot measured at a line 25
feet back from the lot line.
(b) Charges for Water and Sewer Improvements. Property abutting two or more streets shall be exempt from
assessment for sewer and/or water improvements upon the second or third side to the extent of the
frontage on the first side, not exceeding 135 feet; provided the owner thereof agrees to pay the current
assessment of any new lot created on said second or third frontage. (MC#18)
(c) Properties not abutting on streets containing sewer and/or water mains shall, upon attachment to
available sewer and/or water mains, pay an assessment based upon the short side of its frontage, except
that in the event sewer and/or water mains are extended into the street abutting said property it shall be
assessed the frontage upon such street less the frontage previously assessed for. (MC#55)
(d) Charges for interceptor sewer extensions (24" or larger) in active TIF areas shall be assessed at 40 percent
of the rate set forth by the common council. (MC#537)
(2) Charges for water and sewer extensions shall be based on actual installation costs. (MC #1236)
5.04 PROCEDURE FOR LIEN FOR CHARGES
2
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to cause notice to be served upon the owner of each lot or parcel of land in front of which
sewer and water extensions shall have been ordered, as well as arrange for the publication of the final resolution approving
the extensions, and unless sewer and water stub taps shall be installed prior to the beginning of a resurfacing project or at
the time a sewer and water project reaches such owner's property, then the city shall proceed to make such installation and
the charges for installing the same in front of each lot or parcel of land, whether the work to be done by contract or
otherwise, shall be in accordance with the procedures of this ordinance and entered in the tax roll as a special tax and
become a lien against each said lot or parcel of land, and the same shall be collected in all respects like other special
assessments upon real estate.
5.05 SEWER AND WATER STUB TAPS (MC#1132)
(1) Sewer and/or water stub taps shall be installed:
(a) Whenever any new sewer and/or water extensions are made.
(b) Before curb and gutter is installed.
(c) Before any street or public alley is hard surfaced or oiled.
(d) Along said street to a point inside the lot line on both sides of said street, one such stub to be required
and installed for each lot fronting thereupon according to the duly recorded plat thereof, except in
subdivision containing lots less than 75 foot frontage, where stub taps may be installed at intervals not to
exceed 75 feet or each 75 foot frontage, except street and alley crossings, along such streets where the
lots have not been platted and recorded. Exceptions may be granted if the owner submits a proposed
development plan to the engineering department for review and approval. When water extensions only are
made water stub taps shall be installed to every dwelling house or other building used for human
habitation, manufacturing or trade but shall not be required to be installed in accordance with section (4)
until sewer extensions have been made and sewer stub taps are to be installed.
(2) Ownership
(a) The City of Wisconsin Rapids Water Works and Lighting Commission owns and is responsible for
maintaining the water stub tap (lateral or lead) from the main to the curb valve or service valve, whether
the valve is adjacent to or on private property. The City of Wisconsin Rapids Water Works and Lighting
Commission owns and maintains the curb valve and service valve, whether the valve is adjacent to or on
private property. The property owner owns and is responsible for maintaining the water stub tap (lateral or
lead), from the curb valve or service valve into the building structure, including the valve on both sides of
the water meter. The City of Wisconsin Rapids Water Works and Lighting Commission owns the water
meter. Any water main or water stub tap (lateral or lead) not in the public right of way, or in a permanent
easement on private property, or identified as the property owner's responsibility in a development
agreement, shall be the property owner's responsibility. (MC#1159)
(b) The City of Wisconsin Rapids is responsible for the sanitary sewer main. The property owner is
responsibility for the sanitary sewer stub tap (lateral or lead) from the sanitary sewer main to the end of
sanitary sewer stub tap. If the sanitary sewer stub tap (lateral or lead) is installed by City of Wisconsin
Rapids crews or by the City’s contractor there is a five year warranty on workmanship and materials. The
City of Wisconsin Rapids is not responsible after the warranty expires for the sanitary sewer stub tap
(lateral or lead). (MC#1210)
5.06 WHERE STUB TAPS ARE NOT REQUIRED
Stub taps shall not be required in the following areas:
(1) Vacant lot or portion of a lot which is too small for a house to be built upon under the city building code or zoning
ordinance and except when the present dwelling located on portion of two or more lots precludes the possibility of
another dwelling being placed thereupon.
(2) Heavy industrial areas.
(3) Light industrial areas.
(4) Recreational or educational properties of the city.
(5) Recreational, educational or religious properties, privately owned.
(6) Such other properties shall be exempt from this ordinance as shall be determined by the council and in such case
the present owner on his own behalf and in behalf of his heirs, successors and assigns shall enter into an
agreement with the city that, in the event the property exempted be used for other purposes, then the terms and
conditions of this ordinance shall apply thereunto.
3
5.07 CHARGES FOR SEWER AND WATER STUB TAPS
(1) Charges for sewer and/or water stub tap installations shall be revised and set by the common council, by
resolution, based upon the average of the previous three calendar year cost experience. If the total special
assessment levied exceeds the total cost, these charges will be reviewed by the common council and reduced
proportionally. (MC#467)
5.08 REGULATING THE TAPPING OF SEWERS
(1) Any person or persons desiring to tap sewers in the City of Wisconsin Rapids shall, before doing the same, secure
the written permission of the plumbing inspector and the director of public works (or his authorized agent), signed
by the plumbing inspector and the director of public works (or his authorized agent). (MC#813)
(2) Such sewer tap must be made at the tap (Y) that is installed by the city in front of every lot. No person or persons
shall be allowed to tap into the sewer main except at such (Y). The location of such (Y) is available on the map at
the office of the director of public works. (MC#813)
(3) The only exception to the above requirement shall be in the case where the tap is to be made into an old sewer that
did not have such (Y) installation made. Such old sewers without the (Y) connection are so indicated on the map in
the city engineer's office. Any person or persons desiring to tap into such old sewer must also follow the rule of
Section 1, and secure the written permission on the plumbing inspector and the city engineer, and such connection
or tap shall be made under the supervision and subject to the control of the city engineer. It shall be required that
any person, persons, or firms desiring to tap into city sewers or who are re-laying their sewer service to the city
sewers, shall use schedule 40 PVC (polyvinyl chloride )sewer pipes from their property line to the city sewer. (149)
(MC #1207)
5.09 REQUIRING SEWER AND WATER CONNECTIONS
(1) Connections Required Where Available. The owners of dwelling houses or other buildings used for manufacturing or
trade in the City of Wisconsin Rapids shall cause such buildings to be connected to the public sewer and/or water
supply systems within 30 days after such sewer and/or water systems are accessible thereto. The manager of the
water department shall notify the plumbing inspector when the public water supply is accessible to such premises,
and the director of public works (or his authorized agent) shall notify the plumbing inspector when the public sewer
system is accessible to such premises. The plumbing inspector, upon receiving such notification, shall inform the
city health officer of such circumstances and the city health officer shall make investigation and determine whether
such connection is necessary to assure the preservation of the public health, comfort and safety. (MC#813)
(2) Order and Action on Non-compliance. Upon such determination, the plumbing inspector shall issue an order
requiring such owner to connect his building or buildings with the public sewer and/or water system. Such order
shall be delivered to the owner by registered mail. The owner shall report the day of completion thereof to the
plumbing inspector. In the event that the owner does not comply with that order, the city shall, at its option, bring
an action for the violation of this ordinance or proceed to have such connection made by a licensed plumber, under
the direction of the director of public works (or his authorized agent), and charge the cost of such work as a special
tax against such property. (MC#813)
5.10 CONSTRUCTION OF PRIVIES AND CESSPOOLS
(1) Location and Condition. No privy or cesspool shall be built, erected or maintained on any lot or premises in the city
within 50 feet of any residence, 10 feet from any street line, five feet from any lot line, or within 25 feet of the door
or window of any factory or building used by man. All privies, cesspools and septic tanks shall be maintained in a
sanitary manner and all privies shall be properly screened against insects and protected against rodents.
(2) Nonconformity Declared Nuisance. Any water closet, sink, privy, cesspool or septic tank existing or being
maintained which does not conform to the requirements of this section shall be and is hereby declared a nuisance
dangerous to the public health and the health officer shall order abatement of such nuisance in accordance with
the Statutes of Wisconsin.
(3) Non-connection unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to build, erect, construct, keep or
maintain or cause to be built, constructed, kept or maintained any privy or surface closet abutting any street,
avenue or public alley or way along which the city maintains a sewer line and water main, or upon any lot accessible
thereto.
(4) Inadequate Facilities Unlawful. It shall be unlawful to build, erect, keep or maintain any building to be occupied by
one or more persons without providing and maintaining for use of such occupants, adequate water closets
4
connected with the city sewer so as to empty the contents thereof into said sewer or without providing a sanitary
surface privy built according to plans and specifications approved by the city plumbing inspector, where sewer and
water connections are not available.
(5) Duties Delegated to Officers. It shall be the duty of the local health officer and the plumbing inspector to strictly
enforce the provisions of this ordinance and to see that all violations thereof are promptly abated and the violators
thereof are prosecuted. (207)
5.11 AREA IN WHICH WATER SERVICE IS TO BE EXTENDED BEYOND THE CITY LIMITS
(1) Limitation of Territory for City Water. In order to provide adequate fire protection for persons and property within the
corporate limits of the city of Wisconsin Rapids and so as to insure protecting the public health and safety of
residents of the said city without placing any undue financial burden upon the city taxpayers and to effectively
coordinate water department operations with other municipal public works activities, (and for the purpose of
conserving the available water supply) it is hereby determined that it is necessary to specifically limit the territory in
unincorporated areas which the municipal water utility holds itself to serve. (159)
(2) Specific Boundaries. Although the City of Wisconsin Rapids has heretofore provided water service in a limited area
outside the corporate limits, there has been no formal delineation of the specific boundaries of the territory which
the city has undertaken to serve. Based upon a survey of the outside area now served the City of Wisconsin Rapids
herewith acts pursuant to Section 66.069(2)(c) of the Wisconsin Statutes to restrict its holding out to provide water
service in unincorporated areas to the territory specifically set forth as follows:
(a) Mini Lutz, 610 20th Street North
(b) Right of Further Limitation. The City of Wisconsin Rapids reserves the right to further limit such area by
subsequent action.
(c) Certified Copy. The city clerk shall transmit a certified copy of this ordinance to the Public Service
Commission of Wisconsin. (159)
5.12 IMPROVEMENTS ELIGIBLE FOR INSTALLMENT PAYMENTS
(1) Definitions. For the purposes of Sections 5.12 and 5.13 the following definitions will apply:
(a) Special Assessment Year. A "special assessment year" shall run from November 1st of the preceding year
to November 1st of the current year.
(b) Special Assessment Year. A "special assessment year" shall run from November 1st of the
preceding year to November 1st of the current year and is determined by the date of the
invoice for the assessments levied.
(2) Special assessments for the following improvements are eligible for the five, ten, or 15-year
installment payment program.
(a) sewer and/or water mains;
(b) sewer and/or water laterals and taps;
(c) public sidewalks;
(d) curb and gutter;
(e) street surfacing for which assessment is levied.
5.13 TERMS FOR REPAYMENT OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS (MC#1232)
The following terms shall be used in the repayment of special assessments:
(1) Assessments levied for an improvement or combination of improvements, described in Section 5.12
(2) that totals less than $300 in any one special assessment year must be paid in full by November 1.
If it is not paid by that date, the assessment will be placed on the real estate tax bill and be due in full
on or before January 31. There is no interest charged when paid in full.
(2) For assessments levied for an improvement or combination of improvements, described in Section
5.12 (2) totaling $300 but less than $1,000 in any one special assessment year, if full payment is not
made prior to November 1, the assessment will be placed on the five-year payment schedule on the
real estate tax bill. Property owners may then pay their special assessment under two options: (1) in
full without interest with the real estate taxes or (2) they may pay the first one-fifth of the assessment
without interest with the current real estate tax bill. The balance is paid in equal installments on the
5
next four real estate tax bills and accrues interest based on the rate determined under Section 5.17.
The remaining balance may be paid in full at any time with interest calculated through the month of
payment.
(3) For assessments levied for an improvement or combination of improvements, described in Section
5.12 (2) totaling $1,000 but less than $5,000 in any one special assessment year, if full payment is
not made prior to November 1, the assessment will be placed on the ten-year payment schedule on
the real estate tax bill. Property owners may then pay their special assessment under two options: (1)
in full without interest with the real estate taxes or (2) they may pay the first one-tenth of the
assessment without interest with the current real estate tax bill. The balance is paid in equal
installments on the next nine real estate tax bills and accrues interest based on the rate determined
under Section 5.17. The remaining balance may be paid in full at any time with interest calculated
through the month of payment.
(4) For assessments levied for an improvement or combination of improvements, described in Section
5.12 (2) totaling $5,000 or more in any one special assessment year, if full payment is not made prior
to November 1, the assessment will be placed on the fifteen-year payment schedule on the real
estate tax bill. Property owners may then pay their special assessment under two options: (1) in full
without interest with the real estate taxes or (2) they may pay the first one-fifteenth of the assessment
without interest with the current real estate tax bill. The balance is paid in equal installments on the
next fourteen real estate tax bills and accrues interest based on the rate determined under Section
5.17. The remaining balance may be paid in full at any time with interest calculated through the
month of payment.
The Common Council acknowledges that the levy of special assessments can result in financial
hardship in some instances. It therefore enacts this provision: For assessments levied for an
improvement or combination of improvements, described in Section 5.12 (2) totaling $1,500 or more
in any one special assessment year, a property owner may elect to have the assessment placed on
the fifteen-year installment payment schedule provided they notify the City in writing prior to
November 1 in the special assessment year.
5.14 INSTALLMENT ASSESSMENT NOTICE
The city clerk shall cause to be published in the local newspaper the list of property and description of improvements to be
included in the "Installment Assessment Notice" in substantially the same form of "Installment Assessment Notice" as set
forth in Section 66.54(7)(e) of the Wisconsin Statute.
5.15 ASSESSMENTS INCLUDED IN INSTALLMENTS
Special assessments that qualify under sections 5.12 and 5.13 and as listed by the city clerk in the newspaper notice as set
forth in Section 5.14 shall be included in the preliminary and final resolution authorizing each qualifying improvement.
5.16 PROCEDURE FOR INSTALLMENT PAYMENT
All special assessments on the improvements named in Section 5.12 and being in an amount as listed by Section 5.13 shall
automatically be placed on the installment method of payment provided for said improvement, unless within 30 days from
the date of publication in the local newspaper of the "Installment Assessment Notice" the owner(s) notify the city clerk of the
description of his property and of his intention to pay the whole of the special assessment to the city treasurer on or before
the 1st day of November following completion of the installation of the improvement for which assessment is made. If after
making such election to pay the special assessment on or before the 1st day of November following the completion of the
installation, the property owner shall fail to pay the whole special assessment, then the city clerk shall place the entire
assessment on the next succeeding tax roll. (MC#51)
5.17 INTEREST ON INSTALLMENTS
Deferred installment payments on the unpaid balance of special assessments shall bear interest per annum at the rate
equal to the U.S. Prime Rate on January 1 of the year in which the assessment was billed. (MC#1139)
6
5.18 BONDS, PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS
Developers who desire to install sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main, or other utilities shall provide plans and
specifications to the Wisconsin Rapids engineering department and shall post a bond in the amount of 100 percent of the
project cost.
The developer shall also file a permit with the Wisconsin Rapids engineering department. Said permit shall have
been signed by the chairman of the public works committee and by the chairman of the maintenance of way committee at a
regular meeting of each respective committee and by the Wisconsin Rapids director of public works (or his authorized
agent). (MC#813)
Failure to comply with the accepted standards of construction of the City of Wisconsin Rapids and/or with the
conditions set by the public works or the maintenance of way committee and approved by the Wisconsin Rapids Common
Council shall result in the forfeiture of the bond posted.
An agreement on forms furnished by the city shall be executed by the developer prior to commencement of the
work. Said agreement shall specifically outline the work to be completed by the developers.
5.19 OUTDOOR WATER USAGE RESTRICTIONS (MC#445)
(1) The water works and lighting commission's general manager, with concurrence of the water works and lighting
commission and the mayor, may impose voluntary or mandatory outdoor water usage restrictions on all water users
in the City of Wisconsin Rapids. The restrictions may apply to all properties using city water or to alternate sides of
the street as deemed necessary by the general manager. Alternate side restrictions would apply to even-numbered
sides of the street on even-numbered calendar days and odd-numbered sides of the street on odd-numbered
calendar days respectively. Restrictions may be for all day or for specified times each day. Reasons for said
restrictions will be given with each notice. Notice of said restrictions shall be given to all news media in the City of
Wisconsin Rapids.
(2) Criteria for Mandatory Restrictions.
(a) To avoid undue stress upon the resources and reserve capacity of the water utility.
(b) To avoid sustained low pressure.
(c) To maintain reservoir levels sufficient to provide adequate fire protection.
(d) To compensate for loss of one or more wells.
(3) Outdoor Water Usage Restrictions. The following restrictions would be imposed based on the needs and concerns
of the water utility. The level of severity of the imposed restrictions would be based on such factors as weather
conditions and/or forecasts; water distribution system pressure; reservoir levels, and groundwater levels.
(a) Voluntary water restrictions
(b) Mandatory water restrictions for specified times each day
(c) Mandatory water restrictions even/odd sides of the street and specified times each day
(d) Mandatory water restrictions on certain days of the week
(e) Mandatory water restrictions for complete ban of outdoor water usage
(4) Penalty. Any person, owner, or occupant, who violates any mandatory restriction on water usage issued pursuant to
this section, or fails to comply with any of its requirements, shall upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture
of not less than $20.00 nor more than $100.00. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
1
Chapter 6 Streets and Sidewalks
6.01 Sidewalk and Curb and Gutter Construction
6.02 Specifications
6.03 Payment of Cost Assessment
6.04 Procedure for Construction or Repair
6.05 Contractor's Bond
6.06 License
6.07 Permits and Fees
6.08 Construction of Own Sidewalk
6.09 Revocation of License
6.10 Curb and Gutter Installation
6.11 Costs of Temporary and Permanent Surfacing
6.12 Obstruction of Sidewalks
6.13 Littering
6.14 Cleaning Sidewalks
6.15 Snow Removal
6.16 Charges for Snow Removal
6.17 Depositing Snow Removal
6.18 Trees and Foliage
6.19 Use of Streets: Parades
6.20 Content of Petitions and Resolutions
6.21 Bond, Plans, and Specifications
6.22 Driveway Approaches
6.23 Asphalt Paving
6.24 Right-of-way Management
6.25 Environmental Testing Wells in the Right-of-way
6.26 Sidewalk Cafés
6.27 Mobile Vending
6.01 SIDEWALK AND CURB AND GUTTER CONSTRUCTION
(1) All sidewalks, hereafter constructed, shall be concrete of one course construction, not less than four inches in
thickness. Such portion of sidewalks as may be used as a driveway shall be six inches in thickness. (86)
(2) All sidewalks shall be five feet in width on all streets, unless otherwise directed by the city engineer, except that in
front of buildings used for mercantile, commercial, or industrial purposes, the sidewalk may extend from property
line to curb line.
(3) Unless otherwise ordered by the city engineer, all curb and gutter shall be combination curb and gutter, constructed
of concrete according to the plans on file in the city engineer's office.
6.02 SPECIFICATIONS
(1) All sidewalks and curb and gutter shall be concrete containing 1.5 barrels of cement per cubic yard. The city
engineer will fix the proportions of fine and course aggregate, and the maximum allowable amount of water per bag
of cement for the particular aggregate being used, which in his judgement, will assure durable concrete of the
plasticity and workability required for the work.
(2) Cement shall be air-entered portland cement and shall meet requirements of the Standard Specifications of the
American Society for Testing Materials.
(3) Fine aggregate shall consist of natural sand or screening from hard, tough, crushed rock or gravel. It must be clean
and well graded. All fine aggregate shall pass .5-inch screen and 95 percent shall be retained on 100 mesh screen.
(4) Coarse aggregate may be pebbles or broken stone. It must be clean, hard, durable, and un-coated. All coarse
aggregate shall pass one inch screen and 95 percent shall be retained in a .5-inch screen.
(5) Water shall be clean and free from injurious amounts of oil, acid, alkali, organic matter, or other deleterious
2
substances.
(6) Reinforcing steel, where used, shall be bars rolled from new billets of either structural or intermediate grade. All
bars shall be free of grease, dirt, rust, and scale. Where steel fabric reinforcing is required, it shall be electrically
welded, cold drawn, steel wire of the gauge specified.
(7) All concrete shall be mixed in an approved type of batch mixer, in good working order. The mixing of each batch
shall continue for a period of not less than 1.5 minutes.
(8) Concrete shall be placed immediately after mixing. The subgrade and forms shall have been checked and approved
by the city engineer before the concrete is placed. The concrete shall be placed on a moist subgrade, it shall be
thoroughly puddled against the forms, and tamped and spaded sufficiently to bring the mortar to the surface. The
face surfaces of the curb and gutter shall be thoroughly troweled and brushed. The back edge of the curb, the edge
of the gutter, and the edges adjacent to expansion joints, shall be rounded with an edger on .5-inch radius. All
honeycombed faces or backs of the curb shall be pointed with one-two mortar. The surface of the sidewalk shall be
struck off and finished smooth and even by means of a wooden float and given a brushed surface finish. Before
concrete is given the final finishing, the surface of the walk shall be checked with a 10 foot straight edge, and any
irregularities of more than .25 inch in 10 feet shall be eliminated.
(9) All sidewalks built over area-ways, vaults, or coal holes, shall be constructed on suitable walls or steel beams and
shall be constructed according to such specifications as may be given by the city engineer and under his
supervision.
(10) All sidewalks shall be divided into unit areas of not more than six feet on any one side, by cutting joints in the
concrete to a depth of not less than ¼ of the thickness of the sidewalk. The surface edges of each unit shall be
rounded to a radius of ¼ to ½ inch.
(11) When completed, the concrete shall be cured by covering with suitable material or sprayed with a water retaining
compound. Sufficient covering shall be kept available at all times to properly protect newly laid concrete from
damage from the elements.
(12) The forms shall be of wood or metal, straight, free from warp, and of sufficient strength to resist springing during
the process of depositing the concrete against them. If of wood, they shall be of at least two inch surfaced plank,
except for sharply curved sections. If of metal, they shall be of approved section, and shall have a flat surface on
top. They shall be securely staked, braced, held firmly to the required line and grade, and shall be sufficiently tight
to prevent leakage of mortar. All forms shall be cleaned thoroughly and oiled before the concrete is placed against
them.
(13) One-half inch transverse joints, pre-molded bituminous non-extruding, unless otherwise specified, shall be placed
through the sidewalk at uniform intervals at no more than 30 feet.
(14) One-half inch expansion joints, pre-molded bituminous non-extruding, unless otherwise specified, shall be placed
between the sidewalk and the back of the abutting parallel curb and gutter, and between sidewalk and buildings,
and other rigid structures.
(15) One inch expansion joints shall be placed between sidewalk approaches and the back of the curb and gutter or the
edge of the pavements.
(16) Where curb and gutter abuts on new or existing pavement, expansion joints of the same type and thickness shall
be placed in the curb and gutter and directly opposite the expansion joints in the pavement, but no monolithic
section of curb and gutter shall be less than eight feet or more then 12 feet. At street intersection, a one inch joint
shall be placed in the curb and gutter where the tangent and radial curb come together.
(17) Sidewalk or curb and gutter joints shall be constructed with their faces perpendicular to the surface of the section.
Expansion joint filler shall extend to the full depth of the joint and the top shall be flush with the finished surface.
(18) The pitch from the inside line of the sidewalk to the curb shall be .25 inch per foot, wherever possible.
(19) The inside or property line edge of the city sidewalk shall be located within the street right-of-way a distance of one
foot from the street right-of-way line. The location of the inside or property line edge of city sidewalk on or less than
one foot from the street right-of-way line shall be allowed only in those areas of the city wherein city sidewalk exists
on or less than one foot from the street right-of-way line. The location of city sidewalk more than one foot from the
street right-of-way line shall be allowed only by approval of the common council. (MC#92)
(20) All sidewalks and curb and gutter shall be constructed to the line and grade as furnished by the city engineer. No
person thereafter shall raise or lower the surface of any sidewalk, crosswalk, or curb and gutter above or below the
established grade for the same.
(21) All sidewalks and curb and gutter shall be constructed under the supervision of the city engineer.
(22) The sub-grade shall be formed by trenching or filling to the required elevation for the bottom of the concrete. All soft
3
or unsuitable material shall be removed and replaced with suitable material. The sub-grade shall be thoroughly
tamped or otherwise compacted to insure stability. In cuts the sub-grade shall be made sufficiently wide to permit
placing of forms and performing required placing and finished work, and in fills the sub-grade shall be made at
least one foot wider on each side than required for the section. The slope of the fill shall be not less than two feet
horizontal to one foot vertical.
6.03 PAYMENT OF COSTS OF ASSESSMENT
(1) The property owner shall pay for the construction, reconstruction, or repair of sidewalk and curb and gutter, except
as herein provided.
(2) The city will furnish the necessary material for sub-grade free of charge to the contractor or property owner.
(3) A 50 percent credit may be granted for the installation of new sidewalk and the repair or replacement of sidewalk if
approval of the maintenance of way committee is obtained prior to the time the installation or repair is made. In
order to obtain a 50 percent credit for sidewalk which had to be repaired because of tree root damage, the entire
tree would have to be removed.
(4) Whenever a new curb and gutter section is constructed, the city will pay one-third of the costs of such construction
and the property owner two-thirds.
(5) The property owner shall be required to pay two-thirds of the cost of removal and replacement of curb and
gutter and the city shall pay one-third of such cost. The routine repair of curb and gutter that is not part of a
street reconstruction or resurfacing project shall be performed at the expense of the City. Unless a property
owner has paid an assessment for a previous repair of curb and gutter, all curb and gutter that is being
replaced as a part of a street reconstruction or resurfacing project shall be considered assessable. (MC #1235)
(6) The city will pay the entire cost of the laying, relaying, or repairing of a sidewalk approach, from the curb line to the
property line at a corner of a block. The city will likewise pay for the construction, reconstruction, or repairing of a
curb and gutter at a corner of a block between the extreme of sidewalk approaches. (MC#198)
(7) A 100 percent credit may be granted for the installation of new sidewalk if it is to be installed due to Section
6.04(1)(a), except 6.04(1)(a)(1). (MC#1012)
6.04 PROCEDURE FOR CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR (MC#456)
(1) Sidewalk shall be installed:
(a) At the time when adjacent street has curb and gutter installed, if the street has existing curb and gutter,
sidewalk shall be installed when the street is reconstructed, rehabilitated, or overlaid if any of the following
conditions are met and if it is approved by the common council:
(1) Abutting any lot zoned R-3, B-1, B-2, B-3, and conditional use permitted for commercial (only
when adjacent to a commercial zone), public, and semi-public uses as defined by Section 11.05
of the zoning ordinance.
(2) On any street that is identified to be a main school route on the official school route map adopted
by the common council.
(3) On any street that is classified as an arterial or collector street on the Wisconsin Rapids Urban
Area Federal Aid System map.
(4) On any street that is:
(a) 36 feet wide or less and has a traffic volume in excess of 1,000 vehicles per day
(b) 40 feet wide and has a traffic volume in excess of 1,500 vehicles per day
(c) 44 feet wide and has a traffic volume in excess of 2,000 vehicles per day
(d) 48 feet wide and has a traffic volume in excess of 2,500 vehicles per day
(e) 52 feet wide and has a traffic volume in excess of 3,000 vehicles per day
(5) On any block of a street which has 50 percent of the sidewalk in that block existing.
(b) At the time when the main building on the lot is initially constructed, or when it is entirely reconstructed or
replaced. Prior to issuance of a building permit for such construction, reconstruction, or replacement, the
property owner shall execute and file with the city engineering department a written document certifying
installation of a public sidewalk abutting such lot or execute a petition to the city for such installation and
the levy of special assessments in connection therewith and waiving notice of hearing pursuant to Section
66.80(18), Wisconsin Statutes. And when the following conditions are met:
(1) Abutting any lot zoned R-3, B-1, B-2, B-3, and conditional use permitted for commercial (only
when adjacent to a commercial zone), public, and semi-public uses as defined by Chapter 11, the
4
zoning ordinance.
(c) Whenever the common council shall determine it necessary for public safety and welfare that a sidewalk
be installed. Said common council shall declare by resolution and shall order such sidewalk to be laid. The
resolution shall prescribe the street upon which such sidewalk is to be installed.
(2) Sidewalk shall be repaired:
(a) Whenever the city council shall determine it to be necessary for the benefit and use of the public that a
sidewalk be laid, removed, replaced, or repaired on any public street, said city council shall so declare by
resolution and shall order such sidewalk to be laid, removed, replaced, or repaired. The resolution shall
prescribe the street upon which such sidewalk is required to be laid or repaired.
(b) It shall be the duty of the city clerk to serve a written notice or cause such notice to be served upon the
owner of each lot or parcel of land in front of which such work shall have been ordered, and in case the
owner or his agent cannot be found in the city, then by publishing in the official newspaper.
(c) Whenever any such owner shall neglect for a period of 20 days after such service to lay, remove, replace,
or repair any such sidewalk, the city shall cause such work to be done at the expense of the owner, and
the cost thereof shall be entered in the tax roll as a special tax against such property and the same shall
be collected in all respects like other taxes upon real estate.
(d) When in the judgment of the city engineer, it is determined any sidewalk in front of any lot or parcel
requires immediate repair for the safety of the public, the city engineer shall immediately repair or cause
to be repaired, such sidewalk without notice, and charge the cost thereof to the owner of such lot or parcel
of land, not to exceed $100.00. All is in accordance with Section 66.615(3)(e) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(3) Sidewalk shall not be installed as follows: (MC#466)
(a) On any street in the industrial park.
6.05 CONTRACTOR'S BOND
Before any person, firm, or corporation shall be permitted to construct any sidewalk or curb and gutter, either by contract
with the city or any property owner, such person, firm, or corporation shall enter into a good and sufficient bond to be
approved by the city clerk providing that such person, firm, or corporation shall construct said sidewalks or curb and gutter
in accordance with the ordinances of the city and shall conform to the directions of the city engineer, and shall repair, and if
necessary, entirely reconstruct any sidewalk or curb and gutter in which settlement, cracks, or any other defects, due to bad
materials and workmanship, shall appear during a period of three years from and after the date of their completion.
Effective January 1, 1996, such bond shall be in the sum of $3,000.00 and shall run to the City of Wisconsin Rapids and be
for the benefit of said city and of all persons for whom sidewalks and curb and gutter shall be constructed by the principal in
the said bond, and suit may be brought on the same by said city. (MC#700)
6.06 LICENSE
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to lay, remove, replace, or repair any sidewalk or curb and
gutter upon or within any public street without first having applied for and obtained a license therefore, from the
City of Wisconsin Rapids. No license shall be granted to any such person, firm, or corporation until the issuance of
the same shall have been approved by the city engineer. The fee for every license so granted shall be in the sum of
$50.00 to be paid to the city treasurer of the City of Wisconsin Rapids by the party, or parties, to whom it is granted
before issuance of said license, and such license shall expire on the 31st day of December, first following the date
of issue. (MC#1005)
(2) All sidewalk contractors must provide themselves with a stamp made with raised letters and figures. All cement
work done by the contractor shall be stamped at each end of each section of work, giving name of contractor and
year of completion in clearly legible figures.
6.07 PERMIT AND FEE
(1) A permit to lay, replace, or repair a sidewalk or curb and gutter shall be issued to any person, firm, or corporation
having a proper license and bond, as heretofore provided, upon application to the city engineer. A fee of $40.00
shall be paid to the city treasurer at the office of code enforcement for each permit so issued except that the fee
shall be $80.00 if the application for such issued permit is not made prior to the construction or rebuilding of any
sidewalk, curb and gutter, or driveway approach or if the city has to restake line and grade. (MC#1005)
(2) Each permit so issued shall be for continuous sidewalk or curb and gutter, within or between intersection streets in
front of property owned by one person, firm, or corporation.
5
(3) No permit shall be required when the cost of the rebuilding or repairing of a sidewalk or a curb and gutter is $75.00
or less.
(4) A permit shall be issued for a period of 60 days. If the work is not on time, a new permit shall be required.
(5) A permit is not required for work done under the city’s annual curb and gutter and sidewalk contract.
6.08 CONSTRUCTION OF OWN SIDEWALK
This ordinance shall not be construed as prohibiting any person desiring to lay, remove, replace, or repair his own sidewalk,
or driveway approach from so doing without obtaining the license or furnishing the bond as previously provided by this
ordinance providing he shall have obtained the permit as required by this section and providing he shall construct them in
every way according to this ordinance and specifications.
6.09 REVOCATION OF LICENSE
Upon the recommendation of the city engineer, the city council may revoke the license or permit of any contractor operating
under the provisions of this ordinance, who after due warning, violated any of the provisions of this ordinance. (86)
6.10 CURB AND GUTTER INSTALLATION
(1) Curb and gutter shall first be installed before any street is surfaced or resurfaced, except where it is planned to
install sewer and water.
(2) Temporary surfacing only may be placed upon a street or alley without first installing curb and gutter in such streets
wherein sewer and water installation is planned.
6.11 COSTS OF TEMPORARY AND PERMANENT SURFACING
(1) If any street is torn up because of installation of improvements requested by the property owners, 100 percent of
the actual cost of reconstruction shall be assessed to the property owner unless the common council shall
determine that a lesser sum or percentage shall be paid. If any street is torn up because of the installation of
improvements not requested by the property owner, or in need of reconstruction, then the cost of reconstruction
shall be charged as provided by the resolution of charges in effect at the commencement of the project, with the
property owner given credit for the unused life of the previous surfacing.
(a) The life of permanent surfacing shall be 20 years on streets built during or after 1968. Streets built prior
to 1968 shall have a life of 10 years.
(b) The life of overlay on a permanent surfacing shall be six years.
(c) The life of temporary surfacing shall be three years.
(d) A hot mix permanent surfacing shall be a layer of 2.5 inches thick to 4.5 inches thick upon seven inches to
12 inches of crushed aggregate base course respectively. (MC#700)
(e) An overlay shall be a layer two inches thick upon existing permanent surfacing.
(f) A temporary hot or cold mix surfacing shall be a layer 1.5 inches thick on an existing base.
(2) Permanent Surfacing. If 20 or more years have elapsed since the last permanent surfacing, the property owner
shall pay the full cost of new surfacing. If less than 20 years, the property owner will be assessed at the proportion
of the age of permanent surfacing in years, divided by 20 years, times the full cost.
(3) Overlay Surfacing. If six or more years have elapsed since the last overlay surfacing, the property owner will be
assessed at the proportion of the age of the overlay surfacing in years divided by six years, times the full cost.
(4) Temporary Surfacing. If three or more years have elapsed since the last temporary surfacing, the property owner
shall pay the full cost of the new surfacing. If less than three years, the property owner will be assessed at the
proportion of the age of the temporary surfacing in years, divided by three, times the full cost. (MC#298)
6.12 OBSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALK
(1) It shall be unlawful to obstruct any of the streets, alleys, or sidewalks in the City of Wisconsin Rapids by placing
thereon or leaving thereon any objects, merchandise, garbage, rubbish, or other articles. (190)
(2) This section shall not apply to lawfully parked motor vehicles, motor bicycles, or horse drawn vehicles.
(3) This section shall not apply to moving of buildings on public streets or alleys.
(4) A portion of the sidewalk area may be used for street bazaars or open air merchandise sales for a period not to
exceed one day, and not later than 9:00 p.m. or before 7:00 a.m., when application has been made to the council
by a duly constituted organization and approved by the council. Liability insurance must accompany such
application in an amount and form to satisfy the council before such permission may be granted. (190)
6
6.13 LITTERING (MC #1052)
(1) Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(a) Litter means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and all other waste material which is thrown or deposited as
prohibited in this section, and tends to create a danger to public health, safety, and welfare.
(b) Rubbish means non putrescible and solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible
wastes, such as circulars, leaflets, pamphlets, wrappers, handbills, newspapers, and all and any other
printed or non-printed paper material, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
and other similar materials.
(2) Public Place. No person shall throw, deposit, or cause to be placed, litter upon any street, sidewalk, alley, public
parking lot, park, or other public place within the city.
(3) Placement in Containers. Persons placing litter in refuse or garbage containers shall do so in a manner and in such
containers as will prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, public
parking lot, park or other public place, or upon private property.
(4) Sweeping into Gutters. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, alley, or public place within the
city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons
owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalks, entrance walks, parking lots, and parking areas in front of
or upon their premises free of litter.
(5) Public Waters. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, wading pool, river, by or any other body
of water in a public place or elsewhere within the city.
(6) Occupied Private Property. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city,
whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain
authorized refuse or garbage containers for collection such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public area or any private property.
(7) Maintenance of Premises. The owners or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the
premises free to litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized
refuse or garbage containers for collection.
(8) Vacant Lots. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city, whether
owned by such person or not.
6.14 CLEANING SIDEWALKS
It shall be the duty of the property owner to keep the sidewalks adjoining his property free and clear of dirt and
refuse.
6.15 SNOW REMOVAL
It shall be the property owner's duty to remove snow and ice from sidewalks that are located in the street
right-of-way which abuts an owner's property within 24 hours from the end of each l weather event. (MC#109) For
the purposes of this chapter a weather event shall mean: any weather condition that causes a sidewalk to be
partially or fully covered in snow or ice regardless of depth.
6.16 CHARGES FOR SNOW REMOVAL
Should the property owner fail to do the necessary clearing of snow or sanding within 24 hours from the end of the snowfall
or icing weather event, including administrative, labor, overhead, bookkeeping, mileage, and incidentals, shall be charged to
the property owner and shall be added to his tax bill as a special tax. (MC#224)
6.17 DEPOSITING SNOW REMOVAL
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, or corporation to push or deposit snow from their personal driveway or parking
area into public streets or alleys of the City of Wisconsin Rapids. The City of Wisconsin Rapids may cause such deposits of
snow to be removed from the street or alley and the cost of such removal shall be charged to such property owners. (170-B)
6.18 TREES AND FOLIAGE
Any person or persons owning land abutting upon any street in the City of Wisconsin Rapids, upon which there is situated
trees, branches, shrubbery, or foliage extending over and above the sidewalk or paths used by pedestrians shall keep said
limbs, branches, and foliage cut so as to leave a free, clear, and unobstructed passageway for a distance of at least eight
7
feet above such sidewalk or path. (133)
6.19 USE OF STREETS: PARADES
(1) Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, group of persons, or corporation to use or
occupy any street within the City of Wisconsin Rapids for the purpose of holding thereon a parade, procession, or
other similar use without first obtaining a permit therefore from the police chief as provided in this ordinance,
except such processions which are a part of a religious function.
(2) Application for Permit. An application for a permit to use any street in the City of Wisconsin Rapids for the purposes
described in subsection (1) of this section shall be made to the police chief not less than seven days prior to the
date for such proposed use. Such application shall be on such forms and shall contain such information as may be
necessary to show the nature of the proposed use, the number of persons involved, the purpose of the person or
organization sponsoring the same, and such other information as may be deemed necessary and proper by the
police chief. For good cause shown, the police chief may shorten the period of time during which said application
must be filed.
(3) Scope of Permit. The police chief shall make a determination that such proposed use will not be harmful,
dangerous, or injurious to public health or safety, either to persons or property prior to the issuance of any permit
under this section. Such permit shall prescribe the use which is to be made of any such street or streets, and any
change from the conditions of said permit, without prior approval by the police chief shall be a violation of this
section. If any such use shall necessitate the closing of any street, or shall require the closing of parking meters,
then the additional approval of the maintenance of way committee shall be a condition precedent to the issuance
of such permit. (MC#19)
6.20 CONTENTS OF PETITIONS AND RESOLUTIONS
All petitions requesting, and all resolutions ordering curb and/or sidewalks, and/or street surfacing shall include the
following provision: "The front foot charge shall be figured on the rate set by resolution in effect on the date that this project
of curb and gutter, and/or sidewalks, and/or street surfacing is installed. Each block shall be considered a separate
project." (MC#85)
6.21 BOND, PLANS, AND SPECIFICATIONS
Developers who desire to install curb, gutter, and street surfacing shall provide plans and specifications to the engineering
department and shall post a bond in the amount of 100 percent of the project cost. The developer shall also file a permit
with the engineering department of the City of Wisconsin Rapids. Said permit shall have been signed by the chairman of the
maintenance of way committee and the chairman of the public works committee at a regular meeting of each respective
committee and by the Wisconsin Rapids city engineer.
Failure to comply with the accepted standards of design and construction of the City of Wisconsin Rapids and/or
with the conditions set by the maintenance of way or public works committees and approved by the common council shall
result in the forfeiture of the bond posted.
An agreement on forms furnished by the city shall be executed by the developer prior to commencement of the
work. Said agreement shall specifically outline the work to be completed by the developer. (MC#260)
6.22 DRIVEWAY APPROACHES (MC#671)
(1) All driveway approaches hereafter constructed shall be constructed of portland cement concrete from back of the
curb and gutter to the back of sidewalk. (MC#700)
(2) Portland Cement Concrete Driveways
(a) The driveway approach shall only be constructed in accordance with line and grade provided by the
engineering department.
(b) A sidewalk section shall be installed in the driveway approach in accordance with Section 6.01, including
expansion joints on either side of sidewalk section.
(c) The driveway approach shall be a minimum of six inches in thickness.
(3) "Cutting in" new driveways in existing curb and gutter.
(a) Permit must be taken out in accordance with Section 6.07.
(b) A saw cut of a minimum of one inch in depth must be made as close to the curb head as possible. The
curb head may then be broken off.
(c) The curb must be constructed as an integral part of the driveway approach to maintain drainage of the
8
curb and gutter.
(d) The driveway approach of portland cement concrete must be installed at the time of "cutting in" from flow
line of the curb to the lot line.
(4) Driveway tapers shall be installed beginning at the front of the sidewalk widening three feet to five feet at the back
of the curb and gutter.
6.23 ASPHALT PAVING (MC#846)
(1) Contractor's Bond. Before any person, firm, or corporation shall be permitted to pave asphalt, either by contract
with the city or any property owner, such person, firm, or corporation shall enter into a good and sufficient bond to
be approved by the city clerk providing that such person, firm, or corporation shall construct said asphalt paving in
accordance with the ordinances of the city and shall conform to the directions of the city engineer, and shall repair,
and if necessary, entirely reconstruct any asphalt paving in which settlement, cracks, or any other defects, due to
bad materials and workmanship, shall appear during a period of three years from and after the date of their
completion. The bond shall be in the sum of $3,000.00 and shall run to the City of Wisconsin Rapids and be for the
benefit of said city and of all persons for whom asphalt paving shall be constructed by the principal in the said
bond, and suit may be brought on the same by said city.
(2) License. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to lay, remove, replace, or repair any asphalt paving
within the city limits of the City of Wisconsin Rapids without first having applied for and obtained a license
therefore, from the City of Wisconsin Rapids. No license shall be granted to any such person, firm, or corporation
until the issuance of the same shall have been approved by the city engineer. The fee for every license so granted
shall be in the sum of $50.00 to be paid to the city treasurer of the City of Wisconsin Rapids by the party, or parties,
to whom it is granted before issuance of said license, and such license shall expire on the 31st day of December,
first following the date of issue. (MC#1005)
(3) Permit and Fee.
(a) A permit for asphalt paving shall be issued to any person, firm, or corporation having a proper license and
bond, as heretofore provided, upon application to the city engineer. A fee of $50.00 shall be paid to the
city treasurer at the office of the city engineer for each permit so issued except that the fee shall be
$100.00 if the application for such issued permit is not made prior to the asphalt paving or if the city has
to restake line and grade. (MC#1005)
(b) Each permit so issued shall be for continuous asphalt paving, within or between intersection streets in
front of property owned by one person, firm, or corporation.
(c) No permit shall be required when the cost of the asphalt paving is $75.00 or less.
(d) A permit shall be issued for a period of 60 days. If the work is not on time, a new permit shall be required.
(e) A permit is not required for work done under the City’s annual asphalt paving contract.
(4) Revocation of License. Upon the recommendation of the city engineer, the city council may revoke the license or
permit of any contractor operating under the provisions of this ordinance, who after due warning, violated any of the
provisions of this ordinance.
6.24 RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT (MC#1062)
Findings and Purpose. The city finds that the passage of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 has resulted in increased use
of the public rights-of-way and increased costs to the taxpayers of the city and that these costs are likely to continue into the
foreseeable future.
(1) The city finds that excavation and occupancy of the public rights-of-way causes direct and indirect costs to be borne
by the city and its taxpayers, including but not limited to:
(a) Administrative costs associated with public right-of-way projects, such as registration, permitting,
inspection and supervision, supplies and materials.
(b) Management costs associated with ongoing management activities necessitated by public right-of-way
users.
(c) Repair costs to the roadway associated with the actual excavation into the public right-of-way.
(d) Degradation costs defined as depreciation caused to the roadway in terms of decreased useful life, due to
excavations into the public rights-of-way.
In response to the foregoing facts, the city hereby enacts this ordinance relating to administration of and permits to
excavate, obstruct and/or occupy the public rights-of-way, together with an ordinance making necessary revisions
to other Code provisions. This ordinance imposes reasonable regulations on the placement and maintenance of
9
facilities currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future time. It is intended to complement
the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies.
The city's authority to enact this ordinance is pursuant, but not limited to, the following federal and state
authority: 47 U.S.C. 253(c); Section 62.11(5) Wisconsin Statutes, Section 66.045 Wisconsin Statutes, Section
66.048 Wisconsin Statutes, Section 86.16 Wisconsin Statutes, Section 182.017 Wisconsin Statutes, Section
196.58(1) Wisconsin Statutes, and Section 196.499(1) Wisconsin Statutes.
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide the city a legal framework within which to regulate and manage
the public rights-of-way, and to provide for recovery of costs. This ordinance provides for the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the city as they use the rights-of-way of the city, as well as to ensure the structural
integrity of the public rights-of-way. The city desires to minimize and anticipate the number of excavations taking
place thereon and to regulate the placement of facilities within the rights-of-way to ensure that they remain
available for public services. The taxpayers of the city bear the financial burden for the upkeep of the rights-of-way.
A primary cause for the early and excessive deterioration of its rights-of-way is the frequent excavation by Persons
who locate facilities therein.
Under this chapter, all persons who excavate, obstruct, and/or occupy the public rights-of-way will
reimburse the city's administrative, ongoing management and degradation costs. Right-of-way users will bear a fair
share of the financial responsibility for the integrity of the public rights-of-way.
(2) Definitions. The following definitions apply in this ordinance. References hereafter to "sections" are unless
otherwise specified references to sections in this ordinance. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not
capitalized.
(a) Alternative Telecommunications Utility has the meaning in Section 196.01 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) Applicant means any person requesting permission to excavate, obstruct and/or occupy a right-of-way.
(c) City means the City of Wisconsin Rapids, Wisconsin, a Wisconsin municipal corporation.
(d) Degradation means the accelerated depreciation of the right-of-way, caused by an excavation of the rightof-
way, resulting in the need to reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the
excavation did not occur.
(e) Department means the engineering department of the city.
(f) Department Inspector means any person authorized by the department to carry out inspections related to
the provisions of this chapter.
(g) Emergency means a condition that (1) poses a clear and immediate danger to health, safety and/or public
welfare; or (2) requires immediate repair or replacement in order to restore service to a customer.
(h) Excavate means to dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or penetrate any part of the right-ofway.
(I) Facilities means all equipment owned, operated, leased or subleased in connection with the operation of a
service or utility service, and shall include but is not limited to poles, wires, pipes, cables, underground
conduits, ducts, manholes, vaults, fiber optic cables, lines and other structures and appurtenances.
(j) In, when used in conjunction with "right-of-way," means over, above, in, within, on or under a right-of-way.
(k) Local Representative means a local person or persons, or designee of such person or persons, authorized
by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the
scope of this chapter.
(l) Obstruct means to place any object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free and open passage over that or
any part of the right-of-way.
(m) Occupy means to dwell or reside above, on, in, or below the boundaries of the public rights-of-way.
(n) Permittee means any person to whom a permit to excavate or occupy a right-of-way has been granted by
the city under this chapter.
(o) Person means, municipality, corporation, company, association, firm, partnership, limited liability company,
limited liability partnership and individuals and their lessors, transferees and receivers.
(p) PSC means the Public Service Commission of the State of Wisconsin.
(q) Public Utility has the meaning provided in Wisconsin Statutes 196.01(5).
(r) Registrant means any person who has registered with the city (1) to have its facilities located in and rightof-
way, or (2) to use or seek to occupy or use the right-of-way or any facilities in the right-of-way.
(s) Repair means to perform construction work necessary to make the right-of-way useable for travel,
according to department specifications, or to return facilities to an operable condition.
(t) Repair Bond means a performance bond, a letter of credit, or cash deposit posted to ensure the
10
availability of sufficient funds to assure that right-of-way excavation repair work is completed in both a
timely and quality manner, per department specifications.
(u) Restore or Restoration means a performance bond, a letter of credit, or cash deposit posted to ensure the
availability of sufficient funds to assure that right-of-way excavation repair work is completed in both a
timely and quality manner, per department specifications.
(v) Restoration Bond means the process by which an excavated right-of-way and surrounding area, including
pavement and foundation, is reconstructed according to department specifications.
(w) Right-of-Way means the surface and space above and below a public roadway, highway, street, bicycle
lane and public sidewalk in which the city has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way.
(x) Service or Utility Service includes municipal sewer and water services and also includes, except as
provided herein, but is not limited to (1) those services provided by a public utility as defined in Wis. Stats.
196.01(5); (2) telecommunications, pipeline, fire and alarm communications, water, electricity, light, heat,
cooling energy, or power services; (3) the services provided by a district heating or cooling system; and (4)
cable service as defined and regulated under 47 U.S.C. 521 through 573. Wireless telecommunications
service and cellular mobile radio telecommunications (CMRS) services as defined by Section 332(d) of the
Federal Communications Act of 1996 (47U.S.C. 332(d)(1)) are excluded, unless these services have a
presence in the right-of-way.
(y) Supplementary Application means an application made to excavate or obstruct more of the right-of-way
than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had already been issued.
(z) Telecommunications Carrier has the meaning in Section 196.01 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(aa) Telecommunications Provider has the meaning in Section 196.01 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(ab) Telecommunications Rights-of Way User means a person owning or controlling a facility in the public rightof-
way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the public right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be
used for transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information. This includes
Telecommunications Providers, Utilities, ATUs, and Carriers. For purposes of this chapter, a cable television
system defined and regulated under Wis. Stats. 66.082(2)(d), and telecommunication activities related to
providing natural gas or electric energy services, and which are not offered for resale as
telecommunications services, are not telecommunications right-of-way users.
(ac) Telecommunications Service means the offering for sale or the conveyance of voice, data or other
information at any frequency over any part of the electromagnetic spectrum, including the sale of service
for collection, storage, forwarding, switching and delivery incidental to such communication and including
the regulated sale of customer premises equipment. Telecommunications Service does not include cable
television service, wireless service or broadcast service.
(ad) Telecommunications Utility has the meaning in Section 196.01 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(ae) Unusable Facilities means facilities in the right-of-way which have remained unused for one year and for
which the registrant is unable to provide proof that it has either a plan to begin using them within the next
twenty-four (24) months or a potential purchaser or user of the facilities.
(3) Administration. The city engineer is responsible for the administration of the rights-of-way and the permits and
ordinances related thereto.
(4) Registration for Right-of-way Occupancy.
(a) Registration. Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or any facilities
in the right-of-way, including by lease, sublease or assignment, or who has, or seeks to have, facilities
located in any right-of-way shall register with the department and pay the fee set forth in Section 1.06.
Registration will consist of providing application information and paying a registration fee.
This section shall not apply to those persons exclusively utilizing facilities provided by another
right-of-way user.
(b) Registration Prior to Work. No person may construct, install, repair, remove, relocate, or perform any other
work on, or use any facilities or any part thereof in any right-of-way without first being registered with the
department.
(c) Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the provisions of a city ordinance
requiring persons to plant or maintain the tree lawn in the area of the right-of-way between their property
and the street curb, construct sidewalks, install street signs or perform other similar activities. Persons
performing such activities shall not be required to obtain any permits under this chapter.
(5) Registration Information.
11
(a) Information Required. The information provided to the department at the time of registration shall include,
but not be limited to:
(1) Each registrant's name, Diggers Hotline registration certificate number, address and e-mail
address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers.
(2) The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of a
local representative. The local representative or designee shall be available at all times. Current
information regarding how to contract the local representatives in an emergency shall be provided
at the time of registration.
(3) A bond required: No person, firm or corporation shall do any excavating work in any street, alley,
public thoroughfare or right of way, in the City of Wisconsin Rapids, or receive a permit or permits
for such work until the bond hereinafter specified shall first have been executed, approved and
filed. Such bond shall be executed to the City of Wisconsin Rapids; shall be in the amount of
$10,000, shall be executed by the principal therein and by two sureties, or by principal and a
surety company authorized to do business in the State of Wisconsin; shall be conditioned that the
principal therein will perform faithfully all work with due care and skill and in accordance with the
law, ordinances, rules, and regulations governing the plumbing and excavating. (The bond shall
provide that the person, firm, or corporation will indemnify the City of Wisconsin Rapids and save
it harmless against all damages, costs, expenses, outlays and claims of every nature and kind
arising out of any unskillfulness or negligence on such principal’s part in connection with the
excavating work). Such bond shall be approved as to form and sufficiency of the sureties by the
city attorney and after such approval shall be filed with the city clerk. If the sureties on such bond
or any of them shall become insolvent, or removed from the State of Wisconsin, the city may
require a new bond, and in such event the principal therein shall not be permitted to do any such
work until a new bond has been executed, approved and filed. No person, firm or corporation
engaged in the process of excavating, desiring to do excavating work in the city of Wisconsin
Rapids shall commence such work until the provisions of this ordinance have been complied with.
In addition, such bond shall provide that the applicant will backfill and maintain any street, alley
or public grounds in which he makes any openings or excavations ad directed by and to the
satisfaction of the city engineer (or his authorized agent) for a period of one year after initial
backfilling. All blacktop or concrete roadways which have been opened must have a temporary
blacktop surfacing placed thereon within 36 hours after the opening has been backfilled. The
property owner shall pay the cost of restoring the permanent surface to the street, alley or public
grounds. In the event that the time the backfilling of any ditches or excavations between the curb
and the lot line is found defective within a period of one year after the date of completion, the city
shall make or cause to be made the necessary repairs to curbs, sidewalks, driveways, etc. The
applicant shall reimburse the city for all damages to any city property resulting from his work
operations, regardless of whether such damage is done by himself, his agents, employees, or
subcontractors.
(4) If the person is a corporation, a LLC or LLP, a copy of any certificate required to be filed under
Wis. Stats. as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State.
(5) A copy of the person's certificate of authority from the Wisconsin Public Service Commission or
other applicable state or federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such
certificate from said commission or other state or federal agency.
(6) Execution of an indemnification agreement in a form prescribed by the department, which is
consistent with, and shall not exceed the obligations provided in, Subsection (24) herein.
(b) Notice of Changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information listed above current at all times by
providing to the department information as to changes within fifteen (15) working days following the date
on which the registrant has knowledge of any change.
(6) Registration Fee.
(a) Registration Fee. The department shall establish the Registration Fee in an amount sufficient to recover
the costs incurred by the city for processing registrants. This fee shall be computed as the average of labor
costs, indirect costs, and other costs associated with registration. (The fee is $50.00 based on one hour of
clerical labor charge plus incidental labor charge. This rate would be reviewed on a yearly basis and set by
the engineering department.)
12
(b) Fee Computation. The city may recalculate, and by resolution, establish the registration fee.
(7) Reporting Obligations. It is in the best interests of all affected parties to attempt to coordinate construction
in the public right-of-way whenever it is reasonably possible. Therefore, periodic reporting by the registrant
of known construction plans will be useful to achieve this objective.
(a) Operations. Every registrant shall, at the time of registration and no later than January 1 of each year, file a
construction and major maintenance plan with the department. The department shall make available at
the time of registration, and on January 1 of each year the department's construction and major
maintenance plan. The registrant's plan and the department's plan shall be submitted on a form
prescribed by the department and shall contain the information determined by the department to be
necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of excavations of rights-of-way. The
plan shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following information:
(1) The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of all Projects to be commenced
during the next calendar year (in this section, a "Next-year Project"); and
(2) The tentative locations and estimated beginning and ending dates for al Projects contemplated
for the two years following the next calendar year (in this section, a "Two-year Project").
(3) Digital files in DXF format for next-year and two-year Projects.
The term "project" in this section shall include both next-year project and two-year projects.
By March 1 of each year the department will have available for inspection in its office a composite
list of all Projects of which the department has been informed in the annual plans. All registrants are
responsible for keeping themselves informed of the current status of this list.
Thereafter, by April 1, each registrant may change any Project in its list of Next-year Project, and
must notify the department of all such changes in said list. The department will make all such changes
available for inspection in its office. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a
Next-year Project of another registrant listed by the other registrant. (See Section 6.25(15), Joint
Applications.)
(b) Additional Next-year Projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the department may, for good cause shown,
allow a registrant to submit additional next-year projects. Good cause includes, but is not limited to, the
criteria set forth in Subsection (18) concerning the discretionary issuance of permits.
(8) Excavation Permit Requirement.
(a) Excavation permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or other chapters of the city code,
no person shall excavate any right-of-way or place facilities in a right-of-way without first having obtained
an excavation permit from the department.
No person shall excavate the right-of-way or maintain an excavation in the right-of-way beyond the
date or area specified in the permit unless such person makes a supplementary application for another
excavation permit before the expiration of the initial permit, pursuant to Section 6.25(16), and a new
permit or permit extension is granted.
(b) Permit Display. A copy of any permit issued under this chapter shall be made available at all times by the
permittee at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the department upon request.
(9) Excavation Permit Application. Application for a permit shall be made to the department. Permit applications shall
contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions:
(a) Registration with the department if required by this chapter;
(b) Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required attachments and scaled
drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project, an erosion control plan, a traffic control
plan and the exact location of all existing and proposed facilities;
(c) Payment of all money due to the city for:
(1) applicable permit fees and costs as set forth below;
(2) subject to section (e), unpaid fees or costs due for prior excavations; or
(3) subject to section (e) any loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city because of applicant's
prior excavations of the rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city.
(d) When an excavation permit is requested for purposes of installing additional facilities, and the posing of a
restoration bond for the additional facilities is insufficient, the posting of an additional or larger restoration
bond for the additional facilities may be required.
(e) The department shall not deny a registrant an excavation permit because of a dispute between the city
and the registrant, related to Subsection (9)(c)(2) and/or (3) if:
13
(1) the dispute has been adjudicated in favor of the registrant;
(2) the dispute is the subject of an appeal filed by the registrant and no decision in the matter has at
yet been rendered.
(10) Excavation Permit Fee.
(a) Fee Calculation. The excavation fee shall be established by the department in an amount sufficient to
recover the costs incurred by the city. This fee shall recover costs incurred by the city for each of the
following categories as provided herein:
(1) Administrative: The general formula for computing the administrative fee shall be the average perpermit
costs for labor plus indirect and other costs. The fee is $50.00 based on one hour of
clerical labor charge plus incidental labor charge. This rate would be reviewed on a yearly basis
and set by the engineering department.
(2) Repair: No repair fee shall be collected by the city, however the Permittee shall be required to
repair the public right-of-way to department specifications, subject to inspection and acceptance
by the department, as per Subsection (11), and to pay a degradation fee.
(3) Degradation: The general formula for computing the degradation fee shall be the cost per square
foot for permanent, overlay or temporary street surfacing multiplied by the appropriate
depreciation rate for that street multiplied by the area of the patch. The area of the patch shall
be calculated by adding two feet to each side of the actual street cut. The degradation fee = cost
per square foot for permanent, overlay, or temporary street surfacing x depreciation rate x area of
patch. The cost per square foot for street surfacing = the street surfacing type and rate in effect
at the time of the excavation divided by 20% then divided by 36 feet. The depreciation rate = one
minus the age of street surfacing divided by life of the appropriate street surfacing as set by the
municipal code up to the respective street surface life span. The life of permanent street
surfacing, overlay street surfacing and temporary street surfacing as set by 6.11 of the municipal
code as 20 years, 6 years and 3 years respectively. The total excavation permit fee shall be
calculated as follows: Total Excavation Permit Fee = Administrative Cost + Degradation Fee.
(MC#1208)
(b) City Exemption. Notwithstanding Subd. a(c), the city and its contractors shall not pay degradation fees.
(c) Payment of Permit Fees. No excavation permit shall be issued without payment of applicable fees [unless
the applicant shall agree to pay such fees within thirty (30) days of billing therefore].
(d) Non refundable. Permit fees paid for a permit that the department has revoked for a breach as stated in
Subsection (18) are not refundable.
(11) Right-of-way Repair.
(a) Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the repair of the right-of-way as required
herein, must be completed within one week after the completion of the project, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the permittee or when work
was prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable under Subsection (17).
(1) Street surface shall be backfilled with road base meeting city specifications from bottom of the
road base to top of paved surface until permanent repairs are made. The street will be patched with same
material and depth as the surrounding pavement structure in accordance with chapter 6 of the Municipal
Code. The Permittee is responsible for the maintenance of the temporary patch until permanent repairs
are made.
(2) Concrete curb & gutter and sidewalk will be replaced in accordance with Chapter 6 of the
Municipal Code.
(3) Grassed areas are to be backfilled with minimum of four inches (4”) of topsoil, seeded with an
approved lawn type seed and mulched with an approved product.
(b) Repair. In additional to repairing its own work, the Permittee must repair the general area of the work, and
the surrounding areas, including the paving and its foundations, to the specifications of the department.
The department shall inspect the area of the work and accept the work when it determines that proper
repair has been made, per specifications of the department.
A permittee may request to have the city repair the right-of-way.
(1) City Repair. If the Permittee requests to have the city repair the right-of-way, the city may accept
or reject the request at its sole option. If the city accepts, the Permittee shall be billed for the
city's costs, and shall pay the amount thereof within thirty (30) days of billing.
14
(2) Permittee Repair. If the Permittee chooses to repair the right-of-way, it shall, at the time of
application for an excavation permit, post a repair bond in an amount determined by the
department to be sufficient to cover the cost of repairing the right-of-way to department
specifications. If, thirty-six (36) months after completion of the repair of the right-of-way, the
department determines that the right-of-way has been properly repaired, the surety on the repair
bond shall be released.
(c) Standards. The permittee shall perform repairs according to the specifications of the department and/or in
the conditions specified in the permit. The department shall have the authority to prescribe the manner
and extent of the repair, and may do so in written procedures of general application or on a case-by-case
basis.
(d) Guarantees. The permittee guarantees its work and shall maintain it for thirty-six (36) months following its
completion, except for organic material which shall be maintained for twelve (12) months. During this
period it shall, upon notification from the department, correct all repair work to the extent necessary, using
the method required by the department. Said work shall be completed within ten (10) calendar days of the
receipt of the notice from the department, not including days during which work cannot be done because
of circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable under Subsection (17).
(e) Failure to Repair. If the permittee fails to repair the right-of-way in the manner and to the condition
required by the department, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all repair required by the
department, the department at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to the
city, within thirty (30) days of billing, the cost of repairing the right-of-way. If permittee fails to pay as
required, the city may exercise its rights under the repair bond.
(f) Erosion Control. The permittee is responsible to install and maintain erosion control devices as per the
approved erosion control plan that was submitted with the excavation permit.
(g) Traffic Control. The permittee is responsible to install and maintain traffic control devices as per the
approved traffic control plan in accordance with Wisconsin Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices that
was submitted with the excavation permit.
(12) Restoration in Lieu of Repair and Degradation. The permittee may elect to restore the excavation and surrounding
pavement in lieu of repair and a degradation fee. If restoration is elected, the department shall specify the
area to be restored, and the methods and materials to be used for the restoration. The Permittee shall
then also comply with the preceding Subsection (11), Subd. a through e as applied to restoration instead
of repair.
(13) Inspection.
(a) Notice of Completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is completed, the Permittee shall notify
the department.
(b) Site Inspection. Permittee shall make the work site available to the department and to all others as
authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of
the work.
(c) Authority of department. At the time of inspection, the city may order the immediate cessation of any work
which poses a threat to the life, health, safety or well being of the public. The city may issue an order to the
registrant for any work that does not conform to the applicable standards, conditions and codes. The order
shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten (10)
days after issuance of the order, the registrant shall present proof to the department that the violation has
been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the department may revoke
the permit pursuant to Subsection. (18).
(14) Ongoing Management Fees.
(a) Fee Basis. Fees shall reflect the ongoing or long-term costs to the city of managing access to the right-ofway.
These costs are exclusive of Administrative costs collected under Excavation Permit Fees. Fees shall
be initially set, and may be annually re-computed, to recover the costs include, but are not limited to,
inventory maintenance, facility tracking, GIS, tree trimming, grass mowing, right-of-way maintenance,
location marking and general inquires related to public right-of-way users. The fee shall be based on the
number of feet of right-of-way occupancy by a Telecommunications Right-of-Way User. Utilities and
companies that have a franchise agreement with the city are exempt from this fee.
The per foot management fee shall be calculated as follows:
15
Annual management fee per foot = Total annual management cost / Total ROW occupancy feet.
(b) Payment of Fees. Ongoing management fee rate is $0.22/ft and shall be subject to adjustment on an
annual basis and correction at the conclusion of the calendar year. Such fees shall be paid for all and any
part of a calendar year, prorated on a daily basis, during any time period in which the said Person:
(1) Uses or occupies the right-of-way to furnish Telecommunications Service, or
(2) Places, maintains or uses the Person's wires, mains, pipes, or any other facilities in the right-ofway.
(15) Joint Applications.
(a) Joint Application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to excavate the right-of-way at the same place
and time.
(b) With City Projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled excavation performed by the city, whether or not it
is a joint application by two or more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the
degradation portion of the excavation permit fee.
(c) Shared Fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same excavation, which the Department does not
perform, may share in the payment of the excavation permit fee. Registrants must agree among
themselves as to the portion each will pay and indicate the same on their applications.
(16) Supplementary Applications.
(a) Limitations on Area. An excavation permit is valid only for the area of the right-of-way specified in the
permit. No Permittee may perform any work or excavate outside the area specified in the permit, except as
provided herein. Any Permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the permit
must be excavated must, before working in that greater area (1) make application for a permit extension
and pay any additional fees required thereby, and (2) be granted a new permit or permit extension.
(b) Limitations on Dates. An excavation permit is valid only for the dates specified in the permit. No Permittee
may begin its work before the permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the
end date. If a Permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply for a new permit for
the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit or an extension of the old permit before working
after the end date of the previous permit.
(c) Fees for Supplementary Applications. A permittee shall pay administrative costs for any additional permits.
(17) Other Obligations.
(a) Compliance with Other Laws. Obtaining a permit to excavate and/or occupy the right-of-way does not
relieve Permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all
fees required by any other city, county, state, or federal rules, laws or regulations. A permittee shall comply
with all requirements of local, state and federal laws. A Permittee shall perform all work in conformance
with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the
right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work.
(b) Prohibited Work. Except in an emergency, or with the approval of the department, no right-of-way
excavation may be done when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
(18) Revocations, Suspensions, Refusals to Issue or Extend Permits.
(a) Grounds. The department may refuse to issue a permit or may revoke, suspend or refuse to extend an
existing permit if it finds any of the following grounds:
(1) The applicant or Permittee is required by Subsection. (4) to be registered and has not done so;
(2) The applicant or Permittee is seeking to perform work not included in its construction and major
maintenance plan required under Subsection (7); which work was reasonably foreseeable by the
applicant or Permittee at the time said plan was filed;
(3) Issuance of a permit for the requested date would or interfere with an exhibition, celebration,
festival, or other event;
(4) Misrepresentation of any fact by the applicant or Permittee;
(5) Failure of the applicant or Permittee to maintain required bonds and/or insurance;
(6) Failure of the applicant or Permittee to complete work in a timely manner;
(7) The proposed activity is contrary to the public health, safety or welfare;
(8) The extent of which right-of-way space where the permit is sought is available;
(9) The competing demands for the particular space in the right-of-way;
(10) The availability of other locations in the right-of-way or in other rights-of-way for the facilities in the
right-of-way;
16
(11) The applicability of ordinances or other regulations of the right-of-way that affect location of
facilities in the right-of-way;
(12) The condition and age of the right-of-way, and whether and when it is scheduled for total or partial
reconstruction; or
(13) The applicant or Permittee is otherwise not in full compliance with the requirements of this
chapter or state or federal law.
(b) Discretionary Issuance. Notwithstanding Subd. 1 (b), the department may issue a permit where issuance is
necessary (a) to prevent substantial economic hardship to a customer of the Permittee or applicant, or (b)
to allow such customer to materially improve its utility service, or (c) to allow the Permittee or applicant to
comply with state or federal law or city ordinance or an order of a court or administrative agency.
(c) Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the department revoking, suspending, refusing to issue or
refusing to extend a permit may file a request for review with the Public Works Committee. A request for
review shall be filed within ten (10) days of the decision being appealed. Following a hearing, the Common
Council may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the department.
(19) Work done Without a Permit.
(a) Emergency Situations. Each registrant shall immediately notify the city by verbal notice on an emergency
phone number or fax notification provided by the city of any event regarding its facilities that it considers to
be an emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the
emergency. Within two business days after the occurrence of the emergency the registrant shall apply for
the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and otherwise fully comply with the requirements
of this chapter.
If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's facilities, the department may
attempt to contact the local representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the
emergency. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary to protect the public safety as a result
of the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities occasioned the
emergency.
(b) Non-Emergency Situations. Except in an emergency, any person who, without first having obtained the
necessary permit, excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, and shall in addition to any
penalties prescribed by Ordinance, pay double the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees
required by this chapter or other chapters of the city Code, deposit with the department the fees necessary
to correct any damage to the right-of-way and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
(20) Supplementary Notification. If the excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the date given on
the permit, permittee shall notify the department of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.
(21) Location of Facilities.
(a) Undergrounding. Under conformity with local, state and federal law, unless existing aboveground facilities
are used, the installation of new facilities and replacement of old facilities shall be done underground or
contained within buildings or other structures in conformity with applicable codes.
(b) Corridors. The department may assign specific corridors within the right-of-way, consistent with Wisconsin
Public Service Commission standards. All excavation or other permits issued by the department involving
the installation or replacement of facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue
consistent with the Wisconsin Public Service Commission's corridor selection standards.
(c) Limitations of Space. The department may prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities
within the right-of-way if there is insufficient space to accommodate all of the requests of Persons to
occupy and use the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the department shall strive to the extent
possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-of-way, but may prohibit or limit the
placement of new or additional facilities when required to protect the public, health, safety or welfare.
(d) As Constructed Plans. Permittee shall provide the department as constructed plans on electronic files in
the DXF format within 30 days after the completion of the installation of their facilities. A $100 fee will be
charged in advance which would be refunded when the as constructed electronic plans are provided. The
as constructed plans shall show the location of the permittee’s facilities including the depth from a known
reference. Failure to provide, as constructed plans in the electronic DXF format will cause the permittee to
be assessed the actual cost for the department to prepare these files. Failure to provide as constructed
plans may result in revocation of the permittee’s registration. (MC#1107)
(e) All utilities located in the public right-of-way that are 36” or less in height and within 5’ of curb and gutter
17
shall be marked by the utility owner by installing a 6’ reflectorized identity marker at the installation. (MC
#1093)
(22) Relocation of Facilities. Except as prohibited by State or Federal law, a Registrant must promptly and at its own
expense, with due regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and relocate its facilities in the
right-of-way whenever the department requests such removal and relocation, and shall restore the right-of-way to
the same condition it was in prior to said removal or relocation. The department may make such request to prevent
interference by the Company's facilities with (I) a present or future city use of the right-of-way, (II) a public
improvement undertaken by the city, (III) an economic development project in which the city has an interest or
investment, (IV) when the public health, safety and welfare require it, (V) when necessary to prevent interference
with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person shall not be required to remove or relocate its facilities from any
right-of-way which has been vacated in favor of a non-governmental entity unless and until the reasonable costs
thereof are first paid to the person thereof.
(23) Interference with Other Facilities during Municipal Construction. When the city performs work in the right-of-way and
finds it necessary to maintain, support, shore, or move a registrant's facilities, the city shall notify the local
representative. The registrant shall meet with the city's representative within 24-hours and coordinate the
protection, maintenance, supporting, and/or shoring of the registrant's facilities. The registrant shall accomplish
the needed work within 72-hours, unless the city agrees to a longer period.
In the event that the registrant does not proceed to maintain, support, shore, or move its facilities, the city
may arrange to do the work and bill the registrant, said bill to be paid within thirty (30) days.
(24) Indemnification.
(a) Indemnification. Permittee expressly acknowledges and agrees, by acceptance of the permit, to indemnify,
defend, and hold harmless the city, its officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected officials,
employees and agents, from and against all loss or expense (including liability costs and attorney's fees)
by reason of any claim or suit, or of liability imposed by law upon the city or its agents or employees for
damages because of bodily injury, including death at any time resulting there from, sustained by any
person or persons or on account of damages to property, including loss of use thereof, arising from, in
connection with, caused by or resulting from the Permittee's acts or omissions in the exercise of its rights
under this permit, whether caused by or contributed to by the city or it agents or employees.
(25) Abandoned Facilities.
(a) Indemnification. A registrant who has determined to discontinue its operations in the city must either:
(1) Provide information satisfactory to the department that the registrant's obligations for its facilities
under this chapter have been lawfully assumed by another registrant; or
(2) Submit to the department a proposal and instruments for dedication of its facilities to the city. If a
registrant proceeds under this clause, the city may, as its options:
(a) accept the dedication for all or a portion of the facilities; or
(b) require the registrant, at its own expense, to remove the facilities in the right-of-way at
ground or above ground level; or
(c) require the registrant to post a bond or provide payment sufficient to reimburse the city
for reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the facilities.
However, any registrant who has unusable and abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall
remove it from that right-of-way within two years, unless the department waives this requirement.
(b) Public Utilities. This section shall not apply to a public utility as defined by WI Stats. 196.01(5).
(26) Reservation of Regulatory and Police Powers. The city, by the granting of a permit to excavate, obstruct and/or
occupy the right-of-way, or by registering a person under this chapter does not surrender or to any extent lose,
waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter granted to the city under
the Constitution and statutes of the State of Wisconsin to regulate the use of the right-of-way by the Permittee; and
the Permittee by its acceptance of a permit to excavate, obstruct and/or occupy the right-of-way or of registration
under this chapter agrees that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or
the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved by the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to
the exercise are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances
necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general law,
and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to such powers.
(27) Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held
18
invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof.
6.25 ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING WELLS IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY (MC#1005)
A $200.00 permit fee is required to be submitted with an application. An additional $100.00 charge will be assessed per
well if the City of Wisconsin Rapids engineering department needs to determine the coordinates of each well.
6.26 Sidewalk Café (MC#1136)
(1) Purpose. To further encourage the revitalization of the downtown and other areas of the City, including the
development of social and economic activity, the City Council finds and determines:
(a) That there exists a need for outdoor eating facilities in certain areas of the City to provide a unique
environment for relaxation, social interaction, and food consumption.
(b) That sidewalk cafés will permit enhanced use of the available public rights-of-way, will complement
restaurants operating from fixed premises, and will promote economic activity in the area.
(c) That the existence of sidewalk cafés encourages additional pedestrian traffic but their presence may
impede the free and safe flow of pedestrians. Therefore, a need exists for regulations and standards for
the existence and operation of sidewalk cafés to ensure a safe environment.
(d) That the establishment of permit conditions and safety standards for sidewalk cafés is necessary to
protect the public health safety and welfare.
(2) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings given in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
(a) Central Business District, means the portion of the City that is zoned B-1, Central Commercial District as
defined by the City of Wisconsin Rapids Zoning Ordinance.
(b) Initial application, means the first sidewalk café permit applied for by an establishment’s owner or
licensee.
(c) Parking space deck, means a temporary structure placed within the right-of-way, generally existing parking
spaces, for the purpose of expanding the available area for a sidewalk café.
(d) Principal restaurant, means the restaurant which is applying to expand with a sidewalk café.
(e) Renewal permit, means a permit that is applied for by January 1st of the year by a currently valid sidewalk
café permit holder.
(f) Restaurant, means an establishment requiring a State of Wisconsin restaurant license and where a
minimum of 51% of the gross sales come from the sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages; or, has the
meaning provided in Wis. Stat. § 254.61 (5).
(g) Sidewalk, has the meaning provided in Wis. Stat. § 340.01(58).
(h) Sidewalk Café, means any group of tables, chairs, benches, barriers or partitions, trash containers and
suitable decorative devices maintained upon any part of the public right-of-way for use by an
establishment in the sale to the public of food, refreshments, and beverages of all kinds.
(3) Location. Sidewalk cafés may be permitted on public sidewalks and parking space decks within the Central
Business District only and may be located only on that portion of the public sidewalk or parking space deck that is
directly adjacent to the building, or portion of the building, where the permit holder’s restaurant business is located,
and shall not be in conflict with zoning requirements.
(4) Permit Required. No person shall sell or offer to sell any food and/or drink at a sidewalk café unless a permit for
the sidewalk café has been issued by the City Clerk under this division.
(a) An applicant for a permit under this division shall file an application form and the permit fee with the City
Clerk, who shall provide the application form. The application shall be signed by the applicant and, if the
restaurant is a tenant, by the applicant’s landlord. The initial application shall be accompanied by a scale
drawing of the site requested to be used as a sidewalk café, showing the location of all trees, poles,
furniture, equipment, fixed barriers and other items that will be located:
(1) In the sidewalk café
(2) Between the sidewalk café and the street curbing or, if utilized, parking space deck; and
(3) Within ten feet beyond each end of the sidewalk café area
(b) Additional items that shall be submitted at the time of application include:
(1) Photographs, pictures from a sales catalog or detailed drawings of the furniture and equipment
19
proposed for use, with dimensions and colors;
(2) Proof of a valid restaurant license;
(3) Proof of the required insurance; and
(4) Details for a sandwich board sign, if one is desired.
(c) If alcohol beverages are to be sold or served at the sidewalk café, the applicant shall apply for an
expansion of the alcohol license for the principal restaurant to cover the sidewalk café area where alcohol
beverages will be sold, served or consumed. Additional regulations are located in Section 50-519.
(d) Initial applications shall be reviewed by the Planning and Economic Development Director. The Director
shall review the design, type of furniture, furnishings and equipment proposed by the applicant and
determine whether any of it detracts from the aesthetics of the area surrounding the proposed sidewalk
café, and whether the area proposed is suitable for the sidewalk café. After the review of the Planning and
Economic Development Director the application shall be submitted to the Finance and Property Committee
for their review and approval. After approval by the Finance and Property Committee a permit may be
issued by the City Clerk. If the application is denied by the Finance and Property Committee the applicant
may appeal the decision to the full city council.
(5) Permit Fee and Duration. The permit is good from January 1 or thereafter when the permit is issued, and shall
expire on December 31 following its issuance. The annual fee for a sidewalk café permit shall be as set forth by the
city council, and shall be paid to the city clerk at the time of application submission. Sidewalk cafés may generally
only be in place from May 1 to November 1. Earlier setup is permitted with the permission of the Planning and
Economic Development Director in the event of early spring weather.
(6) Renewal Permit. An application for a renewal permit which involves changes to the location of the sidewalk café or
to the furniture, furnishings or equipment, shall be treated as an initial application. An application for a renewal
permit with no changes from the previous permit and the permit holder has not been cited or convicted of a permit
violation or liquor license violation relating to the sidewalk café, does not require the review and approval of the
Finance and Property Committee. After the review of the Planning and Economic Development Director a permit
may be issued by the City Clerk.
(7) Revocation, Suspension, Nonrenewal. In addition to any other penalty provided under this section, any
sidewalk café permit issued hereunder may, after notice and hearing before the Finance and Property Committee,
be suspended for a specific period of time, or not renewed or revoked, for violation of any provisions of this division
or any other law, ordinance or regulation which is substantially related to the permit activity.
(8) Insurance and Indemnification. No applicant shall be issued a sidewalk café permit unless proof of the following
insurance, in amounts not less than stated and covering the sidewalk café area, is provided:
(a) Commercial General Liability: $1,000,000 per occurrence/general aggregate.
(b) Workers Compensation: statutory.
(c) Employers Liability: $300,000 disease policy limit; $100,000 per employee.
The permit holder shall also provide, upon request, policies and endorsements. The policies shall be
endorsed to name the city as an additional insured, and shall provide that the policies of insurance shall not be
canceled or altered without thirty days prior written notice to the City. The insurance requirements are not intended
to waive any immunity or statutory procedures that the City may have or be entitled to under provisions of law.
By obtaining a sidewalk café permit, the permit holder agrees to indemnify, defend, save, and hold
harmless the City, its officers and employees, from any and all claims, liability, lawsuits, damages, and causes of
action, which may arise out the permit or permit holder’s activity on the sidewalk café. The permit holder shall sign
an indemnification agreement provided by the City Attorney prior to operation of the sidewalk café.
(9) Restrictions. No sidewalk café shall be permitted unless the following restrictions are followed:
(a) Signage. No signs shall be allowed in the sidewalk café area except the following:
(1) Table umbrellas with the permit holder’s business name imprinted thereon.
(2) One (1) sandwich board sign showing daily specials.
(3) Tabletop documents and menus are not considered signs.
(b) Furnishings. The permit holder shall use, and maintain in good repair, safe and sturdy furniture,
furnishings and equipment which enhance the aesthetics of the surrounding area. Umbrellas shall be
anchored so they will not lift and blow away.
(c) Hours. A sidewalk café may only be open during the hours of the principal restaurant, but in no case shall
the sidewalk café be open from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(d) Use after hours. The sidewalk café area shall not be utilized for any purpose after hours. It is the
20
responsibility of the permit holder to prevent loitering and unauthorized use of the sidewalk café area and
site furnishings.
(e) Food service availability. A sidewalk café shall not be open during hours when food service is not available.
(f) Music/Noise. The sidewalk café area shall not have music directed to it from speakers nor shall live music
take place at the sidewalk café.
(g) Use of public property. No sidewalk café permit holder may use public property such as light poles, utility
poles, flower planters, trees or other amenities as a point of attachment for anything, including ropes,
posters or signs.
(h) Trash removal. The permit holder shall remove all trash from the sidewalk café on a regular basis during
business hours and shall keep the sidewalk café area in a clean, orderly, litter-free and hazard-free
condition. The permit holder shall remove litter from the abutting properties that may have come from the
sidewalk café. The permit holder shall provide covered trash containers for the costumers. The permit
holder shall not place trash in the City trash containers.
(i) Unobstructed sidewalk, hydrants, standpipes. The permit holder shall provide at least five (5) feet of
unobstructed sidewalk for pedestrian right-of-way past the sidewalk café, and shall not place anything
within two (2) feet of the curb or street (curb setback not required if a parking space deck is part of the
sidewalk café area). The required two (2) foot setback from the curb or street must be separate from the
required five (5) foot unobstructed pedestrian right-of-way. Access to and view of fire hydrants and
standpipes shall be provided.
(j) Distance from curb-cut, crosswalk. No portion of a sidewalk café shall be located within five (5) feet of a
curb-cut or marked crosswalk.
(k) Restroom Facilities. Facilities within the restaurant shall be sufficient to adequately serve the additional
seating and capacity provided by the sidewalk café area as required by the State of Wisconsin Commercial
Building Code.
(l) Non-smoking. The entire area contained within a sidewalk café permit shall be an area where outside
smoking is prohibited, as the City is authorized to so designate pursuant to Section 101.123(4m),
Wisconsin Statutes, and Section 25.35 (4m), Municipal Code. A person in charge of the business to which
the sidewalk café permit is issued may designate an outside area on his or her private property that is a
reasonable distance from the entrance, where persons may smoke.
(10) Service of Alcohol Beverages. A permit holder may sell and serve alcohol beverages in an outdoor café only under
the following conditions:
(a) The permit holder has a valid and appropriate alcohol license for the principal premises.
(b) The alcohol license includes the sidewalk café area in the description of the licensed premises.
(c) The alcohol license permits the sale of the type of alcohol beverages to be served at the sidewalk café.
(d) Alcohol beverages are sold and served only to seated customers of the sidewalk café and are served by
the licensee or licensee’s employees in compliance with the alcohol beverage laws, ordinances and
regulations.
(e) Alcohol beverages may only be served at the sidewalk café when food service is available through the
principal restaurant.
(f) The permit holder shall be responsible for policing the sidewalk café area to prevent underage persons
from entering or remaining in the sidewalk café, except when underage persons are allowed to be present
on the licenses premises under applicable laws.
(g) The permit holder shall not allow patrons of the sidewalk café to bring alcohol beverages from another
location, nor to carry open containers of alcohol beverages about in the sidewalk café area, nor to carry
open containers of alcohol beverages served in the sidewalk café outside the sidewalk café area.
(h) The bar from which the alcohol beverages are dispensed shall be located indoors and shall not be located
in the sidewalk café area.
(i) No container of alcohol beverages shall be present in the sidewalk café area between 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.
(11) Parking Space Decks. The intent of the parking space decks is to provide an expanded area within the public rightof-
way for a restaurant to establish an outdoor café area. All restrictions applicable to sidewalk cafés shall apply to
the parking space decks as well.
Regulations that are specific to the parking space deck areas are as follows:
(a) Approval of a parking space deck shall be part of the approval for a sidewalk café. A parking space deck is
21
not permitted separate from a sidewalk café.
(b) A building permit is required for all parking space decks. Plans for a parking space deck shall be approved
by the City prior to the start of construction. A minimum of a 36” guardrail shall be provided on the sides of
the deck not adjacent to the sidewalk.
(c) The size of the parking space deck shall be limited to the area occupied by parking spaces located entirely
within the frontage of the restaurant holding the permit. A minimum of 3 foot setback from adjacent
parking spaces and a 4 foot setback from the traffic lane shall be provided.
(d) If parking space decks are approved for adjacent restaurants, the decks may be integrated and
constructed as one large parking space deck.
(e) Parking space decks shall be installed no earlier than May 1st and shall be removed no later than
November 1. Earlier setup is permitted with the permission of the Planning and Economic Development
Director in the event of early spring weather.
(f) Cost for the construction, installation, removal and storage of the parking space deck is the responsibility
of the permit holder. If the structure is not removed from the property in accordance with the regulations of
this section, the City may remove the structure after a 15 day notice and charge the expense of removal to
the permit holder or property owner.
(27) MOBILE VENDING
(1) Purpose. To protect the public health, safety and welfare of residents and visitors to the city through the
regulation of the health conditions of food sold, and conditions in which food and related items are vended
by mobile vendors.
(2) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement of this section.
(a) “Mobile Vending Unit” means any motorized or non-motorized vehicle, trailer, kiosk, push, or
pedal cart, stand, display, carried container, blanket, ground covering, or other device, designed
to be portable and not permanently attached to the ground from which food, beverages, or
related items, are being peddled, vended, sold, serviced, displayed, offered for sale or given away.
Mobile vending unit does not include a mobile wholesale delivery unit, a vehicle which is used
solely to transport or deliver food, or a common carrier regulated by the state or federal
government.
(b) “Mobile Vendor” means a person who peddles, vends, sells, serves, displays, offers to sell or give
away food, beverages, and related items from a mobile vending unit.
(c) “Public Street” as used in this section means any highway, street, or alley, located within the
corporate limits of the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
(d) “Special Event” means an event licensed and approved by the City of Wisconsin Rapids under
Section 20.08 of the Municipal Code.
(e) “Vend” means to peddle, vend, sell, service, display, offer to sell, or give away foot, beverages,
and related items.
(3) Permit Required. No person shall engage in the vending of any food and related items from any vehicle,
cart or container on public streets without first obtaining a mobile vending permit. Vending of other goods,
wares, or merchandise within public streets is prohibited. Mobile vendors that are approved participants in
a Special Event under the city’s Special Event Policy are exempt from this section.
(4) Application. Application for a mobile vending permit shall be made in writing to the City Clerk on forms
provided by the City Clerk and shall contain the following information:
(a) Name, home address, date of birth, and phone number of the applicant.
(b) Name, address, and phone number of the business/corporation that the applicant represents.
(c) Driver’s license number for the driver of the motor vehicle.
(d) Description of the items or goods to be sold.
(e) A description of the location(s) or route where the applicant intends to sell food or goods.
(f) Whether the applicant is an individual, corporation, or partnership, including:
(1) If the applicant is a corporation, the registered agent’s name, address and date of birth,
and verification that the corporation has been registered by the state as provided in Wis.
Stats. § 180.
(2) If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners.
(g) The vehicle identification number or unique serial number of the vehicle to be utilized for mobile
vending.
22
(h) A drawing or photograph, with dimensions, of the mobile vending unit.
(i) Statement of whether the applicant has been arrested or convicted of any crime or ordinance
violation together with the nature of the offense and the place of conviction.
(j) Copy of a current Wood County Health Department license for the vending of any food items.
(k) Copy of a current State of Wisconsin Seller’s Permit.
(5) Background Check. The operator of the mobile vending vehicle is subject to a police background check
and review by the City.
(a) Upon receipt of a completed application, the City Clerk shall refer the application to the Chief of
Police or his/her designee. The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall investigate the accuracy
of the provided information and determine if the applicant has been convicted of any crime that
substantially relates to the permitted activity.
(b) After the investigation the Chief of Police or his/her designee shall provide a report and
recommendation to the City Clerk on the issuance of the requested permit.
(6) Insurance and Indemnification. No applicant shall be issued a mobile vending permit unless proof of the
following insurance, in amounts not less than stated and covering the mobile vending activity, is provided:
(a) Commercial General Liability: $1,000,000 per occurrence/general aggregate.
(b) Workers Compensation: statutory.
(c) Vehicle Insurance: statutory.
(c) Employers Liability: $300,000 disease policy limit; $100,000 per employee.
The insurance requirements are not intended to waive any immunity or statutory procedures that the City
may have or be entitled to under provisions of law. By obtaining a mobile vending permit, the permit holder
agrees to indemnify, defend, save, and hold harmless the City, its officers and employees, from any and all
claims, liability, lawsuits, damages, and causes of action, which may arise out the permit or permit
holder’s activity. The permit holder shall sign an indemnification agreement provided by the City Attorney
prior to operation of the mobile vending operation.
(7) Fees. The applicant shall pay the appropriate fee as adopted by the City Council.
(8) Duration. Issued permits are good for the issued calendar year and shall expire on December 31st.
(9) Mobile Vending Restrictions. The following restrictions shall apply to all mobile vendors.
(a) Connection of a mobile vending unit to a public source of electricity, water, or sewer at a mobile
vending site without prior authorization is prohibited.
(b) No mobile vendor may use any public property such as light poles or utility poles, flower planters,
trees, or other amenities to attach any ropes, posters, signs, electrical cords, or other objects
used in his/her operations.
(c) Vending and adjoining areas shall be kept clean and free from litter, garbage, rubble and debris
at all times. When leaving a vending area, the mobile vendor shall be responsible for the removal
of all litter resulting from the vending operations. Vendor shall provide a minimum of one (1) leakproof
container for the deposition of waste, garbage, litter and refuse.
(d) A mobile vendor and any vehicle or other on-street vending in any street shall comply with all
state and municipal traffic and parking laws at all times. At no time shall mobile vending occur
within the right-of-way of a State or County highway.
(e) Licensing issued under this section does not authorize the holder to vend in any public park,
including driveways and parking areas within a public park.
(f) No mobile vendor shall conduct business within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant. Mobile vendors
shall provide a minimum four (4) foot clearance on sidewalks and rights-of-way for pedestrian
access and traffic. A mobile vending unit shall maintain clear access and visibility of cross walks
and street corners.
(g) Mobile vendors that are not approved participants in a Special Event under the city’s Special
Event Policy shall not be located within two (2) blocks of the Special Event.
(h) Vending shall only be permitted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and that time which is 30
minutes after closing hours for Class “B” licensed alcohol premises.
(10) Denial/Revocation/Appeals.
(a) Appeal of a denial or revocation of a permit under this Section shall be made to the Finance
Committee.
(b) Revocation. The Finance Committee may suspend or revoke a permit for violation of the
23
provisions of this chapter.
(11) Penalties. Any person violating this chapter shall be subject to the penalties outlined in Section 1.07 of
the Municipal Code.
1
CHAPTER 7 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION
Section 7.01 Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
(1) Bi-metal container means a container for carbonated or malt beverages that are made primarily
of a combination of steel and aluminum.
(2) Brush means trimmings from shrubs and trees that are 6” in diameter or less, but does not
include brush or yard waste generated by a service contractor.
(3) Collectable recyclables mean all plastic bottles and containers including: all food, beverage and
household bottles, jars, jugs, dairy containers and lids, deli, bakery, produce containers and lids; all
paper including: newspapers and inserts, magazines, books, catalogs, milk, juice and soup cartons, junk
mail and office paper; all metal and glass including: aluminum bottles and cans, steel, tin and bi-metal
cans, empty aerosol cans, food and beverage glass bottles and jars. The items listed as collectable
recyclables in this definition may be modified by the Director of Public Works in accordance with the
effective date of state law or applicable State Department of Natural Resources regulations or variances
therefrom. The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for informing the public of all acceptable
collectable recyclables.
(4) Collectable solid waste means garbage, collectable recyclables, brush, and yard waste.
(5) Commercial or manufacturing source means any private business enterprises, including, but not
limited to, offices, stores, taverns, service stations, restaurants and similar businesses whether nonprofit
or profit making in nature, excluding hazardous, toxic, noxious or offensive waste, brush, yard
waste, refuse or commercial debris.
(6) Compost site means a public site prepared and operated by the city for the purpose of
composting yard waste.
(7) Construction debris means all waste resulting from building construction or demolition,
alteration, or repair, including excavated material, remodeling, and other waste including, but not
limited to, windows, doors, drywall, framing and roofing materials, flooring, carpeting, cabinets and
counter tops, concrete, stone, masonry, rock, asphalt, sod, earth, dirt, and brick.
(8) Container board means corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of shipping containers
and related products.
(9) Disposable bag and bag mean a one-way disposable bag made of polyurethane or other plastic
material with a securing twist tie consisting of a minimum of two-ply paper and minimum of 1½ mils
thickness for plastic. Bags shall not exceed a volume capacity of 32 gallons or a weight of 50 pounds.
Whenever the terms "disposable bag" and "bag" are used in this chapter, such words will mean
disposable bag as described in this definition.
(10) Garbage means miscellaneous waste material, excluding recyclables, including, but not limited
to, discarded material resulting from handling, processing, storing, consumption of food, paper, metals,
2
rubber, wood, cloth, and litter. Garbage shall specifically exclude hazardous, offensive, noxious or toxic
wastes, refuse, construction debris, yard waste or brush.
(11) Hazardous and/or toxic waste means waste materials or substances which, during normal
storage in handling, may be a potential cause of harm, sickness or death, such as explosives, petroleum
products, metal or pharmaceutical materials, batteries, waste paints, solvents, wood preservatives,
sealers, adhesives, corrosive chemicals, poisonous or pathogenic substances, pesticides, chemicals,
radioactive materials, toxic materials, and all other similar harmful substances, whether in solid, liquid
or gaseous form.
(12) Institutional source means any institutional enterprise, including, but not limited to, county,
state or federal government, churches, schools, hospitals, educational institutions, and fraternal
organizations, excluding property owned or operated by the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
(13) Landscape/lawn care operation means all landscape, lawn care, nursery, tree service, or other
business which provides landscape and lawn care services to others for a fee or other consideration. See
also service contractor.
(14) Magazines means magazines and other materials printed on similar paper.
(15) Major appliance means a residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes dryer, clothes
washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven, refrigerator, stove, furnace, boiler, humidifier or
water heater. Major appliances are considered refuse for purposes of this chapter. Microwave ovens
which have had the capacitor removed shall not be considered major appliances.
(16) Manufacturing source means waste resulting from manufacturing or processes and operations,
excluding hazardous, offensive, toxic or noxious wastes, refuse, yard waste, brush or construction
debris.
(17) Multiple-family source means a property containing five or more dwelling units located within a
structure or a complex of structures.
(18) Newspaper means a newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint.
(19) Noxious and/or offensive waste means those wastes that are unwholesome or have an
unpleasant smell or are otherwise noxious and/or offensive, such as manure, filth, slop, carcasses,
carrion meat, fish, entrails, hides and hide scrapings, paint, kerosene, oil or greasy substances, and
objects that may cause injury to any person or animal or damage to vehicles such as barbed wire, briar
thorns or similar materials. The term "manure" herein shall not include the excrement/fecal waste of
domesticated animals allowed in residentially zoned parcels provided such excrement/fecal waste is
properly packaged and disposed of so as to not leak, leach or spill into the garbage container.
(20) Office paper means high grade printing and writing papers from offices in nonresidential
facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer printout are examples of office paper
generally accepted as high grade. This term does not include industrial process waste.
(21) Patron means any person producing any type of waste material covered by the regulations of
this chapter. In the case of a firm or corporation, the term "patron" will be construed to mean the
principal agent, office or employee responsible for the firm or corporation.
3
(22) Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, educational institution, local
governmental unit as defined in Wis. Stats. §66.0117(1)(a), state agency or authority, or federal agency.
(23) Plastic container means an individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can, jar or carton, except for
a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a product that is the subject of a retail sale.
(24) Polycart means a reusable container specifically designed for automated collection and provided
by the city. Polycarts are the property of the city and shall remain with the parcel address to which it is
assigned by the city. Polycarts are specifically designated for garbage or collectable recyclable use.
(25) Postconsumer waste means solid waste other than solid waste generated in the production of
goods, hazardous waste as defined in Wis. Stats. §291.01 (including such amendments as may be made
from time to time), waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap automobiles, or highvolume
industrial waste as defined in Wis. Stats. §289.01 (including such amendments as may be made
from time to time).
(26) Private collection receptacle means container(s) provided by a private garbage or recyclable
collection hauler.
(27) Recyclable materials means lead acid batteries; major appliances; waste oil; yard waste; and
collectable recyclables as defined in this section.
(28) Refuse or rubbish means miscellaneous waste material that is bulky or of such a size that will not
fit in a polycart and as is not collected with garbage including, but not limited to, furniture, appliances,
bicycles, exercise equipment, play equipment, and other household items, mattresses, screen/storm
doors, swing sets, plumbing fixtures, ovens, washtubs, wheelbarrows, box springs, and similar items.
Refuse or rubbish excludes construction debris, electronics such as televisions, stereos, microwaves,
computers, cell phones, telephones systems, keyboards, servers, copiers, video equipment, business
equipment, printers, and similar equipment. Refuse and rubbish also excludes air conditioners,
dehumidifiers, freezers, refrigerators, water coolers, and others similar equipment containing Freon.
(29) Residential source means a property containing one, two, three or four residential units,
including those which are occupied seasonally.
(30) Service contractor means a person, firm, entity or company which performs services for a
property owner or occupant.
(31) Solid waste means garbage, recyclables, brush, yard waste, refuse, construction debris;
hazardous, toxic, offensive or noxious wastes.
(32) Solid waste facility means as specified in Wis. Stats. § 289.01(35) including such amendments as
may be made enacted from time to time.
(33) Solid waste treatment means any method, technique or process which is designed to change the
physical, chemical or biological character or composition of solid waste, including incineration.
(34) Waste tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose because of wear,
damage or defect.
(35) Yard waste means all materials originating in the yard and garden which are capable of natural
decomposition, including leaves, grass clippings, and other vegetation but does not include any yard
waste generated by a service contractor.
4
Section 7.02 Collection Frequency.
Garbage from a residential source shall be collected by the city once each week. Collectable recyclables
from a residential source shall be collected once every two weeks.
Section 7.03 Polycarts.
1. Initial Provision of Polycarts.
The City shall initially provide a 96-gallon grey polycart for garbage and a 96-gallon green
polycart for collectable recycling as follows:
(a) The City will provide one polycart/collection service for garbage, and one
polycart/collection service for collectable recyclables, per single family home.
(b) The City will provide one polycart/collection service for garbage, and one
polycart/collection service for collectable recyclables, to a duplex on a single lot.
(c) The City will provide one polycart/collection service for garbage, and one
polycart/collection service for collectable recyclables, to each unit of a zero-lot line
duplex.
(d) The City will provide one polycart/collection service for garbage, and one
polycart/collection service for collectable recyclables, to a three-plex on a single lot.
(e) The City will provide two polycarts/collection service for garbage, and two
polycarts/collection service for collectable recyclables, to each four-plex on a single lot.
(f) Prior to initial issuance of a polycart, property owners may request, in writing, a 48-
gallon cart in lieu of a 96-gallon cart. If after initial delivery of a polycart, the property
owner wishes to change cart size, the property owner must pay the fee for the new
polycart.
2. Extra Polycart Requests and Fees.
(a) Upon request and subject to the limitations below, duplex, three-plex, and four-plex
property owners may request additional polycarts for garbage and collectable recycling.
Property owners shall be charged for the additional polycarts, with such charges for
carts to be set by resolution of the Council.
The maximum number of polycarts the City shall collect in a collection cycle shall be:
(a) Single Family dwelling: 1 garbage, 1 recycling
(b) Duplex on a single lot: 2 garbage, 2 recycling
(c) Zero lot-line duplex, each unit: 1 garbage, 1 recycling
(d) Three-plex on a single lot: 3 garbage, 3 recycling
(e) Four-plex on a single lot: 4 garbage, 4 recycling
5
(b) If a resident who paid for an additional cart moves to another area in the City and
wishes to have a second cart at the new residence, the resident does not have to pay for
the additional cart, provided the property owner gives the City notice of the move, and
the property owner takes the second cart with them to the new residence.
3. Care of Polycarts.
(a) Carts have an expected life of more than 10 years, and normal wear and tear damage to
wheels or covers may be repaired by the City at no cost to the property owner at the
discretion of the Public Works Superintendent.
(b) Property owners are responsible for the care and protection of recycling carts provided
by the City. Residents requiring a replacement cart will be responsible for the cost of
said replacement. Residents requesting a change in size of cart shall return their existing
cart and will be charged a replacement fee as set by the Council.
(c) All polycarts shall be maintained in a good, clean and sanitary condition. Polycarts shall
not be overloaded, bent, broken or otherwise maintained so as to prevent the cover
from properly fitting thereon.
4. Storage of Polycarts in between Collection Periods.
(a) Polycarts shall be stored in a garage or other permitted enclosure or outbuilding on the
parcel, or when such garage or other permitted enclosure or outbuilding is not available
or is impracticable for storage, polycarts may be stored along the side of primary and
accessory structures in the side yard or rear yard. Polycarts may not be stored in the
front yard or street yard, nor in that part of the side yard of a corner lot that is in front
of a vertical line extending from the front facade of the structure.
(b) Polycarts must be stored with the lids completely closed.
(c) Polycarts shall not be stored near a furnace, grill or any other heat source.
5. Location and Placement of Polycarts for Collection.
(a) Prior to the scheduled time of collection, polycarts shall be placed adjacent to the street
adjacent to the residence such that it shall be apparent to the Public Works
Superintendent which residence the polycart is assigned.
(b) All garbage and collectable recyclables shall be placed in the proper polycart.
(c) Polycarts shall be placed within 1 foot of the curb or edge of pavement with the wheels
and handle closest to the house and 3 feet from another cart, object, or parked car.
(d) Areas that have no terrace shall place their polycart at the house edge of the sidewalk.
(e) Placement of polycarts will only be allowed within 24 hours prior to the scheduled time
of collection, with required removal of containers within 24 hours after the scheduled
collection.
(f) All garbage and collectable recyclables shall be placed as required by this chapter by
6:00 a.m. on the designated collection day.
6
(g) Collections may be made at the alley line where such parcels are served by an alley or
adjacent to the sidewalk in designated downtown areas, subject to the consent and
approval of the Public Works Superintendent.
(h) Location of polycarts in winter. During winter months, polycarts shall be placed in the
driveway apron or on an adjacent area to the curb line which has been shoveled free of
snow. In cases where the Public Works Superintendent determines that collection
would be best facilitated by allowing property owners to place polycarts at other
accessible points, this subsection may be waived by the city. Polycarts shall not be
placed on top of snow bank.
Section 7.04 Preparation of Solid Waste for Collection Generally.
All garbage and collectable recyclables placed for collection shall be prepared as provided under this
section.
1. Garbage
All residential garbage must be placed inside the proper polycart; no garbage shall be placed outside the
polycart for collection
2. Collection of recyclables.
Collectable recyclables shall be separated from garbage and other collectable solid waste and placed for
collection in the proper polycart in conformity with this subsection.
(a) Occupants of single to four unit residences shall separate collectable recyclables from
garbage and other solid waste and shall keep the collectable recyclables clean and free
of contaminants, such as produce residue, oil or grease, or other non-recyclable
materials, including, but not limited to, household hazardous waste, medical waste and
agricultural chemical containers. Recyclable materials shall be stored in accordance with
this chapter in a manner which protects them from wind, rain and other inclement
weather, and shall be placed curbside for collection as provided in this chapter.
3. General Rules
(a) The owner and/or the occupant of a residential source shall be responsible for the
proper and sanitary storage of all garbage and collectable recyclables accumulated at
the premises until collection.
(b) The owner and/or the occupant of a residential source shall use sufficiently sized
polycarts to adequately hold garbage or collectable recyclables accumulating between
collections without overloading.
(c) The owner and/or the occupant shall be responsible for the proper and sanitary storage
of all other solid waste and recyclable material and shall be responsible for its disposal
according to law.
(d) Any solid waste not placed in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance may be
rejected by the collector. Garbage or collectable recyclables or any other solid waste not
7
picked up on a scheduled pickup, must be removed within 24 hours of the time said waste
was scheduled to be picked up. A property owner or tenant failing to remove said solid
waste as outlined above shall be subject to a fine or forfeiture in accordance with this
chapter.
(e) Accumulation of waste. If the owner, occupant, or lessee of any premises shall neglect or
refuse to clean up and remove from the premises any waste when ordered to do so by
the county health department, the city building inspector or his/her designee, or the
Public Works Superintendent or his/her designee, the owner, occupant or lessee shall be
liable for the penalty provided for violation of this chapter. The waste may be collected
by the Public Works Department and the entire cost so incurred shall be entered in the
tax roll as a special charge against said parcel of land, and the same shall be collected in
all respects like other special charges upon real estate under Wis. Stats. Sect. 66.0627.
Section 7.05 Condominiums, Mobile Home Parks, Residences above Businesses.
The City will not provide collectable recycling service or garbage service to residential properties
physically located above commercial properties, to mobile home parks, or to condominiums.
Section 7.06 Multifamily source.
1. Garbage and collectable recyclables shall not be collected from any multifamily source. All
owners or designated agents of multifamily dwellings shall be responsible for the proper and
sanitary transportation of garbage and collectable recyclables generated from multifamily
sources in compliance with all federal, state and local laws and regulations.
2. Owners or designated agents of multifamily dwellings and other areas where the city does not
provide collectable recycling service or garbage service shall be responsible to:
a. Provide adequate separate containers for recyclable materials;
b. Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the dwelling and at
least semiannually thereafter about the established recycling programs;
c. Provide for the collection of materials separated from the solid waste by tenants
and the delivery of the materials to a recycling material facility;
d. Notify tenants of the reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which includes
materials collected, how to prepare the materials in order to meet the
processing requirement, collection methods or sites, locations and hours of
operation, and a contact person or company, including the name, address and
telephone number.
e. The requirements of subsection (2) a, b, c and d of this section will not apply to
the owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings if the
postconsumer waste generated within the dwelling is treated at a processing
facility licensed by the state department of natural resources which recovers
8
collectable recyclables from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically
feasible.
Section 7.07 Commercial, Institutional and Manufacturing Sources.
1. Garbage and collectable recyclables shall not be collected from any commercial,
institutional, or manufacturing sources. All owners or designated agents of commercial,
institutional, and manufacturing sources shall be responsible for the proper and sanitary
transportation of garbage and collectable recyclables generated from commercial,
institutional, and manufacturing sources in compliance with all federal, state and local
laws and regulations.
2. Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of commercial, institutional, and
manufacturing parcels. Owners or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and
properties shall:
a. Provide adequate, separate containers for recyclable material.
b. Notify in writing, at least semiannually, all users, tenants and occupants of the
properties about the established recycling program.
c. Provide for the collection of materials separated from the solid waste by the
users, tenants and occupants, and the delivery of the materials to a recycling
facility.
d. Notify users, tenants and occupants of reasons to reduce and recycle, which
materials are collected, how to prepare materials in order to meet the
processing requirements, collection methods or site, locations and hours of
operation, and a contact person or company, including a name, address and
telephone number.
e. The requirements of subsection (2) a, b, c and d of this section do not apply to
owners or designated agents of commercial, institutional and manufacturing
parcels if the postconsumer waste generated within the facility or property is
treated at a processing facility licensed by the state department of natural
resources that recovers for recycling the collectable recyclables from solid waste
in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
Section 7.08 Enclosures for Private Collection Receptacles.
1. All property upon which private collection receptacle(s) are stored which are not subject
to refuse and recycle storage requirements under any site plan approval from the City
Planning Commission, shall store such private collection receptacles in a garage or other
permitted enclosure. When such garage or other permitted enclosure or outbuilding is
not available, the private collection receptacle(s) shall be screened from view of any
observer located at the property line or any public right-of-way. The receptacle shall be
placed on a concrete pad in an easily accessible location for collection by haulers.
9
Concrete pads shall extend 1-1/2 feet beyond the container on all sides and be level.
When located in a commercial zoning district, the enclosure must be made of brick,
textured concrete masonry units, and/or wood. When located in an industrial zoning
district, the enclosure must be made of brick, textured concrete masonry units, wood,
and/or chain-link with slats. All private collection receptacles shall be stored with lids
completely closed and away from all heat sources. All screening shall be properly
maintained and in a good state of repair.
2. The building inspector or his/her designee shall have the authority to order that any
exterior storage of garbage, recyclables, or refuse be enclosed in a structure if, in the
building inspector's determination, the storage of such garbage, recyclables, or refuse is
unsanitary or creates or tends to create a nuisance to public health or safety. Such
enclosure shall meet the following requirements:
a. Use of such enclosure shall be limited to the storage of private collection
receptacles; and
b. The enclosure shall be 100 percent impervious to sight; and
c. The enclosure shall be equipped with a gate, and both the gate and the
enclosure shall be constructed of vinyl, brick, masonry or composite wood
which matches the primary structure. Chain link fence with slats is not
permitted.
d. The enclosure shall be at least one foot higher than the receptacle(s) but no
higher than six feet. No refuse or recycle may be stored higher than the
enclosure.
e. The refuse recycle storage area shall have a concrete pad.
f. Landscaping is required around screening walls wherever they abut a non-paved
surface or a required landscape area.
Section 7.09 Preparation of Brush and Yard Waste; Other Special Collections.
1. Brush and yard waste may be collected during special collection periods as determined
by the Public Works Committee and Council. When collected, brush and yard waste
shall be prepared as follows:
(a) Brush shall be placed in stacks aligned perpendicular to the curb with the butt
ends facing the street, and shall not obstruct either the street (and gutters) or
sidewalk. Brush piles are limited to a pile size of 4’ high, 6’ wide, and 10’ long. In
areas where there are no sidewalks, brush shall be placed within four feet of the
curb line and placed in stacks aligned perpendicular to the curb line and in such
a manner as to not interfere with the flow of water in the gutters. Brush shall
not be larger than 6’ in diameter. The city will not collect logs, brush, or stumps
generated by the clearing of land. Brush shall be placed curbside the Sunday
prior to the week of pickup.
10
(b) Yard waste and leaves shall be placed in 32 gallon kraft bags, placed within six
feet of the curb line and in such a manner as not to interfere with the flow of
water through the gutters nor to obstruct the sidewalk or street. Yard waste
shall be placed curbside by the Sunday prior to the week of pickup.
2. The City may provide for the special collection of Christmas trees, storm damage, and
other materials as determined by the Public Works Committee and Council.
Section 7.10 Disposal of Hazardous and Other Non-Collectable Items.
The following materials shall not be collected by the City and the owner and/or occupant of any
premises shall be responsible for the proper disposal of such materials:
(1) Televisions, electronics and computer equipment.
(2) Fluorescent light bulbs and light ballasts.
(3) Construction debris and concrete.
(4) Propane tanks
(5) Waste tires.
(6) Batteries.
(7) Wastes as identified in Section 7.12.
(8) Postconsumer Waste
Section 7.11 Authority to Direct the Disposal of Solid Waste.
1. Disposal at the direction of the Public Works Superintendent. All solid waste, whether
collected by the City pursuant to this chapter or collected privately, shall be disposed of
as directed by the Public Works Superintendent or as otherwise provided by law. Solid
waste shall not be buried on any premises within the city, and no person shall burn solid
waste outdoors at any time within the city limits.
2. Solid waste on public streets. It shall be unlawful for any patron or person to deposit,
throw, place or leave any solid waste upon any street, court, lane, park, sidewalk, alley,
business, public enclosure, body of water, or other public place, or within or upon any
private property or premises whether owned by, kept, or controlled by such person or
not, unless the same shall be placed in containers as herein provided.
3. Disruption of collectable solid waste placed for collection unlawful. Except upon the
direction of the Public Works Superintendent, no person shall upset or break open any
bag or upset or remove the cover of any container or polycart placed in the manner
provided for by this chapter for garbage or recyclable collection or otherwise remove
the contents of any such receptacle in any street, alley or other public place.
11
4. Prohibitions on disposable recyclable materials separated for recycling. No person may
dispose of in a solid waste disposal facility or burn in a solid waste treatment facility any
collectable recyclables which have been separated for recycling.
Section 7.12 Disposal of Certain Solid Wastes.
1. Disposal of animal offal and other offensive wastes. Animal offal and other offensive
waste, including dead animals, fish, fowl, manure and nightsoil may not be placed for
collection by the City. It is the responsibility of the owner or possessor of such animals
to dispose the waste in a sanitary manner. The excrement/fecal waste of domesticated
animals allowed upon in residentially zoned parcels shall be allowed for municipal
collection provided such excrement/fecal waste is properly packaged and disposed of so
as to not leak, leach or spill into the polycart or overflow bag.
2. Cinders and ashes. Cinders and ashes or any smoldering embers shall not be placed for
collection.
3. Disposal of infectious material. The removal of apparel, bedding or other refuse from
homes or places where highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed shall be
performed under the supervision and direction of the County Health Department. Such
waste shall not be placed curbside for collection with normal garbage or collectable
recyclables.
4. Hazardous and/or toxic waste. Placing or depositing any hazardous or toxic waste
including, without limitation, explosive materials such as dynamite, dynamite caps,
shotgun shells, rifle cartridges, gunpowder, gasoline or other similar material in a
disposable bag, polycart, recyclable box or bundle for collection is prohibited.
5. Questions concerning disposal. When any patron is in doubt as to proper preparation,
handling and disposal of any type of solid waste, he or she shall communicate with the
Public Works Superintendent for information concerning handling and disposal.
Section 7.13 Collection Regulation and Licenses
(1) No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in, exercise, or carry on a trade or business of
picking up and hauling solid waste in the city of Wisconsin Rapids without first obtaining a license
therefore, as provided herein, nor continue in such a business after such license has been revoked.
(2) All vehicles used for the transportation of solid waste shall be of substantial construction and
the body shall be water tight or of a design approved by the public works committee as acceptable for
transporting solid waste. All vehicles used in the transportation of solid waste shall be constructed and
loaded in such manner as to prevent the contents from blowing or falling from said vehicle while either
moving or standing.
(3) License fee and Number Issued. The yearly fee for any person, firm, or corporation engaging in
the trade or business of picking up or hauling solid waste shall be as set by resolution of the Council.
Said license shall expire on July 1 of each year, and no reduction shall be made in the fee for a period of
12
less than one year. Said fee shall be paid to the city treasurer prior to the issuance or renewal of any
such license. Licenses for persons, clubs, or organizations engaged in transporting material to the
compost center for residents shall be free of charge.
(4) Applications for the license required by this section shall be reviewed by and approved by the
Public Works Committee. Application shall be made on forms furnished by the city clerk. The license
may be issued by the city clerk upon approval of the applicant by the Public Works Committee and the
filing of the necessary bond.
(5) Every person desiring a license required by this section shall, prior to the issuance thereof, enter
into a bond to the City of Wisconsin Rapids with such sureties as may be approved by the Public Works
Committee in a penal sum of $200 conditioned for the observance of all ordinances of the City of
Wisconsin Rapids now in force or hereafter passed regulating or pertaining to such business. Proof of
insurance shall be required.
(6) The license issued pursuant to this section shall state the name of the licensee, and the fee,
address of the place of business, type of business carried on, and the name or names of the bondsmen.
(7) No license shall be transferred from the licensee to any other person, firm, or corporation
without the approval of the Public Works Committee.
(8) Failure to comply with the following operational rules and regulations will result in the
revocation of the license to operate in the City of Wisconsin Rapids:
(a) The licensee must be properly licensed by the Department of Natural Resources of the
State of Wisconsin and must display a Wisconsin state permit/license number on his/her
vehicle.
(b) All containers placed at a commercial, industrial, governmental, institutional, or multifamily
account of the licensee shall have the name of the licensee displayed on the
containers.
(c) Licensees shall be responsible for cleaning up any debris spilled, dumped, or blown from
his/her collection vehicle while traveling or collecting within the city limits.
(d) The licensee shall pay the city for depositing any solid waste in the landfill owned and
operated by the city. The rate shall be determined by the Public Works Committee and
Council.
(9) Commercial, institutional, manufacturing governmental, or industrial firms or agencies may
transport solid waste generated by their own firm without a license, but may not engage in picking up or
transporting the solid waste generated by another person without obtaining a license, regardless of
whether or not there is a monetary exchange for the service.
Section 7.14 Compost site regulations.
1. The City may maintain compost sites for yard waste drop off. No bags or reusable
containers may be disposed of at the compost site, other than plastic bags which may
be deposited in the containers marked for same. Compost sites are for City residents,
13
and for other persons who live in a municipality who has an agreement with the City to
provide compost services to that municipality, for a fee.
2. Persons transporting yard waste shall cover or otherwise contain the waste in such a
manner as to prevent scattering or dumping of yard waste in transport.
3. The hours of operation of the compost site shall be published by the Department of
Public Works.
4. Composted material may be available for City residents’ use.
5. Yard waste from commercial operations is prohibited, except as may be allowed with a
permit approved by the Department of Public Works.
6. Home composting is encouraged by the city. Bins, compost piles, etc., shall be located in
a rear yard, screened from the view of neighbors' living areas, and maintained in a clean
odor-free condition.
7. No compost materials shall be deposited at the compost drop-off sites or outside of the
facility fence and/or gates except in the areas and/or containers designated for
compost. Persons depositing unauthorized material or material in areas not specifically
designated for compost material shall be subject to the penalties as provided in this
ordinance.
Section 7.15 City Demolition and Other Sites.
1. Clean concrete, tree trunks, stumps, bituminous pavement, dirt, or sand may be deposited at
sites as determined by the Public Works Superintendent. A charge as approved by the Public
Works Committee may be made for the disposal of such material.
2. Any material resulting from the removal of trees, or brush larger than six inches in diameter,
may be deposited at sites as specifically designated by the City.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb, remove, or carry away any material or property
from any landfill or site owned or operated by the City without written approval of the Public
Works Superintendent.
4. It shall be unlawful for any person not residing within the City of Wisconsin Rapids to deposit
any waste at any City demolition site and further, it shall be unlawful for any person to deposit
any such material generated outside of the corporate limits of the City in said city sites.
Section 7.16 Enforcement Provisions and Penalties
1. Enforcement by Public Works Department. For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the
provisions of this chapter in regard to recyclables, any authorized officer, employee or
representative of the Public Works Department may inspect recyclable materials separated for
recycling, solid waste intended for disposal, recycling collection sites and facilities, collection
vehicles, collection areas of multiple-family dwellings, and nonresidential facilities and
14
properties, and any records relating to recycling activities which shall be kept confidential when
necessary to protect proprietary information. No person may refuse access to any authorized
officer, employee or authorized representative of the Public Works Department who requests
access for purposes of inspection and who presents appropriate credentials. No person may
obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such inspection. The Public Works Superintendent or his
designee may issue citations for violations of this chapter.
2. If the owner, occupant or lessee of any premises shall neglect or refuse to clean up and remove
from the premises any solid waste when ordered to do so by the City, the owner, occupant or
lessee shall be liable for the penalty provided for violation of this chapter. The waste may be
collected by the Public Works Department and the entire cost so incurred shall be entered in the
tax roll as a special charge against said parcel of land, and the same shall be collected in all respects
like other special charges upon real estate under Wis. Stats. Sect. 66.0627.
3. Should the accumulation occur on any street, alley or public thoroughfare, the waste may be
collected by the Public Works Superintendent and the entire cost so incurred shall be entered in
the tax roll as a special charge against said parcel of land, and the same shall be collected in all
respects like other special charges upon real estate under Wis. Stats. Sect. 66.0627.
4. Failure to comply. The Public Works Superintendent may refuse to furnish collection service to
any person not complying or refusing to comply with this chapter or the rules and regulations
made by the Public Works Committee or other orders of the Public Works Superintendent or
health department for the collection or disposal of solid wastes.
5. Prosecution. When services for collection of solid waste have been withdrawn by the Public
Works Superintendent from any person for failure to comply with such rules and regulations
resulting in the accumulation of Landfill Waste or other solid wastes on his premises, which is
offensive or a public nuisance, that person may be prosecuted under any ordinance of the city
regulating the same.
6. Penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance or who refuses to obey any
order issued under this ordinance shall be subject to a forfeiture collected by municipal citation.
The issuance of the citation shall not preclude proceeding under any other ordinance or law
relating to the same matter. Proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same
matter shall not preclude the issuance of a citation under this subsection. Penalties for violating
this ordinance, except as specifically provided elsewhere in this ordinance, shall be $25 for a first
offense, $50 for a second offense, and $100 for each subsequent offense, together with the
costs of the action. Upon default or refusal to pay such forfeiture, the person may be
imprisoned for not more than 60 days or may have motor vehicle operating privileges revoked
as provided by law. Each 24-hour period of violation, disobedience, omission, neglect or refusal
to obey this ordinance or any order in accordance therewith shall be deemed a separate
offense.
Chapter 8 Sewage Regulations
8.01 General Provisions.
8.02 Definitions.
8.03 Sewer Service Area.
8.04 Obligations of Contract Communities.
8.05 Connections to City Sewage Collection System.
8.06 Private Sewage Disposal.
8.07 Limitations on Discharges to the Sewers Applicable to All Users.
8.08 Additional Prohibitions and Requirements for Industrial Users.
8.09 Special Requirements for Dental Clinics.
8.10 Wastewater Discharge Permits.
8.11 Pretreatment and Other Obligations for Significant Industrial Users.
8.12 Special Agreements.
8.13 Limitations on Discharges of Hauled Wastes.
8.14 Determination of Sewer Service Charges in General.
8.15 Sewer Service Charges and Rates.
8.16 Service Agreements.
8.17 Billing and Collections.
8.18 Enforcement, Abatement, and Penalties.
8.19 Appeals.
8.20 Schedule of Sewer Charges.
8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(1) Purpose. The City has provided facilities for the collection and treatment of
wastewater to promote the health, safety, and convenience of its people and to
safeguard public water resources. In furtherance of these goals, this ordinance
regulates the use of public and private sewers and drains, disposal of holding tank
wastes into the public sewers, and the discharge of waters and wastes into the
Sewerage System. It provides for Wastewater treatment service charges, sets
uniform requirements for discharges into the Sewerage System, and sets
requirements for connections to sanitary sewers within the City. This ordinance
provides a means for determining Wastewater volumes, constituents, and
characteristics; the setting of charges and fees; and the issuing of permits to certain
Users. Revenues derived from the application of this Ordinance shall be used to
defray the City’s costs of operating and maintaining adequate Wastewater facilities
and to provide sufficient funds for capital outlay, debt service costs, and capital
improvements. It enables the City to comply with administrative provisions, water
quality requirements, toxic and pretreatment effluent standards, and other discharge
criteria which are required or authorized by the State of Wisconsin and/or Federal
law.
(2) Right of Entry and Access.
(a) General Right of Entry. Any duly authorized employee or representative of
the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be allowed access
to all property serviced by the City, for the purpose of inspection,
2
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing of discharges to the
Wastewater facilities and for the purpose of inspection, repair, or
maintenance of any portion of the City’s Wastewater facilities.
(b) Right to Enter Easements. Any duly authorized employee or representative
of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted
to enter all private properties through which the City holds an easement for
the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the Sewerage System
lying within said easement, all subject to the terms, if any, of such easement.
(c) Safety. While performing the necessary work on private premises referred
to in subs (1) and (2) above, the duly authorized employee or representative
of the City shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the User. The User shall be held harmless for injury or death
to the City’s duly authorized employees or representatives. The city shall
indemnify the User against loss or damage to its property by said duly
authorized employees or representatives and against liability claims and
demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the User
and growing out of the flow metering and sampling operation, except as such
may be caused by negligence or failure of the user to maintain safe
conditions.
(3) Obstructions to City Facilities.
(a) All persons, firms, or corporations lawfully having buildings, structures,
works, conduits, mains, pipes, tracks, or other physical obstructions in, over
or under the public lands, avenues, streets, alleys or highways which block
or impede the progress of City facilities when in the course of construction,
establishment, or repair shall upon reasonable notice by the City, promptly
so shift, adjust, accommodate, or remove the same at the cost and expense of
such persons, firms, or corporations, as fully to meet the exigency occurring
such notice.
(b) Any person, firm, or corporation who shall fail to comply with the provisions
of this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 8.18.
(4) General Rules of Interpretation.
(a) Superseding Previous Ordinances. This Ordinance supersedes all previous
regulations and ordinances of the City which are in conflict herewith.
(b) The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this ordinance
shall not affect the validity of any other part of this ordinance which can be
given effect without such invalid part or parts.
(c) Amendment. The City reserves the right to amend this Ordinance in whole
or in part whenever it may deem necessary, but such right will be exercised
only after due notice to all persons concerned and proper hearing on the
proposed amendment.
(d) The city shall be responsible for the interpretation and execution of the
provisions of this ordinance.
3
8.02 DEFINITIONS.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this
ordinance shall be as follows:
(1) Applicable Pretreatment Standard: shall mean the most restrictive provisions
contained in any pretreatment limitations or prohibitive standards (enacted by any
federal, state or local governmental entity) and incorporated in this Ordinance,
which Applicable Pretreatment Standard shall be complied with by non-domestic
Wastewater users of the Sewerage System.
(2) Best Management Practices (BMPs): shall mean structural or non-structural
measures, practices, operating procedures, schedules of activities, treatment
requirements, techniques or devices employed to minimize or treat the discharge of
pollutants into the Sewerage System; to implement prohibitions listed in Wis.
Admin. Code § NR 211.10(1) or (2); or to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage areas. BMPs may
be specified (i) by EPA and/or DNR categorical regulations, or (ii) by the City for
Significant Industrial Users and non-significant industrial, institutional, and
commercial users.
(3) Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD5): shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions
in five days at 20oC, expressed in milligrams per liter. Determination of BOD5 shall
be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. Acceptable
test method(s) shall be as indicated in Chapter NR 219 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(3) Building Drain: shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which received the discharge from all soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer.
(4) Building Sewer: shall mean the extension from the building drain beginning at the
immediate outside foundation wall to its connection with the sewage collection
system or other point of disposal that conveys sanitary and/or industrial wastewater.
(5) City: shall mean the governing authority of the City of Wisconsin Rapids, or their
duly authorized deputies, agents, or representatives.
(6) Clear Water: shall mean wastewater other than storm water, having no impurities or
where impurities are below a minimum concentration considered harmful by the
City, including but not limited to noncontact cooling water and potable water
discharged to the Sewerage System to prevent freezing of underground pipes in the
water system.
(7) Commercial User: shall mean any user whose premises are used primarily for the
conduct of profit-oriented enterprise in the fields of construction, wholesale or retail
trade, finance, insurance, real estate, or services, and who discharges primarily
domestic waste water. This definition shall include multi-family residences having
three or more units served by a single water meter.
4
(8) Contract Community. A city, village, town sanitary or utility district, or a county,
state, or federal agency which is billed by the City for sewerage services.
(9) Debt Service Charge: shall mean the annual payment of principal and interest for
the retirement of debt issued to finance the cost of capital improvements to the
sewerage system. This shall include the administrative costs associated with the debt
retirement.
(10) Detrimental Effect: shall mean a discharge to the Sewerage System that either alone
or in combination with other discharges would pass through or interfere with the
operation of the Sewerage System, cause the City to violate its WPDES permit, or
create or constitute a hazard to human health or the environment.
(11) DNR: shall mean the State of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(12) Domestic Waste Water: shall mean the combination of liquid and water carried
wastes discharged from toilets and other sanitary plumbing facilities in the amount
of approximately 100 gallons per capita per day from residential users and 15 to 20
gallons per employee per day from a place of business or industry and in which fiveday
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5), total suspended solids (TSS), total
kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN), and total phosphorus meet the following levels:
(a) A BOD5 concentration less than or equal to 300 mg/l;
(b) A TSS concentration less than or equal to 300 mg/l;
(c) A TKN concentration less than or equal to 40 mg/l as N;
(d) A Total Phosphorus concentration less than or equal to 8 mg/l as P.
(13) Fats, Oils, and Grease: shall mean a group of substances including fats, waxes, free
fatty acids, calcium and magnesium soaps, mineral oils, and certain other non-fatty
materials as analyzed in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
Acceptable test method(s) shall be as indicated in Chapter NR 219 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(14) Floatable Oil: shall mean fat, oil, or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from waste water by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A waste water shall be considered to be free of floatable oil if it is properly
pretreated to the extent that it does not result in increased maintenance requirements
for the sewerage system.
(15) Garbage: shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooling, and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
(16) Governmental User: shall mean all federal, state, and local governmental facilities
discharging waste water into the sewerage system.
(17) Grant: shall mean Federal and/or State financial assistance for the construction of
improvements to the sewerage system.
(18) Hauled Waste: shall mean Wastewater or waste sludges transported to and
discharged at the Sewage Treatment Plant. This includes but is not limited to
Holding Tank Wastes and Septage.
(19) Holding Tank Wastes: shall mean the liquid or solid contents of holding tanks or
portable restrooms.
5
(20) Industrial User: shall mean any person who engages in the manufacture or
production of goods and discharges Wastewater other than sanitary sewage into the
Sewage System.
(21) Industrial Waste water: shall mean any trade or process waste water as distinct from
domestic waste water.
(22) Infiltration: shall mean the water entering a sanitary sewer system and service
connections from the ground through such means as, but not limited to, defective
pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls.
(23) Inflow: shall mean the water discharged into a sanitary sewer system and service
connections from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar, yard, and
area drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs and
swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm sewers and combined
sewers, catch basins, storm waters, surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage.
(24) Institutional User: shall mean all schools, hospitals, churches, religious facilities,
nursing homes, clubs, fraternities, and similar facilities generally of non-profit
nature, not engaged in retail trade or in manufacturing.
(25) Interference: a discharge that alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges
from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the sewage treatment plant, its treatment
processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a
cause of a violation of the City’s WPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage
sludge use or disposal in compliance with any and all applicable Federal, State and
local regulations.
(26) Lateral: shall mean the extension from the building drain beginning at the immediate
outside foundation wall to its connection with the sewage collection system or other
point of disposal that conveys sanitary and/or industrial wastewater. The lateral is
not part of the sewage collection system, as that term is defined in sub (48). See
also “Building Sewer.”
(27) Main: shall mean the principal pipe or conduit in the Sewerage System that collects
and conveys sanitary and/or industrial sewage.
(28) May: shall be permissive.
(29) Municipal Code: shall mean the municipal code of the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
Abbreviated in this ordinance as “MC # XXX”.
(30) Natural Outlet: shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pool, ditch, lake, or other
body of surface or groundwater.
(31) Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Cost: shall mean all cost associated with the
operation and maintenance of the sewerage system, as well as the cost associated
with periodic equipment replacement necessary for maintaining capacities and
performance of the sewerage system.
(32) Ordinance: shall mean a statute or regulation enacted by a governing authority.
(33) Pass Through: A discharge which exits the sewage treatment plant into the waters
of the state of Wisconsin in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a
6
violation of any requirement of the City’s WPDES permit, including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation.
(34) Person: shall mean any individual, firm, company, partnership, municipality,
association, private or public, society, corporation, cooperative, institution,
enterprise, government agency, group, or other entity.
(35) pH: shall mean the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration in moles
per liter of solution. Determination of pH shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in Standard Methods. Acceptable test method(s) shall be as
indicated in Chapter NR 219 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(36) Pollutant: shall mean any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, refuse, oil, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive substance, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water.
(37) Pretreatment: shall mean reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in waste water to a
less harmful state prior to, or in lieu of, discharging such pollutants into the sewerage
system.
(38) Pretreatment Program: shall mean a program administered by the City that follows
the criteria established in Chapter NR 211 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(39) Pretreatment Standard: shall mean any regulation which applies to Industrial Users
and which contains pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the DNR in
accordance with Section 283 of the Wisconsin Statutes. This term shall include both
prohibited discharge standards set forth in or established under NR 211 and
categorical pretreatment standards set forth in NR 211 and in NR 221 through NR
297 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(40) Properly Shredded Garbage: shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely with the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers,
with no particle greater than one-half inch in dimension.
(41) Private Sewage System: shall mean a system comprised of a septic tank and effluent
absorption area designed for the purpose of on-site processing of sewage. This term
shall also include holding tanks and other private sewage storage or disposal
systems.
(42) Replacement Costs: shall mean expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the
sewerage system to maintain the capacity and performance for which the sewerage
system facilities were designed and constructed.
(43) Residential User: shall mean an individual household unit and includes single
family, duplex, and apartment units. It includes each residential unit serviced by a
separate water meter. Boarding houses or institutions having a common water meter
serving several non-related occupants are not included.
(44) Residential User Flow Equivalent: shall mean the domestic waste water flow, in
gallons per day, representative of the average residential user. This value shall be
7
calculated as the total metered water flow for all residential users divided by the
number of residential users.
(45) Sanitary Sewer: shall mean the city sewers which carry sewage, and to which storm,
surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
(46) Septage: shall mean the liquid or solid contents of septic tanks, dosing chambers,
seepage beds, seepage pits, seepage trenches, or privies. Septage does not include
waste from a grease trap or grease interceptor.
(47) Sewage: shall mean any combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residential, commercial, institutional, governmental, and industrial users, together
with unintentionally admitted infiltration/inflow..
(48) Sewage Collection System: shall mean a system of sanitary sewers owned,
maintained, operated, and controlled by the City. The facilities which convey waste
water from individual structures and/or from private property, including laterals, to
the public sewer or its equivalent, are specifically excluded from the definition, with
the exception of pumping units and pressurized lines for individual structures or
groups of structures when such units are owned and maintained by the City.
(49) Sewage Treatment Plant: shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures used
by the City for treating sewage.
(50) Sewerage System: shall mean all city facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and
disposing of sewage. The Sewerage System does not include plumbing inside and
in connection with building served, and laterals, from building to street main.
(51) Sewer Service Charge: shall mean a service charge levied on users of the sewerage
system and shall include the User Charge and the Debt Service Charge as defined
in Section 8.02 of this ordinance.
(52) Shall: shall mean mandatory. See also “May”.
(53) Significant Industrial User: shall have the meaning provided in Section 8.11(1).
(54) Slugs: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation
of the prohibited discharges of this Ordinance. Slugs are any discharges of a nonroutine,
episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary
batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause Interference
or Pass Through, or in any other way violate the City’s WPDES Permit conditions.
(55) Standard Industrial Classification Manual: shall mean the reference document
prepared by the Office of Management and Budget, latest edition.
(56) Standard Methods: shall mean Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Waste water as published by American Public Health Association, American Water
Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation, latest edition.
(57) Storm Drain (sometimes termed Storm Sewer): shall mean a city sewer which
carries storm and surface waters and drainage but excludes domestic and industrial
waste waters, other than unpolluted cooling water.
(58) Storm water: shall mean runoff from precipitation including rain, snow, ice melt or
similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
(59) Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN): shall mean the total of organic and ammonia
nitrogen present in a waste water sample. Determination of TKN shall be made in
8
accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. Acceptable test
method(s) shall be as indicated in Chapter NR 219 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code.
(60) Total Phosphorus: shall mean total phosphorus in waste water which may be present
in any of three principle forms: orthophosphate, polyphosphate, and organic
phosphate. Determination of total phosphorus shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in Standard Methods. Acceptable test method(s) shall be as
indicated in Chapter NR 219 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(61) Total Suspended Solids (TSS): shall mean solids that either float on the surface of,
or are in suspension in, water, waste water, or other liquids, and that are removable
by laboratory filtering. Determination of TSS shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in Standard Methods. Acceptable test method(s) shall be as
indicated in Chapter NR 219 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(62) Toxic Pollutant: shall mean those pollutants or combination of pollutants, including
disease-causing agents, which after discharge and upon exposure, ingestion,
inhalation or assimilation into any organism, either directly from the environment
or indirectly by ingestion through food chains, will, on the basis of information
available to the DNR, cause death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer,
genetic mutations, or physiological malfunctions in such organisms or their
offspring.
(63) User: shall mean a residential, commercial, institutional, governmental, or industrial
establishment which discharges waste water to the sewerage system.
(64) User Charge: shall mean a charge levied on users of the sewerage system for the
cost of operation and maintenance of the sewerage system as defined in Section
35.905-26, Title 40 USC. The user charge shall be contained within the Sewer
Service Charge as created by this Ordinance. The User Charge shall also include
Replacement Costs as defined in Section 8.02 of this ordinance, administrative costs
associated with operation and maintenance of the sewerage system, and sewer
service charge billing costs.
(65) User Classes: shall mean residential, institutional, commercial, governmental, and
industrial categories of users.
(66) Unaltered Water: shall mean waters which are not changed chemically or physically
as a result of use.
(67) Waste water: shall mean any discharge from any residential, commercial,
governmental, institutional, or industrial user into the sewerage system. See also
“Domestic Waste water” and “Industrial Waste water”.
(68) Watercourse: shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
(69) Wisconsin Administrative Code: shall mean the published rules of executive
agencies having rule-making authority for the State of Wisconsin, latest edition.
(70) WPDES: shall mean Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit as
issued by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
9
8.03 SEWER SERVICE AREA
The service area of the City shall include those areas inside the corporate limits of the City
and those areas contracting with the City for service. The sewer service area outside of the
corporate limits of the City is limited to those areas being served by the City as of
September 1, 2016, as shown on maps and/or descriptions of the areas maintained by the
City Clerk.
8.04 OBLIGATIONS OF CONTRACT COMMUNITIES
(1) All Contract Communities shall comply with the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code
§ NR 210.23 to establish and implement a capacity, management, operation and
maintenance program (CMOM). Contract Communities shall prepare written
documentation of the CMOM program components and provide a copy of such
documentation to the City upon request. The CMOM program shall ensure that
provisions of Wis. Admin. Code § NR 210.23.
(2) In the event of a bypass or spill of wastewater from any sanitary sewer owned or
operated by a Contract Community which results in a sanitary sewer overflow or
building backup, the Contract Community shall notify the City and the Department
of Natural Resources immediately upon becoming aware of the situation. The
notification shall include the location of the bypass/spill, the reason for the
bypass/spill, when the situation is expected to be corrected, and an estimate of the
volume or rate of the bypass/spill in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § NR
210.23. A corrective action plan and other necessary requirements to eliminate
future sanitary sewer overflows at this location shall be developed by the Contract
Community which complies with Wis. Admin. Code § NR 210.23.
(3) Contract Communities shall submit applicable parts of the Compliance
Maintenance Annual Report (CMAR) to the City for review upon request.
(4) Contract Communities and their users shall follow Best Management Practices
applicable to their particular discharge which may be developed or cited by the City
for the discharge of any constituents, substances, materials, waters, or waste where
the City determines that following these BMPs is necessary to meet the objectives
of this Section or the conditions of the City’s WPDES permit.
(5) Contract Communities may be required to submit a system evaluation and capacity
assurance plan should any of the conditions exist as defined in Wis. Admin. Code §
NR 210.24.
8.05. CONNECTIONS TO CITY SEWAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM
(1) Connections Required.
(a) Persons owning dwellings or other buildings used for manufacturing or trade
within the jurisdiction of the City, that generate domestic and/or industrial
waste water, shall cause such buildings to be connected to the sewage
collection system within 30 days after the sewage collection system is
accessible thereto.
10
(b) Upon determination of non-compliance, the city shall issue an order
requiring such person to connect to the sewage collection system. Such an
order shall be delivered to the person by registered mail. The person shall
report the day of the completion thereof to the City. In the event the person
does not comply with such order, the city may bring an action for the
violation of this ordinance or proceed to have such connections made by a
licensed plumber, under the direction of the City, and charge the cost of such
work as a special charge against such property.
(c) The person, or the person’s contractor, shall obtain the necessary city permits
prior to commencing work required to make said connection.
(d) The City shall maintain sewer service within the boundaries of the sanitary
sewer service area for the sanitary sewer mains without expense to the Users,
except when they are damaged as a result of negligence, intentional conduct,
or an ordinance violation on the part of the User. All laterals from the mains,
to and throughout the User’s premises, must be maintained free of defective
conditions, by and at the expense of the User.
(2) General Requirements for Sewer Connections.
(a) New connections to the sewage collection system will be allowed only if
there is available capacity in all of the downstream sewerage system.
(b) No unauthorized person shall alter, disturb, or uncover any connections with
or opening into any sewerage system facility without first obtaining written
permission from the City.
(c) Each separate cut or opening in any street, alley, or public thoroughfare shall
require payment of a minimum fee as specified by the City. Fees are to be
paid upon application for permit. An excavating permit shall be applied for
and received before excavating in any street, alley, or other public way to
repair, alter, or make any installation below the surface, or whenever opening
surfaces are necessitated to accommodate surface installations.
(d) Every house or building must be separately and independently connected
with the sanitary sewer, except in cases where a house or building stands in
the rear of another or an interior lot. See also State of Wisconsin Plumbing
Code.
(i) All house sanitary and storm sewer piping extending from the service
lateral or other disposal terminal to within three to five feet of the
outside foundation walls or any building must consist of cast iron soil
pipe or schedule 40 PVC pipe with a minimum coverage of four feet
and conforming to the standards established in Wis. Admin. Code ch.
SPS 384.
(ii) All sanitary and storm drains inside the building and to a point three
to five feet of the outside foundation walls of any building must
consist of cast iron soil pipe or schedule 40 PVC Pipe with adequately
sealed joints and conforming to the standards established in Wis.
Admin. Code chs. SPS 382 and 384.
11
(iii) No master plumber or other authorized person shall lay and connect
with any sanitary and/or storm sewer pipe that is cracked, damaged,
or of an inferior grade or quality, under penalty as is herein provided.
(e) All users shall keep their own building sewers and building drains in good
repair and protected from frost, at their own risk and expense, and shall
prevent any unnecessary overburdening of those facilities.
(f) The City and its duly authorized representatives shall not be liable for
damages occasioned by reason of the breaking, clogging, stoppage, or
freezing of any building sewers or building drains; nor from any damage
arising from repairing mains, making connections or extensions or any other
work that may be deemed necessary. The City reserves the right to cut off
the sanitary sewer service at any time for the purpose of repairs, or any other
necessary purpose, and permit granted or regulation to the contrary
notwithstanding. Whenever it shall become necessary to shut off the sanitary
sewer service, the City shall, if practicable, give notice to each and every
consumer affected.
(g) No user shall allow others or other services to connect to the sewage
collection system through the user’s building sewers and building drains.
(3) New Building Sewer Connections.
(a) All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the User. The User shall indemnify the City
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
(b) Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found on examination and test by the City to meet all
requirements of this ordinance.
(c) The size, slope, alignment, materials for construction of a building sewer,
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 382. In the absence of code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in Gravity
Sanitary Sewer Design and Construction (MOP FD5), as published by the
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) and Water Environment
Federation (WEF), latest edition, shall apply.
(d) Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the sanitary sewer, waste water
carried by such a building drain shall be lifted and discharged to the building
sewer by facilities conforming to Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 382.
(e) No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains, basement sump pumps, or other sources of surface
runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a sanitary sewer.
12
(f) The connection of the building sewer into the sanitary sewer shall conform
to the requirements of this Section.
(g) The person applying for the building sewer permit shall notify the City when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the sanitary
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the City.
(h) All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to minimize the hazard to the public welfare
and safety. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed
in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
City.
(i) Except upon application made with written permission of the City, ample
width of roadway shall be maintained at all times for the continuous safe use
and passage of one lane of traffic. Flagpersons shall be provided when the
amount of traffic on the street requires it as determined by the City. The
traveled portion of the street shall be kept free from machinery, tools,
excavated materials, or other obstruction at all times. All hot mixed
bituminous and concrete surfaces shall be machine cut. Balling of concrete
and hot mix bituminous is prohibited.
(j) No plumber, pipe fitter, or other person will be permitted to do any plumbing
or pipe fitting work in connection with the sewage collection system without
first receiving a license from the State of Wisconsin, and posting an
appropriate bond as specified by the City, except in cases where State Law
permits persons owning buildings to do their own work without being
licensed.
(4) Connection of New Sewers to Existing Sewerage System.
(a) Any person located within the sanitary sewer service area desiring to connect
a proposed new sanitary sewer extension to the Sewerage System shall make
a written application to the City for permission to make such connection or
use. The application shall include a statement of the location or locations at
which it is desired to connect, and a statement of the character of the waste
water to be transmitted.
(a) The City shall be responsible for review and approval of all proposed sanitary
sewer extensions. All costs and expenses incident to the design and bidding
including engineering, permits and other fees associated with the connection
or hookup to the sewerage system shall be borne by the person requesting the
extension. Prior to the design of a sanitary sewer extension, the person
requesting the extension shall secure and furnish proof of an escrow account
for the estimated amount of the design costs, the amount to be determined by
the City. The account shall be so arranged and an escrow agreement executed
between the person, the financial institution and the city to allow the latter to
withdraw amounts from the account. The account shall be sufficient to cover
payments to all parties under contract with the city for the design of the
13
sanitary sewer extension. This money will not be refunded if the project does
not proceed to construction.
(b) The person requesting the sanitary sewer extension shall assist in securing
all required utility easements, the location and width of which shall be
determined by the City. The City will furnish blank easement forms to the
person who will be responsible for the proper legal description of the
easement parcel and for the proper execution of the easement by the grantor.
All completed easements shall be submitted to the City, designated as the
grantee for its review, and shall be recorded at the County Register of Deeds
office by the City.
(c) The person requesting the sanitary sewer extension shall also execute any
other special agreements deemed necessary by the City.
(d) Prior to permitting such connection or use, the City may investigate, or cause
to be investigated, the sanitary sewer extension for which such connection or
use is requested. If the City finds such system to be in a satisfactory
condition, it will grant a permit for such connection or use. If the City finds
such system to be defective in operation, construction, design, or
maintenance, the City will so notify the person and will advise the person
that upon completion of specified alterations, new construction, or changes
in supervision or operation, a permit will be granted. Should the plans or
specifications not be approved, one copy will be returned to the applicant
who will be informed as to the reason for non-approval.
(e) During the construction of any sanitary sewer extension which the City has
approved, the City may, from time to time, observe construction of the same
to see that said work is being done in accordance with the approved plans
and specifications. Failure to make such observations shall not nullify the
rights of the City to require reconstruction should non-adherence to approved
plans and specifications be subsequently discovered. Every person in the
construction of laterals or sanitary sewer extensions, within its jurisdiction,
shall require that such construction be under the direction of a Wisconsin
Registered Professional Engineer or Licensed Master Plumber, as applicable,
if plan approval was obtained under their license. The Professional Engineer
or Master Plumber shall keep accurate records of the location, depth, and
length of the sewers as built, and of the location of the Y-branches or slants.
(f) All proposed sanitary sewer connections shall be made at a manhole with the
flow lines of the connecting sewer being at or below the manhole shelf or the
connection shall be made through an approved drop. At least 24 hours before
connection is to be made, notice of such intent must be given to the City.
When the actual connection is made, it must be done in the presence of a
construction observer representing the City.
8.06 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
14
(1) Sewer Collection Unavailable. Where sewage collection is not available, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage system complying with the
following provisions.
(2) Permits Required. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage
system, persons shall first obtain a written permit signed by the City. The application
for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city which the person shall
supplement by any plans, specifications, and/or other information as is deemed
necessary by the City.
(3) Effective Date and Inspection. A permit for a private sewage system shall not
become effective until the installation is completed and approved by the City. The
city shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and in any
event, the person applying for the permit shall notify the city when the work is ready
for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The
inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the City.
(4) Compliance with State Law. The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private
sewage system shall comply with Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383. The person shall
operate and maintain the private sewage system in accordance with Wis. Admin.
Code ch. SPS 383. No statement contained in this article shall be construed to
interfere with, or contradict, any requirements that may be imposed by Wis. Admin.
Code ch. 383.
(5) Sewer Connections Available. At such time as the sewage collection system
becomes available to a property served by a private sewage system, a direct
connection shall be made to such sewage collection system in compliance with this
ordinance, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage systems shall
be abandoned in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383.
8.07 LIMITATIONS ON DISCHARGES TO THE SEWERS APPLICABLE TO ALL
USERS.
All Users shall comply with the requirements of this section.
(1) General Requirements.
(a) No Person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water or clear
water drains of any kind, including subsoil and building drain tile drains, into
a sewer designed or designated as a sanitary sewer. If storm water or clear
water is being discharged into a sanitary sewer, the city shall give the person
offending 15 days' notice to disconnect. Failure to disconnect after such
notice shall authorize the city to disconnect and assess the costs of such
disconnection against the property involved. The city shall have the
alternative right at the end of such notice to institute action for violation of
this ordinance.
(b) Discharges to the public sewerage system of substances, materials, waters or
waste shall be limited to concentrations or quantities that will not harm the
sewers, Wastewater treatment process or equipment; will not have an adverse
effect on receiving waters; will not have an adverse effect on the City’s
15
biosolids management program; will not endanger persons or property; will
not cause adverse environmental effects; and will not constitute a public
nuisance.
(c) No Person shall discharge pollutants into the Sewerage System which pass
through or interfere with the operation or performance of the City’s
Treatment Plant and thereby cause or significantly contribute to a violation
of the City’s WPDES permit and any modification or re-issuance thereof.
(d) Users shall follow Best Management Practices (BMPs) developed or cited
by the City for the discharge of any constituents, substances, materials,
waters, or waste where the City determines that following these BMPs is
necessary to meet the objectives of this Ordinance or the conditions of the
City’s WPDES permit.
(e) The City reserves the right to refuse or accept any and all industrial waste
waters from an industry or combination of industries as may be necessary to
insure proper operation of the sewerage system.
(2) Prohibited Discharges.
(a) General Prohibitions. No Person shall introduce or cause to be introduced
any substances or wastes which cause, or are capable of causing either alone
or in combination with other substances:
(i) Obstruction of flow or damage to the Wastewater facility;
(ii) Danger to life or safety or welfare of any persons;
(iii) Prevention of effective maintenance or operation of the Wastewater
facility;
(iv) Any product of the City’s treatment processes or any of the City’s
residues, biosolids, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to
interfere with reclamation processes;
(v) A Detrimental Effect, a public nuisance, or any condition
unacceptable to any public agency having regulatory jurisdiction over
the District;
(vi) Any sanitary sewer or the District’s Wastewater facilities to be
overloaded.
(b) Specific Prohibitions. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced in
to the Sewerage System any of the following:
(i) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
(ii) Any substances containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases
in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
(iii) Any substance having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 10.0 or
having other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard
16
to structures, equipment, and/or personnel operating the sewage
system.
(iv) Pollutants which result in the presence of gases, vapors, or fumes
within the Sewerage System in a quantity which may cause acute
worker health or safety problems.
(v) Solids or viscous substances which will cause or contribute to
obstruction to the flow in the sewers or have a Detrimental Effect on
the operation of the Treatment Plant. Such substances include, but are
not limited to ashes, cinders, clay, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole
blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, disposable dishes,
cups, milk containers, and similar materials, either whole or ground
by garbage grinders.
(vi) Wastewater that contains organo-sulfur or organo-phosphate
pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizers.
(vii) Heat in amounts which will inhibit or contribute to the inhibition of
biological activity in the Treatment Plant resulting in Interference or
causing damage to the Treatment Plant but in no case heat in such
quantities that the temperature exceeds 40°C (104°F) at the influent
to the POTW Treatment Plant unless the DNR at the request of the
City, has approved alternate temperature limits.
(viii) Radioactive wastes which, alone or with other wastes, result in
releases which violate rules or regulations of any applicable state or
federal agency.
(ix) Wastewater containing more than 50 milligrams per liter of non-polar
petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or products of mineral
oil origin as measured by the silica gel treated hexane extractable
material (SGT-HEM) analytical method.
(x) Wastewater containing more than 300 mg/l of polar oil or grease of
animal or vegetable origin as determined by subtraction of non-polar
(SGT-HEM) analytical results from hexane extractable material
(HEM) analytical results.
(xi) Wastewater containing polychlorinated biphenyls.
(xii) Wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in
quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen
(15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24)
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
(xiii) Pollutants which create or contribute to a fire or explosion hazard at
the POTW, including but not limited to wastestreams with a closed
cup flashpoint of less than 140°F or 60°C using the test methods in
Wis. Admin. Code § NR. 661.21.
(xiv) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the City.
17
(c) Discharges Subject to Permission of the City. No person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged any of the following described substances, without
the specific written permission of the City. Such permission is subject to
termination at any time upon written notice. In forming its opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the City will give consideration to such factors
as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the
sanitary sewers, materials or construction of the sanitary sewers, nature of
the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, and
other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
(i) Waste water containing more than 25 mg/l of petroleum oil,
non-biodegradable cutting oils, or products of mineral oil
origin.
(ii) Any liquid containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32oF and 150oF.
(iii) Waste water from an industrial user containing floatable excess
fats, oils, or grease.
(iv) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded or solid
material having any dimension greater than one-half inch. The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped
with a motor of three-fourth (3/4) horsepower or greater shall
be subject to the review and approval of the City.
(v) Substances containing any toxic pollutant including, but not
limited to, those toxic pollutants listed in Wis. Admin. Code
ch. NR 215.
(vi) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by state or
federal regulations.
(vii) Materials which exert or cause:
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such
as but not limited to, fullers earth, clay, lime slurries,
and lime residues) or of dissolved solids detrimental to
the treatment process.
(2) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.)
(3) Unusual BOD5, chemical oxygen demand or
disinfection requirements in such quantities in excess
of that found in domestic waste water.
(4) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting "slugs" as defined in Section 8.02.
(viii) Substances which are not treatable by the sewage treatment
processes employed, or are untreatable to such a degree that
18
the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the
requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction.
(ix) Any substance containing odor-producing compounds, in
excess of that associated with domestic waste water, and
exceeding limits which may be established by the City.
(3) Separators and Interceptors. Grease and oil separators and sand interceptors shall
be provided when, in the opinion of the city they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquids containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable fluid,
sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors and separators shall
not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All separators and
interceptors shall be of the type and capacity approved by the DNR and/or
Wisconsin Department of Commerce, and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. The introduction of grease or fat emulsifiers
into a grease interceptor is prohibited.
(4) Obligation to Report Discharges. In the case of any discharge, including, but not
limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, a Slug Discharge or Slug Load, that might cause
potential problems for the Treatment Plant, the User shall immediately notify the
City by telephone and email of the incident. This notification shall include the
location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and
corrective actions taken by the User. Within fifteen (15) days of such discharge, a
detailed written statement describing the cause of the discharge and the measures
taken to prevent a future occurrence shall be submitted to the City. A notice shall
be permanently posted on the User’s bulletin board or other prominent place
advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described above. Users
shall ensure that all of its employees who could cause such a discharge to occur are
advised of the emergency notification procedure. Such reporting shall not relieve
the Person causing the accidental discharge from any penalties imposed by this
Ordinance. Where the City deems necessary, Industrial Users shall provide
facilities to prevent accidental discharges or spills of wastes or Wastewaters
prohibited under this Ordinance.
(6) Dilution Prohibited. No User shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any
way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly
authorized by an applicable Pretreatment Standard or Requirement. The City may
impose mass limitations on Users who are using dilution to meet applicable
Pretreatment Standards or Requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of
mass limitations is appropriate.
(7) Response by the City. If any wastewater is discharged, or proposed to be discharged
to the Sewerage System which contains the substances or possesses the
characteristics enumerated in this Section and which in the judgment of the City,
may have a deleterious effect upon the sewerage system, or receiving waters, or
19
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the City may
in writing:
(a) Reject the wastes;
(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition prior to discharge to the
sewerage system;
(c) Require control over quantities and rate of discharge;
(d) Require flow equalization of rate of discharge, and/or
(e) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the waste
not covered by sewer charges under the provisions of Section 8.15.
The cost for the City to evaluate the potential effects of a proposed waste water
discharge on the sewerage system, in which one or more of the substances or
characteristics enumerated in this Section have a reasonable probability of being
present in the proposed discharge, shall be born in entirety by the proposed
discharger. If the City permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, plans
and specifications shall be submitted to the DNR for review and approval. Where
pre-treatment, or flow-equalizing facilities are provided they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory condition and effectively operated by the user at the
User’s expense.
8.08 ADDITIONAL PROHIBITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR INDUSTRIAL
USERS.
(1) Discharge Prohibitions. All Industrial Users shall be subject to the following
prohibitions:
(a) Wastewater which contains in excess of the specified concentrations of any
of the following constituents in a twenty-four (24) hour flow proportionate
sample made up of an aggregate of the total discharge from all of the outfalls
of an Industrial User is prohibited.
0.25 mg/l cadmium
0.5 mg/l hexavalent chromium
10.0 mg/l total chromium
1.5 mg/l copper
5.0 mg/l lead
0.02 mg/l mercury
0.3 mg/l selenium
3.0 mg/l silver
8.0 mg/l zinc
2.0 mg/l nickel
0.1 mg/l cyanide
For the purposes of this subsection, samples shall be collected over the period
of discharge if the discharge is less than twenty-four (24) hours in duration
20
and in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance and applicable
state and federal law.
(b) Dilution of an industrial discharge for purposes of reducing the pollutant
characteristics or concentrations to meet the limitations established in this
Section, any applicable Pretreament Standards, or any other Section of this
Ordinance or a local, state, or federal law, is prohibited.
(2) Monitoring Facilities.
(a) The City may require an Industrial User to construct a sampling manhole or
other monitoring facility to facilitate collection of a Representative Sample
of Wastewater being discharged to the Sewerage System. Construction of
such facility must be completed within ninety (90) days after the User has
been notified of the requirement, unless the City grants an extension of time.
In the event that the Industrial User fails to construct such a facility, the City
may do so and shall assess the cost to the Industrial User.
(b) All monitoring facilities shall be constructed at the User’s expense, in
accordance with the plans approved by the City. The monitoring facility
shall contain the necessary flow monitoring and sampling equipment to
facilitate the observation, sampling, and measurement of wastes; and shall be
maintained by the User so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(3) Industrial Request to Discharge Form. All new Industrial Users and all other
Industrial Users shall upon request of the City submit to the City an Industrial
Request to Discharge Form as established from time to time by the City’s
Wastewater Superintendent that provides information on volume and constituents
of the Wastewater.
(4) Change in Operations. All Industrial Users shall notify the City in advance of any
change in industrial operations that may have an effect upon the waste and
Wastewaters generated or of any substantial change in the volume or character of
pollutants in their discharge.
(5) Standard Methods. All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of
fluids and solids to which reference is made in this Ordinance shall be determined
in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods. Acceptable methods for
waste water analysis shall be in accordance with Chapter NR 219 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
8.09 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR DENTAL CLINICS
(1) Intent. This section applies to discharges from dental clinics where amalgam is
placed or removed. This section does not apply to the specialties orthodontics,
periodontics, oral and maxillo-facial surgery, endodontics, prosthodontics or to
other clinics that do not place or remove amalgam, or which are identified by the
City as de-minimus contributors. For the purpose of this section, a dental clinic is
defined as a non-mobile facility dedicated to the examination and treatment of
patients by healthcare professionals specializing in the care of teeth, gums, and oral
tissues.
21
(2) Implementation of BMPs. Dental clinics that place or remove amalgam shall
implement Best Management Practices for amalgam as established by the
Wisconsin Dental Association.
(3) Amalgam Separators. Dental clinics shall install, operate and maintain an amalgam
separator meeting the criteria of the International Standards Organization (ISO
11143) for every vacuum system receiving amalgam waste. Amalgam separators
shall be installed, operated, and maintained according to instructions provided by
the manufacturer. The amalgam separator shall have a design and capacity
appropriate for the size and type of vacuum system.
(4) Reporting. Dental clinics will annually submit reporting information to the City
using forms provided by the City. Reporting information may include:
(a) The date the amalgam separator was installed.
(b) The manufacturer name and model number for the separator.
(c) Certification that the amalgam separator is operated and maintained in
accordance with instructions provided by the manufacturer.
(d) Certification that Best Management Practices for amalgam as established by
the Wisconsin Dental Association are being implemented.
(e) Any other information deemed relevant by the City.
(5) Records. Dental clinics shall obtain recycling records for each shipment showing
the volume or mass of amalgam waste shipped, the name and address of the
destination, and the name and address of the contractor. Dental clinics shall
maintain these records for a minimum of three (3) years. Dental clinics shall make
these records available to the City for inspection and copying upon request by the
City.
(6) Inspection. Dental clinics shall allow the City to inspect the vacuum system,
amalgam separator, amalgam waste storage areas, and other areas deemed necessary
by the City to determine compliance with this Section. Inspections shall occur
during the normal operating hours of the dental clinic.
8.10 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.
(1) Permits Required. The City may require a permit under this Section for Commercial
or Industrial Users that discharge or have the potential to discharge wastes or
wastewater containing toxic pollutants to the Sewerage System or whose discharges
have the potential individually or cumulatively to adversely affect the Sewerage
System or to impact the ability of the City to meet its WPDES Permit requirements.
Such wastes and wastewaters include but are not limited to:
(a) Chloride.
(b) Stormwater, groundwater, rain water, street drainage, roof runoff, and
subsurface drainage.
(c) Unpolluted water, including but not limited to, cooling water, process water
or blow down from cooling towers or evaporative coolers, or swimming pool
waters.
(d) Temperature or thermal loads.
22
(e) Pharmaceuticals.
(f) Mercury or other toxic chemicals.
(2) Permit Process.
(a) The City shall notify a User if the City determines that a permit is necessary.
(b) The City shall specify the information required to be submitted to process
the permit application and any applicable fees. The User shall provide such
information within sixty (60) days of the information request.
(c) Proposed new users shall submit a permit application at least 90 days prior
to connecting to and discharging to the Sewerage System.
(3) Permit Content. Permits under this Section may require the following provisions:
(a) A written application containing the name, address, and telephone number of
the User, and the identity of an authorized representative to act on its behalf.
(b) The imposition of average and/or maximum limits of various Wastewater
constituents which may be discharged by such User.
(c) The requirement to use Best Management Practices, source reduction or
treatment as appropriate.
(d) The description of any sampling, monitoring or reporting requirements.
(e) A compliance schedule for construction of pretreatment facilities if required.
(f) A statement concerning the District’s right to inspect the industry’s facilities.
(g) Other terms and conditions deemed necessary by the District to effectively
regulate the discharge of concern.
(h) A time limit for the permit not to exceed five (5) years.
(4) Permit Implementation.
(a) Any permit issued under this Section shall be effective for a period not to
exceed five (5) years. Any User holding a permit shall apply for a permit
reissuance or renewal at least one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the
expiration date of the User’s existing permit.
(b) Upon issuance of such permit, the User shall faithfully comply with all
provisions of the permit and as contained in this Ordinance, and as amended
from time to time.
(c) Any existing User shall notify the City in writing of the following changes at
least ninety (90) days prior to initiating such a change:
(i) Any proposed discharge of pollutants previously not being discharged
by the User;
(ii) Any proposed increase in existing discharges of pollutants, where the
increase is greater than twenty-five percent (25%) of existing
pollutant levels.
(d) The City reserves the right to amend from time to time any such permit so
issued by adding or deleting therefrom such provisions, requirements, and
conditions as it deems appropriate. The City shall notify the User of any
changes in the permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of
such change. Any change or new condition in the permit shall allow for a
reasonable period of time for compliance by the User.
23
(e) Any permit issued under this Section shall be revocable by the City
summarily for violation of its terms or conditions. In addition, any violation
of the conditions of any such discharge permit or this Ordinance shall be
subject to the enforcement provisions of Section 8.18.
(f) Permits issued under this Section are personal as to the User/holder and may
not be subsequently assigned or transferred by operation of law or otherwise,
to any successor or assignee, without the prior written approval of the City.
(g) The City may in its discretion impose mass limitations on Users or grant a
request for a mass limitation by the User in accordance with Wis. Admin.
Code § NR 211.11(3) where the City determines that imposition of mass
limitations is appropriate.
(h) The City may convert mass limitations of categorical pretreatment standards
in Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 233, NR 235 and NR 279 into equivalent
concentrations limits in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § NR 211.11(3)
where the City determines that imposition of concentration limitations is
appropriate.
(i) The City in its discretion may impose concentration limitations on Users or
grant a request for concentration limitations by the User in accordance with
Wis. Admin. Code § NR 211.11(3) where the City determines the imposition
of concentration limitations is appropriate. Dilution to meet a concentration
limitation is prohibited.
(j) When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in
terms of pollutant concentrations, the District may convert concentration
limits to mass limits in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § NR 211.11(3).
(5) Expired Permit. An expired permit will continue to be effective and enforceable
until reissued.
(6) General Permit. The City may utilize a General Permit to address a category of
dischargers with similar discharge characteristics. General Permits may include
limitations on concentration and mass of pollutants, may specify Best Management
Practices and include other conditions necessary to ensure compliance with
applicable limits.
8.11 PRETREATMENT AND OTHER OBLIGATIONS FOR SIGNIFICANT
INDUSTRIAL USERS
(1) Determination of Significant Industrial Users. The following Industrial Users shall
be considered a Significant Industrial User:
(a) Any Industrial User subject to categorical pretreatment standards in Chapters
NR 221 to 297 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, except as otherwise
designated by the City under Wis. Admin. Code § NR 211.15(4)(d).
(b) Any Industrial User of the Sewerage System which discharges more than
25,000 gallons per day (gpd) of waste water to the Sewage Treatment Plant,
excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler blowdown waste waters;
24
(c) Any industrial user that discharges to the Sewage Treatment Plant a process
waste stream which makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather
hydraulic capacity, or more than 5% of the BOD5, TSS, TKN, or total
phosphorus treating capacity, of the sewage treatment plant;
(d) Any centralized waste treater;
(e) Any other Industrial User may be considered a Significant Industrial User
under this Ordinance by the City on the basis that the Industrial User has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the Sewage Treatment Plant’s
operation.
(2) General Requirements. All Industrial Users shall notify the City in advance of any
change in its industrial operations which may have an effect upon the waste and
Wastewaters generated or of any substantial change in the volume or character of
pollutants in their discharge that could affect their status as a Significant Industrial
User.
(3) Permit Requirements for Significant Industrial Users.
(a) Significant Industrial Users shall make written application to the City for the
issuance of a Permit to Discharge.
(b) The City has the authority to issue a permit to the Significant Industrial User,
and impose necessary conditions which shall include, but not be limited to:
(i) The name, address and telephone number of the Industrial User; and
the identity of an authorized representative to act on its behalf.
(ii) A description of the Industrial User’s permitted connection or
connections to the public sewer system and its location.
(iii) The average and/or maximum limits of various Wastewater
constituents which may be discharged by such user.
(iv) Any limit on the maximum rate of industrial discharge or the time of
the discharge.
(v) A requirement for a monitoring manhole or some other means to
collect a Representative Sample of the Industrial User’s discharge.
(vi) A description of both the frequency of self-monitoring that is required
and of the method of sample collection.
(vii) Reports which must be submitted to the City and the frequency of
report submittal.
(viii) A compliance schedule for construction of pretreatment facilities if
required.
(ix) The requirements for records retention.
(x) The notification procedure to be followed if the Industrial User
intends to change the characteristics of its Wastewater discharge.
(xi) A statement concerning the City’s right to inspect the industry’s
facilities.
(xii) The agreement of the holders of the permit to indemnify the City from
and against any and all liability for injury or damage arising out of or
related to the activities of the holder in discharging Industrial Waste.
25
(xiii) A statement of the Applicable Pretreatment Standards or National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards that the User must abide by.
(xiv) A statement that a violation of pretreatment requirements as specified
in Chapter 6 shall be subject to various penalties as listed in this
Ordinance.
(xv) A summary of BMPs required to be implemented if applicable. User
maintained documentation of BMP activities that demonstrate the
compliance status of the User shall be considered compliance records.
Such records must be retained by the User in accordance with
industrial pretreatment program requirements.
(a) Permit Implementation for Significant Industrial Users.
(i) Any permit issued under this Section shall be effective for a period
not to exceed five (5) years. Any User holding a permit shall apply
for a permit reissuance or renewal at least one hundred eighty (180)
days prior to the expiration date of the User’s existing permit.
(ii) Upon issuance of such permit, the Significant Industrial User shall
faithfully comply with all provisions of the permit and as contained in
this Ordinance, as amended from time to time.
(iii) Any existing Significant Industrial User shall notify the City in
writing of the following changes at least ninety (90) days prior to
initiating such a change: (i) any proposed discharge of pollutants,
previously not being discharged by said User; or (ii) any proposed
increase in existing discharges of pollutants, where the increase is
greater than twenty-five percent (25%) of existing pollutant levels.
(iv) The City reserves the right to amend from time to time any such
permit so issued by adding or deleting therefrom such provisions,
requirements and conditions as it deems appropriate. The City shall
notify the Industrial User of any changes in the permit at least thirty
(30) days prior to the effective date of such change. Any change or
new condition to the permit shall allow for a reasonable period of time
for compliance by the User.
(v) Any permit issued under this Chapter shall be revocable by the City
summarily for violation of its terms or conditions. In addition, any
violation of the conditions of any such discharge permit or this
Ordinance shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of this
Ordinance.
(vi) Permits issued under this Section are personal as to the User/holder;
and may not be subsequently assigned or transferred by operation of
law or otherwise, to any successor or assignee, without the prior
written approval of the City.
(vii) Dilution of an industrial discharge for purposes of reducing the
pollutant characteristics or concentrations to meet the limitations
26
established in this Ordinance or meet or exceed the Applicable
Pretreatment Standards, is prohibited.
(viii) The City in its discretion may impose mass limitations on Industrial
Users or grant a request for mass limitations by the Industrial User in
accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § NR 211.11(3) where the City
determines the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(ix) The City may convert mass limitations of categorical pretreatment
standards in Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 233, NR 235 and NR 279 into
equivalent concentrations limits in accordance with Wis. Admin.
Code § NR 211.11(3) where the City determines that imposition of
concentration limitations is appropriate.
(x) The City in its discretion may impose concentration limitations on
Industrial Users or grant a request for concentration limitations by the
Industrial User in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § NR 211.11(3)
where the City determines the imposition of concentration limitations
is appropriate. Dilution to meet a concentration limitation is
prohibited.
(xi) When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed
only in terms of pollutant concentrations, the City may convert
concentration limits to mass limits in accordance with Wis. Admin.
Code § NR 211.11(3).
(2) General Discharge Permit. The City may issue and utilize General Permits in
accordance with the provisions in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 211.235(1). General
Permits may include limitations on concentration and mass of pollutants, may
specify Best Management Practices and include other conditions necessary to
ensure compliance with applicable limits.
(3) Effect of New National Standards. Upon promulgation of National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards for a particular Industrial User subcategory, the Federal
standards (if more stringent than the limitations imposed under this Ordinance) shall
immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this Ordinance; and each
Industrial User shall comply with the applicable Federal standards. The City shall
notify all affected Users of the applicable requirements using the procedures
specified in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12.
(4) Pretreatment Facilities.
(a) Users shall provide Wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with these
rules and shall, at the User's expense, achieve and maintain compliance
within the time limitations specified by the City. Detailed plans showing the
pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
City. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way
relieve the User from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary
to produce an effluent that will not violate any provision of these rules.
27
(b) Any subsequent modification in the pretreatment facilities or operating
procedures shall be reported to the City prior to the User's proposed
modification.
(5) Monitoring and Inspection.
(a) Monitoring Facilities.
(i) The City may require a Significant Industrial User to construct a
sampling manhole or other monitoring facility to facilitate collection
of a Representative Sample of Wastewater being discharged to the
public sewerage system. Construction of such facility must be
completed within ninety (90) days after the User has been notified of
the requirement, unless the City grants an extension of time. In the
event that the Industrial User fails to construct such a facility, the City
may do so and shall assess the cost to the Industrial User.
(ii) All monitoring facilities shall be constructed at the User’s expense, in
accordance with the plans approved by the City. The monitoring
facility shall contain the necessary flow monitoring and sampling
equipment to facilitate the observation, sampling, and measurement
of wastes; and shall be maintained by the User so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.
(b) Sampling.
(i) The City may require the Significant Industrial User to collect
Representative Samples of its Wastewater discharge, to analyze the
sample for parameters specified by the City, and to report the results
to the City in a timely manner.
(ii) The City may elect to independently monitor the discharge of any
Industrial User to assess compliance with applicable standards.
(iii) Upon finding a violation based on City sampling performed in lieu of
the Industrial User, the City is notified of the violation and is required
by the City to perform repeat sampling and analysis. Repeat sampling
conducted by the Industrial User must be consistent with the
requirements under Section 8.11(7).
(vi) Any samples collected during such monitoring shall follow a strict
chain of custody procedure to insure security of the samples and
anonymity during analysis.
(v) All measurements and test analyses of the characteristics of
Wastewater shall be determined in accordance with methods
established by the EPA and contained in 40 C.F.R. pt. 136 and
amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the
EPA. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
approved by the EPA. Where 40 C.F.R. pt. 136 does not include a
sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the
procedures set forth in the EPA publication, “Sampling and Analysis
28
Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority
Pollutants, April 1977,” and amendmSents thereto, or with any other
sampling and analytical procedures approved by the EPA.
(c) Inspection.
(i) Agents of the City shall be allowed access to all monitoring facilities
at any time.
(ii) City inspectors bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
allowed access to all property serviced by the City, for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing of
discharges to the Wastewater facilities; or for the purpose of
inspection and copying of records kept by Industrial Users relating to
pretreatment requirements or reporting.
(6) Request for Information. The City may require a Significant Industrial User to
provide additional information concerning, but not limited to:
(a) Volume, time and peak rate of discharges.
(b) Chemical analysis of discharges.
(c) Raw materials, processes and products relevant to discharge characteristics.
(d) Discharges of specific wastes such as sludge, oil, solvent, or incompatible
pollutants.
(e) Plot plans of sewers on the User’s property showing locations of sewers,
monitoring facilities and pretreatment facilities.
(f) Details of pretreatment facilities.
(g) Details of systems to prevent losses of materials through spills to the
municipal sewers.
(h) Documentation of Best Management Practices.
(7) Reporting Requirements.
(a) General Reporting Obligations.
(i) Any Industrial User shall comply with the reporting requirements of
a permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance.
(ii) All reports required by a permit shall be based upon data obtained
through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the
period covered by the report, which data is representative of
conditions occurring during the reporting period. Where the
Industrial User is subject to standards that require compliance with
BMP or pollution prevention alternatives, the User shall submit
documentation that demonstrates its compliance status.
(iii) Reports pertaining to the compliance schedule for any required
pretreatment facilities. The discharge permit will specify the type of
reports required and the dates when they are due.
(iv) A responsible officer shall sign any reports required to be submitted
by an Industrial User pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance.
(v) All reports required by this Section shall include the following
certification statement:
29
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with
a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather
and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the
person or persons who manage the system, or those directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted
is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and
complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.
(vi) Any effluent data submitted or supplied to the City by any Person or
User is a public record within the meaning of Wis. Stat. § 19.21. All
other information submitted to the City shall be a public record unless
the information is entitled to confidential treatment pursuant to Wis.
Stat. § 283.55(2)(c) and Wis. Admin. Code § NR 2.19 as a trade
secret. The City may require any Industrial User to provide
information about industrial processes which may have an effect on
the nature or composition of the industrial discharge; and such
information will be kept confidential if the requirements of the
aforesaid statute and administrative rule are satisfied. Any
information or data obtained by the City which is confidential or
constitutes a trade secret shall not be disclosed to unauthorized
persons.
(b) Periodic Compliance Report. Any permittee shall comply with the
requirements of its Industrial Discharge Permit for preparing a periodic
report of compliance. The report requirements are provided in the permit
and may contain outfall average and maximum flow rate data, the volume
and fate of any regulated Wastewater hauled off-site, the signed certification
statement, and any other certification statements contained in the permit.
(c) Reporting Following National Pretreatment Standard Changes.
(i) 180-Day Baseline Monitoring Report. Industrial Users subject to
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall submit to the City
this report within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date
of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
(b) 90-Day Final Compliance Report. In accordance with Wis. Admin.
Code § NR 211.15(3) existing Industrial Users subject to National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards, must submit a final compliance
report to the City within ninety (90) days following the date for final
compliance with the applicable Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
For new Industrial Users subject to National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, as well as for Industrial Users subject only to local
30
standards, this report must be submitted within ninety (90) days
following the introduction of Wastewater into the public sewer
system.
(d) Discharge Monitoring Report.
(i) Permittees with monitoring requirements shall submit Discharge
Monitoring Reports (DMR) summarizing outfall analytical data
within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the analytical data. Each report
shall include the certification statement and the signature of the
responsible officer or designee. The DMR shall include the
Wastewater flow data from the sampling period. The DMR shall
provide the laboratory analysis report. The discharge permit will
indicate what parameters must be analyzed and what frequency of
sample collection should be followed.
(ii) If sampling performed by a permittee indicates a violation, the User
shall notify the City within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware
of the violation. The User shall also repeat the sampling and analysis
for the parameters showing violation and submit the results of the
repeat analysis to the City within thirty (30) days.
(iii) If a permittee monitors any pollutant more frequently than required
by the City, using analytical methods specified in the permit, the
results of this monitoring shall be included in reports and submitted
to the District.
(iv) As part of an SIU permit, the City may authorize a monitoring waiver
for individual pollutants or reduce the frequency of reports for certain
discharges in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § NR 211.15(4).
(e) Reports of Upsets, Spills, Slugs, and Bypasses
(i) Each Industrial User shall notify the City, the EPA Regional Waste
Management Division Director, and the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources Bureau of Solid Waste Management in writing of
any discharge into the City’s treatment system of a substance which,
if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R.
pt. 261. Notification is not complete until the City or its designee
personally responds and acknowledges receipt of the notification.
The initial notice of a hazardous waste discharge shall be followed by
a written notice to the City from the Industrial User within five (5)
business days.
(ii) In accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § NR 211.15, each Significant
Industrial User shall notify the City immediately in the event of a slug
discharge of waste, an upset of either the User’s industrial process or
its pretreatment facilities, or a period of noncompliance with general
prohibitions. Such Significant Industrial User shall provide a written
or oral notification within twenty-four (24) hours after the occurrence
of such event, and shall provide the detailed written statement referred
31
to in Section 8.07(4) to the City within the time period established
therein.
(8) Slug Control. The City may evaluate whether any Industrial User needs a plan to
control slug discharges. If the City determines that a slug control plan is needed,
requirements to prepare and implement a slug control plan will be included in a
permit issued under this Ordinance.
(a) Slug Control Plan. Where the City determines a slug control plan is
necessary, the slug control plan may include the following elements:
(i) A description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges.
(ii) A description of stored chemicals.
(iii) Procedures for immediately notifying the City of slug discharges,
including any discharge that would violate a general prohibition or
specific prohibited discharge standard, with procedures for followup
written notification within five (5) days.
(iv) The necessary procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental
spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas,
handling and transferals, loading and unloading operations, control
plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures
or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants
including solvents, and/or measures and equipment of emergency
response.
(b) Changes in Slug Load Potential. In accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § NR
211.15, each Industrial User is required to notify the City immediately of any
changed circumstances at its facility affecting the potential for a Slug
Discharge. The permittee shall provide notification to the City at least fortyfive
(45) days prior to any planned changes to chemical storage facilities.
Based on these changes, the City may determine that a slug control plan is
needed. If so, the plan shall at a minimum contain the elements listed in
Section 8.11(8)(a). The City, at any time, based on inspection or responses
to events, may determine that a slug control plan shall be prepared by an
Industrial User. The User’s permit will be revised to contain requirements
to control Slug Discharges.
(9) Bypass Provisions.
(a) An Industrial User may allow a bypass of its pretreatment facilities to occur
which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated,
but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation.
These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of Sections 8.11(9)(b), (c),
and (d).
(b) If an Industrial User knows in advance of the need for a bypass it shall submit
prior notice to the City, if possible, at least ten (10) days before the date of
the bypass.
32
(c) An Industrial User shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that
exceeds Applicable Pretreatment Standards to the City within twenty four
(24) hours from the time the Industrial User becomes aware of the bypass. A
written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the
Industrial User becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall
contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass,
including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected,
the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to
reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
(d) Bypass of pretreatment facilities is prohibited and the City may take
enforcement action against an Industrial User for a bypass, unless:
(i) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or
severe property damage;
(ii) There was no feasible alternative to the bypass, such as the use of
auxiliary treatment facilities retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This
condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have
been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to
prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment
downtime or preventative maintenance; and
(iii) The Industrial User submitted notices as required under Section
8.11(9)(b) or (c).
(10) Records Retention.
(a) Significant Industrial Users shall retain and preserve for no less than three
(3) years any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports,
correspondence, and all summaries relating to monitoring, sampling, and
chemical analyses made by, or on behalf of, a Significant Industrial User in
connection with its discharge. Included in this requirement is the
preservation of documentation of Best Management Practices employed as a
result of Ordinance or permit requirements.
(b) Significant Industrial Users shall retain and preserve all records that pertain
to matters that are the subject of special orders or any other enforcement or
litigation activities brought by the City until all enforcement activities have
concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals
have expired.
(11) Violations of Pretreatment Requirements.
(a) Each Industrial User shall strictly comply with all provisions of this
Ordinance. A violation of this Ordinance may lead to enforcement actions
by the City.
(b) Without limiting the foregoing, the following events related to pretreatment
shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance and may cause enforcement
proceedings to be commenced by the City under Section 8.18.
(i) Failure to notify the City of a new or increased discharge.
33
(ii) Failure to submit any required reports including those required under
40 C.F.R. § 403.12 in a timely manner.
(iii) Failure to submit self-monitoring reports in a timely manner.
(iv) Failure to meet the dates specified in the compliance schedule for
construction and operation of pretreatment facilities.
(v) Failure to meet applicable local (including, but not limited to the
City), state or federal pretreatment standards for discharge quality.
(vi) Failure to notify the City of an accidental discharge or Slug Load.
(vii) Untruthfully reporting results on any report submitted to the City.
(viii) Any other failure to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance or
of any conditions in a permit.
8.12 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
No statement contained in this Ordinance shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the City and any Industrial Users whereby an industrial
waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject
to payment, therefore, by the Industrial User provided the agreement is not in conflict with
the intent or rates established by this ordinance or in conflict with State or Federal
regulations. Such discharges, if permitted, shall be limited to concentrations or quantities
which will not cause interference, pass through, contamination of sewage treatment plant
sludge, injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, or constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in or have an adverse
effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the Sewerage System. Determination of
such limits shall comply with the requirements of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
33 USC 1251 to 1387, and regulations adopted under that act. (MC#1115)
8.13 LIMITATIONS ON DISCHARGES OF HAULED WASTES
(1) Discharges Prohibited. Except as provided in this Chapter, no Person, shall
discharge Hauled Waste, including Septage or Holding Tank Wastes into the
Sewage Collection System.
(2) Discharges at the City’s Receiving Facilities.
(a) Discharges of Hauled Wastes by a licensed disposer may be allowed at a City
receiving station but only in such manner and at such place as may be
designated by the City and subject to the provisions of this Section.
(b) The Hauler desiring to discharge such wastes shall first make application to
the City for a permit to discharge under this Section.
(c) The Hauler making the discharge shall pay to the City all applicable fees and
sewer service charges based on the characteristics of the discharge; and any
additional costs or expenses associated with the provision of additional
facilities or personnel necessary to accept such waste at the point of
introduction into the City’s Wastewater Treatment Plant.
(d) Payment of fees and charges will be on a monthly basis unless otherwise
provided for by the City in the Hauler’s permit. If payments are not received
34
within 30 (thirty) days of the date they are due, the City may suspend disposal
privileges and/or proceed with enforcement of any delinquent payment
provisions in Section 8.17(2).
(3) Permits to Discharge Hauled Wastes.
(a) No discharge of Hauled Wastes shall be made unless the Hauler making the
discharge has been issued a permit under this Section.
(b) All applications for a permit shall be in writing and shall contain such
information as the City deems appropriate. No permit once issued shall be
assignable or transferable and no holder of any permit shall acquire any
vested right or privilege in the permit.
(c) A Hauler seeking a permit shall apply to the City prior to September 1 for a
permit. A permit shall be valid for a period of one (1) year, beginning on
September 1, and expiring on August 31 of each year unless the District
decides to issue a permit for a longer period not to exceed five (5) years.
(d) The City may require the applicant to pay an annual fee in such reasonable
amount as it may determine as a condition precedent to the issuance of such.
(e) Any permit shall be revocable by the City summarily for violation of the
terms or conditions the permit.
(f) Any Person discharging Hauled Waste in violation of this Section shall be
subject to enforcement under Section 8.18.
(4) Permit Requirements. If the City determines to issue a permit, such permit may be
issued upon such terms and conditions including but not limited to the following:
(a) The City shall have the right to reject and refuse to accept Hauled Wastes
from the Hauler if:
(i) Treatment of the waste would cause the City’s Sewerage System to
exceed its operating design capacity or to violate any applicable
effluent limitations or standards, water quality standards or any other
legally applicable requirements, including court orders or state or
federal statutes, rules, regulations or orders;
(ii) The waste is not compatible with the City’s Sewerage System or
contains wastes otherwise prohibited under this Ordinance;
(iii) The Hauler fails to comply with waste disposal rules promulgated by
the City from time to time or fails to pay the appropriate sewer service
charges in a timely manner.
(b) The City may impose reasonable terms and conditions for Hauled Waste
disposal into the Wastewater Treatment Plant relating to the following:
(i) Specific quantities, locations, times and methods for discharge of such
wastes into the City’s Sewerage System;
(b) Requirements to report the source and amount of such wastes placed
in the City’s Sewerage System; and
(c) Requirements that the Hauler analyze Representative Samples of the
waste placed in the City Sewerage System in order to determine the
35
characteristics of the waste and the compatibility of the waste with the
City’s Sewerage System.
(d) If the City’s Sewerage System can accept some, but not all, of the Hauled
Wastes offered for disposal, the City may accept such waste which is
generated within the geographic boundaries of the City before accepting such
wastes which are generated outside of the boundaries of the City.
(e) The City reserves the right to sample Hauled Waste loads and inspect truck
log books at any time without prior notice. The City may request copies of
the Hauler’s invoices to its clients as documentation of the content of Hauled
Waste loads.
(f) The agreement of the Hauler to indemnify the City from and against any and
all liability for injury or damage arising out of or related to the activities of
Hauler in exercising the rights granted. The City may require the Hauler to
post a bond written by a bonding company licensed to transact business in
Wisconsin, to guarantee performance.
(g) The agreement of the Hauler to have in full force and effect sufficient
worker’s compensation insurance, public liability and property damage
insurance. With respect to public liability insurance, any person hauling
septage or holding tank wastes agrees to carry public liability insurance in an
amount not less than $150,000.
(h) The City may accept Exceptional Quality High Strength Waste of up to
12,000 gallons per day in total from all vendors/haulers. The acceptance of
this waste may further limited or terminated at any time pursuant to (b)
herein. (MC#1240)
(5) Permit Exceptions.
(a) Upon notice and approval of the City, a permit under this Section is not
required for the following:
(i) The temporary transfer of sewage from a Sewerage Collection System
sewer to allow for maintenance or repair of a Sewerage Collection
System sewer.
(ii) Emergency response actions as determined by the City.
(iii) Temporary actions resulting from analytical activities.
(b) The City may utilize a General Permit to address a category of waste haulers
with similar discharge characteristics.
8.14 DETERMINATION OF SEWER SERVICE CHARGES IN GENERAL
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish the basis for reasonable charges
for the cost of collecting and treating domestic waste water and industrial waste
water. All revenues raised by the sewer service charges shall be utilized for payment
of the user charges and debt service charges as defined in Section 8.02 of this
Ordinance. Any revenue not spent in any budget year shall be placed in a nonlapsing
account and carried forward to pay the next year's expenses and to defer the
need for rate increases.
36
(2) Annual Review. Sewer service charges shall be reviewed annually to determine
their adequacy to offset user charge and debt service charge costs. Accordingly, the
City reserves the right to adjust the sewer service use charges annually to assure
their continued adequacy.
(3) Determination of Charges.
(a) Sewer service charges to all Users will be based on metered water volume
from the City water meter when City water is the only source of waste water
discharged from the User’s premises into the Sewerage System. In addition,
there will be a surcharge for BOD5, TSS, TKN, and total phosphorus in
excess of the concentrations defined in Section 8.02 for domestic waste
water.
(b) When a User discharging waste water into the Sewerage System is a User of
water not supplied by the City, the amount of water used shall be measured
by a meter acceptable to the City or determined by the City in such manner
and by such method as it may find practicable under the conditions and
attendant circumstances of the case, in order to determine the sewer service
charge. Such determination may be appealed to the City. As an alternative,
the City may establish a flat rate for sewer service, or authorize the
installation, at the user’s expense, of a control manhole with metering
facilities.
(c) When a User utilizes metered water in an industrial process or for other
purposes which prevents the discharge of all water purchased into the City
Sewerage System, the User may be eligible for a proportionate sewer service
charge reduction. It shall be the responsibility of the User to install adequate
metering facilities to properly identify all water not discharged into the
Sewerage System. The City reserves the right to inspect all installations of
this nature and may require the user to monitor the waste water discharge
volume to verify actual discharge rates.
(d) Sampling of industrial waste waters may be made on a regular basis or as
needed to verify sewer service charges.
(e) Each new Industrial User shall file with the City an initial written statement
for each separate connection to the Sewerage System giving the daily
volume, surge rate, peak rate, pounds of TSS, pounds of BOD5, pounds of
total phosphorus, and pounds of TKN of the waste water. Initial sewer
service charges shall be developed on the basis of this statement. Changes in
operations or use shall be reported by the Industrial User and it shall be the
Industrial User’s sole responsibility to have such changes made to the
original statement to remain in compliance with this ordinance.
(f) The City may sample and test, at any time, any industrial waste water
discharge to verify the accuracy of any statement filed by an Industrial User.
If the results of the waste water tests indicate waste water with measured
parameters less than, or equal to, the values listed in the Industrial User’s
statement, then the cost of the testing shall be at the City’s expense. If the
37
results of the waste water tests indicate waste water with measured
parameters more than 5% greater than the values listed in the Industrial
User’s statement, then the cost of the testing shall be at the Industrial User’s
expense.
8.15 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES AND RATES
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish the method of setting sewer
service charges and rates for Users of the Sewerage System. Rates shall be set
annually by the City with the City budget, not later than January 1 of each year. The
new rate shall become effective on the date set forth in the ordinance establishing
the rate change.
(2) Sewer Service Rates. The sewer service charge rate (ST ) shall be determined as
follows:
ST=CT/VT
Where:
ST = Sewer Service Charge Rate for Treatment
CT = Total Annual Cost of Treatment
VT = Total Volume Treated
CT shall include the costs associated with the user charge and the debt service charge
as defined in Section 8.02 of this Ordinance. VT shall include the total volume of
water which was invoiced by the water utility during the preceding year as well as
any additional waste water discharged to the Sewerage System measured by
alternate means approved by the city in accordance with this ordinance.
(3) Sewer Service Charges.
(a) The sewer service charge for all residential, institutional, commercial, and
governmental Users, discharging domestic waste water, as defined in Section
8.02 of this Ordinance, shall be determined by multiplying the metered water
volume by ST. There shall be a minimum monthly sewer service charge. The
User shall pay both the calculated sewer service charge and the minimum
sewer service monthly charge. The sewer service charge shall be paid
monthly. (MC#1141)
(b) The sewer service charge for all Industrial Users, discharging waste water
with BOD5, TSS, TKN, or total phosphorus concentrations in excess of those
values defined for domestic waste water, as defined in Section 8.02 of this
Ordinance, shall pay a charge determined by the formula in Section
8.15(4)(d). Using this formula, the average annual cost per pound of
treatment of BOD5, TSS, TKN, and total phosphorus shall be determined.
These costs per pound shall be the surcharge rates per pound of BOD5, TSS,
TKN and total phosphorus in excess of domestic waste water strength as
defined in Section 8.02 of this Ordinance. Users will be sampled monthly by
the City to determine BOD5, TSS, TKN, and total phosphorus for surcharge
38
purposes. For any Users required under this Ordinance to install waste water
flow measuring facilities, waste water flows for the purposes of calculating
the sewer service charge, shall be based on readings from the installed waste
water flow meter. There shall be a minimum monthly sewer service charge
for all Industrial Users. The Industrial User shall pay both the calculated
sewer service charge and the minimum sewer service monthly charge. The
sewer service charge shall be paid quarterly. (MC#1141)
(c) Minimum monthly sewer service charges shall be based on ensuring
collection of sufficient funds for repayment of sewerage system debt
retirement and other fixed costs. The minimum monthly sewer service charge
shall be calculated based on the debt retirement payment for the year divided
by the number of residential user flow equivalents as defined in this
ordinance. At the discretion of the City, the minimum charge for commercial,
institutional, governmental, and industrial users may be determined based on
yearly metered flow for the said user divided by the residential user flow
equivalent value. (MC#1141)
(4) Rate Determination.
(a) Charges levied on residential, industrial, commercial, institutional, and
governmental users which discharge waste water of strength equal to, or less
than, domestic waste water will be billed at the rate defined in Table 1. The
minimum monthly charge shall be based on water meter size defined in Table
1. The City reserves the right to impose higher minimum charges for
commercial, industrial, governmental, or institutional users. (MC#1171)
(b) Charges levied on all Users discharging wastes into the Sewerage System at
concentrations in excess of domestic waste water strength, as defined in
Section 8.02, shall be computed in accordance with the formula in paragraph
(d) below.
(c) The sewer charge for Users discharging waste water with BOD5, TSS, TKN
or total phosphorus concentrations in excess of the values for domestic waste
water as defined in Section 8.02 of this Ordinance shall be based on the
schedule of unit costs as defined in Table 1,
(d) The sewer service charge for users discharging waste water with BOD5, TSS,
TKN, or total phosphorus concentrations exceeding the values for domestic
waste water strength as defined in Section 8.02 of this ordinance shall be
determined in accordance with the following formula:
CU = [(Vw*1000)*CV]
+ [(B-300)*Vw*CB*8.34]
+ [(S-300)*VW*Cs*8.34]
+ [(P-8.0)*VW*CP*8.34]
+ [(N-40)*VW*CN*8.34]
Where:
CU = Sewer Service Charge to the user
VW = Waste water volume in million gallons
39
B = Concentration of BOD5 in milligrams per liter (mg/l)
S = Concentration of TSS in milligrams per liter (mg/l)
P = Concentration of total phosphorus, as P, in milligrams
per liter (mg/l)
N = Concentration of TKN, as N, in milligrams per liter
(mg/l)
Cv = Cost per 1,000 gallons of flow
CB = Surcharge per pound of BOD5
CS = Surcharge per pound of TSS
CP = Surcharge per pound of total phosphorus
CN = Surcharge per pound of TKN
Unit costs for BOD5, TSS, TKN, and total phosphorus surcharge
determination shall be as indicated in Section 8.15(4)(c).
(e) The sewer charge for holding tank wastes and septic tank wastes will be
based on the following assumptions: holding tank wastes have a BOD5
concentration of 875 mg/l, a TSS concentration of 1,055 mg/l, a total
phosphorus concentration of 30 mg/l, and a TKN concentration of 84 mg/l;
septic tank wastes will have a BOD5 concentration of 3,030 of mg/l, a TSS
concentration of 8,900 mg/l, a total phosphorus concentration of 250 mg/l,
and a TKN concentration of 700 mg/l. Values indicated for BOD and TSS
are based upon Wisconsin Rapids’ Waste Water Treatment Plant lab testing
whereas values for TKN and total phosphorous are EPA mean average values
for holding tank wastes and septage. Unit cost charges for holding tank and
septic tank wastes shall be as indicated in Table 1.
(f) The City reserves the right to measure the actual volume of wastewater and
concentrations of BOD5, total phosphorus, and TKN in any septic or holding
tank wastes and calculate a sewer charge based on the following equation:
SC = [(VS*CHT or CST)]
+ [(B-300)*(VS /1000)*CB*8.34]
+ [(S-300)*(VS /1000)*CB*8.34]
+ [(P-8.0)*(VS /1000)*CP*8.34]
+ [(N-40)*(VS /1000)*CN*8.34]
+ AD
SC = Sewer Service Charge to the user.
VS = Volume of septage or holding tank wastes in units of
1,000 gallons
B = Concentration of BOD in milligrams per liter (mg/l) in
the septage or holding tank wastes.
S = Concentration of TSS in milligrams per liter (mg/l) in
the septage or holding tank wastes.
P = Concentration of total phosphorus, as P, in milligrams
per liter (mg/l) in the septage or holding tank wastes.
40
N = Concentration of TKN, as N, in milligrams per liter
(mg/l) in the septage or holding tank wastes.
CHT = Cost per 1,000 gallons of holding tank volume.
CST = Cost per 1,000 gallons of septic tank waste.
CB = Surcharge per pound of BOD5.
CS = Surcharge per pound of TSS.
CP = Surcharge per pound of total phosphorus.
CN = Surcharge per pound of TKN.
AD = Administrative Charge = $10.00 per invoice
Unit costs for BOD5, TSS, TKN, and total phosphorus surcharge
determinations shall be as indicated in Table 1.
(g) The sewer charge for clear water shall be as indicated in Table 1.
(h) The charge levied on hauled high strength waste discharged directly into the
digester shall be determined using the following equation:
SC = [FLOW + BOD + TSS + P + N -(.5*CNG)+ AD]
FLOW: VHS/ 1000 * CVHS
+ BOD: VHS/1,000.0000*B*8.34*CBHS
+ TSS: VHS/1,000.0000*S*8.34*CSHS
+P: VHS/1,000.0000*P*8.34*CPHS
+N: VHS/1,000.0000*N*8.34*CNHS
CNG: B*12*650/1000000*CNG*.5
+AD: Administrative Cost per Invoice
Where:
SC = Sewer Service Charge to the user.
VHS = Volume of high strength wastes in units of 1,000 gallons
B = Concentration of BOD in milligrams per liter (mg/l) in
the high strength wastes.
S = Concentration of TSS in milligrams per liter (mg/l) in
the high strength wastes.
P = Concentration of total phosphorus, as P, in milligrams
per liter (mg/l) in the high strength wastes.
N = Concentration of TKN, as N, in milligrams per liter
(mg/l) in the high strength wastes.
41
CBHS = Surcharge per pound of BOD5.
CSHS = Surcharge per pound of TSS.
CNG = Value of BTU at current rates (See Table 1)
CVHS = Cost per 1,000 gallons of volume.
CPHS = Surcharge per pound of total phosphorus.
CNHS = Surcharge per pound of TKN.
AD = Administrative Charge
For sewer service charge determinations, hauled high strength waste shall
be certified laboratory tested for BOD, TSS, Phosphorus and TKN. If
hauled high strength waste is to receive an average strength designation a
minimum of three separate certified laboratory test samples will be required
to receive the average designation. The hauler and their description of
waste, test results and average designation will be placed on file at the
POTW. The average strength designation, once determined, allows similar
waste to be accepted at the POTW without continuously testing the waste
parameters. (MC#1240)
(i) The City has approved providing sanitary sewer service to specific Users
outside the city limits. The sewer service charge for Users outside city limits
shall be an additional 25% to rates as set forth in this Ordinance. Service shall
not be given to any Users outside of the City boundaries without specific
approval of the City. (MC#1166)
(j) This Section does not preclude the City from billing for the treatment of
waste water as specified in intergovernmental sewer service agreements.
(MC#639)
(5) Emergency Lateral Repair Fund. In addition to the foregoing sewer service charges,
each bill for sewer service shall include a charge of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per
month for an emergency lateral repair fund. Such funds shall be kept in a segregated
account to be used by the City only for emergency repairs to the portion of a lateral
located within the street right-of-way as determined appropriate by the Sewer Utility
Manager. If the City repairs a lateral within the right-of-way, the cost of the repair
within the right-of-way shall be paid from the segregated fund created by this
subsection, and the User shall not be charged therefor.
8.16 SERVICE AGREEMENTS.
In the event an Industrial User discharges industrial waste water constituting a substantial
portion of either the design flow capacity or the BOD5, TSS, or phosphorus capacity of the
sewage treatment plant, as defined in the Compliance Maintenance Annual Report
(CMAR) filed by the City with the DNR, then a service agreement between the Industrial
User and the City shall be executed. Service agreements shall be required when an
Industrial User discharges industrial waste water that comprises 10% or more of the
average day design flow, or 10% or more of the average day design BOD5, TSS, or total
phosphorus load for the sewage treatment plant. The service agreement shall assure
42
continued participation in capital cost recovery by the industrial user over the life of the
agreement. Should the Industrial User eliminate its discharge, the City, at its option, may
elect to assign to another user that portion of the design capacity of the sewage treatment
plant and associated capital costs thereby relieving the industrial user of continued financial
participation.
8.17 BILLING AND COLLECTIONS.
(1) Billing and Payment. Sewer service charges shall be billed on a quarterly basis,
unless circumstances require a delayed billing. Such charges shall be payable to the
City on or before the fifteenth (15) day of the month after the month of such billing,
unless the City has extended the time for payment.
(2) Delinquent Payments.
(a) Any person failing to pay the sewer charge within 20 days of the billing date
will be subject to a late payment charge of three (3) percent of the most recent
past due charges.
(b) Any person failing to pay the sewer service charge one month after due date
shall pay an interest charge of 1% per month on the unpaid balance. Interest,
at 1% per month, will be collected in one month increments beginning one
month after the due date.
(c) All charges established by this ordinance shall be a lien against the property
served pursuant to Wis. Stat. §§ 66.0809(1) to (4), 66.0813, and 66.0821.
8.18 ENFORCEMENT, ABATEMENT, AND PENALTIES.
(1) Violations Prohibited.
(a) No User shall violate any provision of this Ordinance, a wastewater
discharge permit, an order issued under this Ordinance, or any pretreatment
standard or requirement. Any person violating any provision of this
Ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, an order issued under this
Ordinance, or any pretreatment standard or requirement shall be subject to
the enforcement and penalty provisions of this Ordinance.
(b) No person shall knowingly make any false statement, representation, record,
report, plan or other document filed with the City or falsify, tamper with, or
knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or method required
under this Ordinance.
(5) No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the Sewerage System. Any
person violating this provision will be subject to the penalty provisions of
this Section and enforcement of any other applicable local, state, or federal
law.
(2) Notice of Noncompliance. When the City finds that a User has violated or continues
to violate any provision of this Ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, an order
43
issued herein, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, the City or its designee
may serve upon the User a written notice of noncompliance.
(a) Any notice of noncompliance issued by the City shall:
(i) Be in writing, personally served or delivered by certified mail, return
receipt requested;
(ii) State the nature of the violation, the approximate date and time of the
violation, and the consequences of further violation; and
(iii) Describe the administrative procedures that are available to review the
City’s determination.
(b) As appropriate to the circumstances, a notice of noncompliance may require
the User to take the following actions, within thirty (30) days of issuance of
the notice of noncompliance:
(i) Identify in a written document to the City the nature and cause of the
violation and provide a description and plan of the remedy action and
compliance schedule;
(ii) Undertake any additional sampling, information, and corrective action
required by the City.
(iii) Attend a meeting with the City.
(c) Nothing in this subsection shall limit the authority of the City to take any
action, including emergency actions or other enforcement actions, without
first issuing a notice of noncompliance.
(d) Submission of the requirements under this subsection in no way relieves the
User of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the
notice of noncompliance.
(3) Notice of Violation. When the City or its authorized designee finds that a User has
violated or continues to violate any provision of this Ordinance, a wastewater
discharge permit, an order issued herein, or any pretreatment standard or
requirement, and has failed to provide an acceptable plan for corrective action as
required in subsection (2), the City or its designee may serve upon that User a
written notice of violation.
(a) Any notice of noncompliance issued by the City shall:
(i) Be in writing, personally served or delivered by certified mail, return
receipt requested;
(ii) State the nature of the violation, the approximate date and time of the
violation, and the consequences of further violation; and
(iii) Describe the administrative procedures that are available to review the
City’s determination.
(b) As appropriate to the circumstances, a notice of noncompliance may require
the User to take the following actions, within thirty (30) days of issuance of
the notice of noncompliance:
(i) Identify in a written document to the City the nature and cause of the
violation and provide a description and plan of the remedy action and
compliance schedule;
44
(ii) Undertake any additional sampling, information, and corrective action
required by the City.
(iii) Attend a meeting with the City.
(c) Nothing in this subsection shall limit the authority of the City to take any
action, including emergency actions or other enforcement actions, without
first issuing a notice of violation.
(d) Submission of the requirements under this subsection in no way relieves the
User of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the
notice of violation.
(4) Orders. If the City has determined that a User has violated or is violating any
provision of this Ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, an order issued herein,
or any pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may order the User to take
certain action by a certain date to remedy or otherwise address the violation. The
City need not proceed with notices under subsection (2) or (3) prior to issuing an
order under this section. Orders shall:
(a) Be in writing and personally served or delivered by certified mail, return
receipt requested;
(b) State the reasons and actions required by the User to comply with the order;
(c) Describe the administrative procedures that are available to review the order.
(5) Orders to Show Cause. When the City finds that a User has violated or continues
to violate any order or enforcement action issued herein, the City may order the User
to appear before the Sewer Utility Manager to show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken.
(a) Any order to show cause shall:
(i) Be in writing, personally served or delivered by certified mail, return
receipt requested;
(ii) State the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for the proposed
enforcement action, the time and place for the hearing, and a request
that the User show cause why the enforcement action should not be
taken.
(iii) Describe the administrative procedures that are available to review the
City’s determination.
(b) Hearing Process.
(i) The City will serve notice of the hearing on the User no less than 10
(ten) days before the hearing date.
(ii) Service of the hearing notice may be made on any agent, officer, or
authorized representative of the appellant User.
(iii) The hearing to show cause shall be before the Sewer Utility Manager
or a hearing examiner as designated by the Sewer Utility Manager.
(iv) The Sewer Utility Manager or designated hearing examiner shall take
evidence on the reasons why the enforcement action should not be
taken.
45
(v) The User shall have the burden of proof as to why the enforcement
action should not be taken.
(vi) Any testimony taken must be under oath. A transcript will be made
available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon
request and payment of the usual chargers thereof. Such request must
be made within ninety (90) days of the hearing.
(c) Appeals.
(i) A person aggrieved by a decision of the Sewer Utility Manager or
designated hearing examiner in an order to show cause proceeding
may seek review of the decision before the Wastewater Treatment
Commission.
(ii) Review shall be limited to the record before the Sewer Utility
Manager or hearing examiner at the order to show cause hearing.
(d) The provisions regarding judicial review in Section 8.19(5) of this Ordinance
shall be applicable to final determinations arising out of proceedings under
this subsection (5).
(6) Emergency Actions Regarding Industrial Dischargers. The City may suspend
wastewater treatment service to an Industrial User whenever it appears to the City
that an actual or threatened industrial discharge presents or threatens an imminent
or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons; a substantial danger to the
environment; an interference with the operation of the City’s Wastewater Treatment
Plant; or violates any pretreatment limits imposed by state or federal law or this
Ordinance.
(a) The City shall notify such Industrial User in the event of a determination to
suspend wastewater treatment service hereunder.
(b) Such User shall cease all such discharges immediately.
(c) The City may reinstate the wastewater treatment service pending proof by
the User and judged sufficient by the City that the conditions creating threat
of imminent or substantial danger have been eliminated.
(7) Judicial Proceedings. Following entry of any order by the City with respect to the
conduct of a User contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance, the City may
commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the appropriate
local court. The City may take further action pursuant to this Section or Section
8.19 or as otherwise allowed by law.
(8) Penalties for Violations.
(a) Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance or any
order of the City shall forfeit an amount not less than $100.00 nor more than
$1,000.00 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
(b) Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall become
liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage incurred by the city by
reason of such violation. The city shall be held harmless as a result of any
expense, loss or damage incurred as a result of a violation to this ordinance.
46
(c) Any person found to be responsible for allowing discharge of a deleterious
substance into the sewerage system which causes damage to the sewerage
system and/or receiving body of water shall, in addition to a forfeiture, pay
the amount to cover damage, both values to be established by the City.
(d) The forgoing penalties are cumulative and not exclusive. Imposition of any
penalty pursuant to this Section does not protect a violator from enforcement
by any other unit of government.
8.19 APPEALS.
(1) Notice of Appeal. Any User directly aggrieved by any decision of the City other
than a decision arising out of a hearing to show cause under Section 8.18(5) may
file a notice of appeal with the Wastewater Treatment Commission.
(a) The notice shall state the grounds upon which the aggrieved User contends
the decision should be modified or reversed.
(b) The notice shall be received by the Wastewater Treatment Commission
within thirty (30) days of the decision of the City.
(c) The filing of the notice of appeal shall stay enforcement of the decision
pending resolution of the appeal.
(d) A fee of $100 shall accompany any appeal. This fee may be refunded if the
appeal is sustained in favor of the appellant.
(2) Notice of Hearing. Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the City will schedule a
hearing before the Wastewater Treatment Commission and will serve notice of the
hearing on the aggrieved User no less than ten (10) days before the hearing date.
(a) The hearing notice shall specify the time and place of the hearing.
(b) Service of the hearing notice may be made on any agent, officer, or
authorized representative of the appellant User.
(3) Authority of Wastewater Treatment Commission. The Wastewater Treatment
Commission shall have the authority to:
(a) Issue notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in
the hearings;
(b) Take evidence;
(c) Issue a decision based on its review of the hearing evidence provided. The
Commission may set such terms and conditions in its decision as are
necessary and appropriate to protect the City’s Sewerage System.
(4) Hearing Process.
(a) The Wastewater Treatment Commission shall preside over a hearing under
this subsection and shall take evidence.
(b) The User shall have the burden of proof as to why the challenged decision
should not be upheld.
(c) Any testimony taken must be under oath. A transcript will be made available
to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon request and
47
payment of the usual chargers thereof. Such request must be made within
ninety (90) days of the hearing.
(5) Judicial Review. Any party to a proceeding under this Section resulting in a final
determination may seek review thereof by certiorari within 30 days of receipt of the
final determination.
(6) Relation to Wis. Stat. ch. 68. The City elects not to be governed by Wis. Stat. ch.
68 with respect to this Ordinance. Accordingly, the procedures set forth in this
section apply in lieu of those in Wis. Stat. §§ 68.01 to 68.12.
48
8.20 Schedule of Sewer Charges (Effective starting 06/01/2018) (MC#1240)
Hauled Waste Surcharges
Holding Tank (CHT) $16.38 per 1000 gal
Septage Tank (CST) $86.16 per 1000 gal
Grease Trap Waste (GTW) $45.00 per 1000 gal
Portable Toilet Waste (PTW) $86.16 per 1000 gal
Exceptional Quality High Strength Waste (EQW) $0.00 per 1000 gal
Hauled High Strength
Volume (CVHS) $0.38 per 1000 gal
BOD5 (CBHS) $0.07 per pound
TSS (CNHS) $0.06 per pound
Nitrogen (CNHS) $0.07 per pound
Phosphorous (CPHS) $8.66 per pound
BTU value (CNG) (2016) $8.69 Per 1,000,000 BTU
Clear Water
Volume (VCW) $2.43 per 100 CF
Meter Size: 8” $386.59 Per month
Table 1 - Schedule of Sewer Charges
Minimum Monthly Charges
Meter Size Minimum Monthly Fee
Rate
5/8" $14.39)
1" $25.91)
1.5" $43.18)
2" $50.38)
3" $107.95)
4" $161.21)
6" $287.87)
Domestic Wastewater Charges
Category Rate
Actual Units
Volume (CV) $3.60) per 100 CF
Non-Domestic/Industrial Wastewater Surcharges
Category Rate
Actual
49
Volume (CV) $3.60) per 100 CF
BOD5 (CB) $0.96) per pound
TSS (CS) $0.44) per pound
Nitrogen (CN) $0.90) per pound
Phosphorous (CP) $11.11) per pound
Clear Water Charge
Volume (VCW) $2.43) per 100 CF
Hauled Waste Surcharges
Holding Tank (CHT) $16.38) per 1000 gal
Septage Tank (CST) $86.16) per 1000 gal
Hauled High Strength
Volume (CVHS) $0.38) per 1000 gal
BOD5 (CBHS) $0.07) per pound
TSS (CNHS) $0.06) per pound
Nitrogen (CNHS) $0.07) per pound
Phosphorous (CPHS) $8.66) per pound
BTU value (CNG) (2016) $8.69) Per 1,000,000 BTU
Clear Water
Volume (VCW) $2.43) per 100 CF
1
Chapter 9 Fair and Open Housing (MC#1092)
9.01 State Statutes Adopted by Reference
9.02 Duties
9.03 Complaints
9.01 FAIR AND OPEN HOUSING
Section 106.50 of the Wisconsin Statute, as amended, and all subsequent amendments thereto, is
hereby adopted by reference.
9.02 DUTIES.
The officials and employees of the City of Wisconsin Rapids shall assist in the orderly prevention and
removal of all discrimination in housing within the City of Wisconsin Rapids by implementing the authority and
enforcement procedures set forth in Section 106.50, Wisconsin Statutes, as amended.
9.03 COMPLAINTS.
The city clerk shall maintain forms for complaints to be filed under Section 106.50, Wisconsin
Statutes, as amended, and shall assist any person alleging a violation thereof in the City of Wisconsin Rapids
to file a complaint thereunder with the Wisconsin Department of Work Force Development, Equal Rights
Division, for enforcement of Section 106.50, Wisconsin Statutes, as amended.
1
Chapter 10 Flood Plain Zoning
10.01 Statutory Authorization, Finding of Fact, Statement of Purpose, Title, and General
Provisions
10.02 General Standards Applicable to all Flood Plain Districts
10.03 Floodway District (FW)
10.04 Flood Fringe District (FF)
10.05 General Flood Plain District (GFP)
10.06 Nonconforming Uses
10.07 Administration
10.08 Amendments
10.09 Enforcement and Penalties
10.10 Definitions
10.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDING OF FACT, STATEMENT OF PURPOSE, TITLE, AND GENERAL
PROVISIONS.
(1) Statutory Authorization. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Sections 61.35 and
62.23 and the requirements in Section 87.30, Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) Finding of Fact. Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of this municipality
would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general welfare, and tax base.
(3) Statement of Purpose. This ordinance is intended to regulate floodplain development to:
(a) Protect life, health, and property;
(b) Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects;
(c) Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the taxpayers;
(d) Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
(e) Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
(f) Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain;
(g) Discourage the victimization of unwary land and homebuyers;
(h) Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in conflicts
between property owners; and
(i) Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate the
activity, use, or structure outside of the floodplain.
(4) Title. This ordinance shall be known as the Floodplain Zoning Ordinance for Wisconsin Rapids,
Wisconsin.
(5) General Provisions.
(a) Areas to be Regulated. This ordinance regulates all areas that would be covered by the
regional flood or base flood.
[Note: Base flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study. Regional flood elevations may be derived from other studies. Areas
covered by the base flood are identified as A-Zones on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map.]
(b) Official Maps and Revisions. The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as
floodplains or A-Zones on the maps listed below and the revisions in the Wisconsin Rapids
Floodplain Appendix. Any change to the base flood elevations (BFE) in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by the
DNR and FEMA before it is effective. No changes to regional flood elevations (RFE's) on non-
FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions are on
file in the office of the Department of Planning and Economic Development, Wisconsin
Rapids. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall
apply.
Official Map(s): Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), panel numbers 55141C0386G,
55141C0387G, 55141C0388G, 55141C0389G, 55141C0391G, 55141C0392G,
55141C0395G, 55141C0526G, 55141C0527G, and 55141C0531G dated February 17,
2
2010; with corresponding profiles that are based on the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated
February 17, 2010, Volume number 55141CV000A.
(c) Establishment of Districts. The regional floodplain areas are divided into three districts as
follows:
(1) The Floodway District (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional floodwaters.
(2) The Floodfringe District (FF) is that portion of the floodplain between the regional
flood limits and the floodway.
(3) The General Floodplain District (GFP) is those areas that have been or may be
covered by floodwater during the regional flood.
(d) Locating Floodplain Boundaries. Discrepancies between boundaries on the official floodplain
zoning map and actual field conditions shall be resolved using the criteria in paragraphs (a) or
(b) below. If a significant difference exists, the map shall be amended according to Section
10.08. The zoning administrator can rely on a boundary derived from a profile elevation to
grant or deny a land use permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The zoning
administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual pre-development field conditions
and the basis upon which the district boundary was determined and for initiating any map
amendments required under this section. Disputes between the zoning administrator and an
applicant over the district boundary line shall be settled according to Section 10.07(3)(c) and
the criteria in (1) and (2) below.
(1) If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall determine the
district boundary. The regional or base flood elevations shall govern if there are any
discrepancies.
(2) Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the boundary shall be determined by
the map scale, visual on-site inspection and any information provided by the
Department.
[Note: Where the flood profiles are based on established base flood
elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must also approve any map amendment
pursuant to Section 10.08(1)(f).]
(e) Removal of Lands from Floodplain. Compliance with the provisions of this ordinance shall not
be grounds for removing land from the floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above the
regional or base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the
map is amended pursuant to Section 10.08.
[Note: This procedure does not remove the requirements for the mandatory purchase
of flood insurance. The property owner must contact FEMA to request a Letter of Map
Change (LOMC).]
(f) Compliance. Any development or use within the areas regulated by this ordinance shall be in
compliance with the terms of this ordinance, and other applicable local, state, and federal
regulations.
(g) Municipalities and State Agencies Regulated. Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities,
villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this ordinance and obtain all
necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Section 13.48(13), Wisconsin
Statutes, applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance, and repair of state
highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation is exempt when Section
30.2022, Wisconsin Statutes, applies.
(h) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
(1) This ordinance supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance
enacted under Sections 59.69, 59.692, or 59.694 for counties; Section 62.23 for
cities; or Section 61.35 for villages; or Section 87.30, Wisconsin Statutes, which
relate to floodplains. If another ordinance is more restrictive than this ordinance, that
ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater
restrictions, but not otherwise.
(2) This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing deed
restrictions, covenants, or easements. If this ordinance imposes greater restrictions,
the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail.
(i) Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance are the
minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of the governing body and are not a
limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. If a provision of
this ordinance, required by ch. NR 116, Wisconsin Administrative Code, is unclear, the
3
provision shall be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the date of the adoption of
this ordinance or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this ordinance.
(j) Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The flood protection standards in this ordinance are
based on engineering experience and scientific research. Larger floods may occur or the flood
height may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply or
guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free from flooding
and flood damages. Nor does this ordinance create liability on the part of, or a cause of action
against, the municipality or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that may
result from reliance on this ordinance.
(k) Severability. Should any portion of this ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected.
(l) Annexed Areas for Cities and Villages. The Wood County floodplain zoning provisions in effect
on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for
all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance, which meets the
requirements of chapter NR 116, Wisconsin Administrative Code and the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed lands are described on the municipality's official
zoning map. County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the
purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of the municipal zoning
administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and the
location of the floodway.
(m) General Development Standards. The community shall review all permit applications to
determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads; be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; be constructed by methods
and practices that minimize flood damages; and be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding. Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above
standards. All subdivision proposals (including manufactured home parks) shall include
regional flood elevation and floodway data for any development that meets the subdivision
definition of this ordinance.
10.02 GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS
(1) Hydraulic and Hydrologic Analyses
(a) Except as allowed in paragraph (3) below, no floodplain development shall:
(1) Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters
by itself or with other development, increasing regional flood height; or
(2) Increase regional flood height due to floodplain storage area lost, which equals or
exceeds 0.01 foot.
(b) The zoning administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the proposed development will
obstruct flow or increase regional flood heights 0.01 foot or more, based on the officially
adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless the provisions of sub. (3) are met.
(c) Obstructions or increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be permitted if
amendments are made to this ordinance, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines,
and water surface profiles, in accordance with Section 10.08.
[Note: This section refers to obstructions or increases in base flood elevations as
shown on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map. Any such alterations
must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR.]
(2) Watercourse Alterations. No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain
shall be issued until the local official has notified in writing all adjacent municipalities, the
Department, and FEMA regional offices and required the applicant to secure all necessary state and
federal permits. The flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be
maintained.
As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date of the watercourse
alteration or relocation, the zoning administrator shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting
appropriate technical or scientific data in accordance with NFIP guidelines that shall be used to revise
the FIRM, risk premium rates and floodplain management regulations as required.
4
(3) Chapter 30 and 31, Wisconsin Statutes, Development. Development that requires a permit from the
Department, under Chapters 30 and 31, Wisconsin Statutes, such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges,
culverts, dams and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and
amendments to the floodway lines, water surface profiles, BFE's established in the FIS, or other data
from the officially adopted FIRM, or other floodplain zoning maps or the floodplain zoning ordinance
are made according to Section 10.08.
(4) Public or Private Campgrounds. Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage
potential and shall meet the following provisions:
(a) The campground is approved by the Department of Health Services.
(b) A land use permit for the campground is issued by the zoning administrator.
(c) The character of the river system and the elevation of the campground is such that a 72- hour
warning of an impending flood can be given to all campground occupants.
(d) There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that offers the minimum
notice required under this section to all persons in the campground. This procedure shall
include a written agreement between the campground owner, the municipal emergency
government coordinator and the chief law enforcement official which specifies the flood
elevation at which evacuation shall occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood
elevations, types of warning systems to be used and the procedures for notifying at-risk
parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for conducting the evacuation.
(e) This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which time the agreement
shall be reviewed and updated - by the officials identified in sub. (4) - to remain in compliance
with all applicable regulations, including those of the state Department of Health Services and
all other applicable regulations.
(f) Only camping units are allowed.
(g) The camping units may not occupy any site in the campground for more than 180 consecutive
days, at which time the camping unit must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of
24 hours.
(h) All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be issued a limited
authorization by the campground operator, a written copy of which is kept on file at the
campground. Such authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period not to
exceed 180 days and shall ensure compliance with all the provisions of this section.
(i) The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the campground operator
to assure compliance with the terms of this section.
(j) All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive days must meet the
applicable requirements in either Section 10.03 or Section 10.04 for the floodplain district in
which the structure is located.
(k) The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances warning of the flood hazard
and the procedures for evacuation when a flood warning is issued.
(l) All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse collection, electrical service, natural
gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells shall be properly anchored and placed at
or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
10.03 FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW)
(1) Applicability. This section applies to all floodway areas on the floodplain zoning maps and those
identified pursuant to Section 10.05(4).
(2) Permitted Uses. The following open space uses are allowed in the floodway district and the floodway
areas of the general floodplain district, if:
- - they are not prohibited by any other ordinance;
- - they meet the standards in Section 10.03(3) and 10.03(4); and
- - all permits or certificates have been issued according to Section 10.07(1).
(a) Agricultural uses, such as: farming, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, and wild
crop harvesting.
(b) Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking areas and
airport landing strips.
(c) Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, archery ranges, picnic
grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing areas and hiking and
horseback riding trails, subject to the fill limitations of Section 10.03(3)(d).
(d) Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as historic structures that
comply with Sections 10.03(3)(c) and 10.03(3)(d).
5
(e) Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with Section 10.03(3)(d).
(f) Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves, dams, flowage areas,
culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply
with Chapters 30 and 31, Wisconsin Statutes
(g) Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with Section 10.03(3)(c).
(3) Standards for Developments in Floodway Areas.
(a) General.
(1) Any development in floodway areas shall comply with Section 10.02 and have a low
flood damage potential.
(2) Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects of the proposal
according to Section 10.02(1).
(a) A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular to the
watercourse, showing if the proposed development will obstruct flow; or
(b) An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional flood height.
(3) The zoning administrator shall deny the permit application if the project will increase
flood elevations upstream or downstream 0.01 foot or more, based on the data
submitted for paragraph (b) above.
(b) Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or functionally dependent on
a waterfront location may be allowed by permit if the structures comply with the following
criteria:
(1) The structure is not designed for human habitation and does not have a high flood
damage potential;
(2) it must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement;
(3) mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the
flood protection elevation; and
(4) it must not obstruct the flow of flood waters or cause any increase in flood levels
during the occurrence of the regional flood.
(c) Public Utilities, Streets, and Bridges. Public utilities, streets, and bridges may be allowed by
permit, if:
(1) Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood protection elevation; and
(2) Construction meets the development standards of Section 10.02(1).
(d) Fills or Deposition of Materials. Fills or deposition of materials may be allowed by permit, if:
(1) The requirements of Section 10.02(1) are met;
(2) No material is deposited in the navigable channel unless a permit is issued by the
Department pursuant to chapter 30, Wisconsin Statutes, and a permit pursuant to
Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33
U.S.C. 1344 has been issued, if applicable, and the other requirements of this
section are met;
(3) The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative
cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and
(4) The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
(4) Prohibited Uses. All uses not listed as permitted uses in Section 10.03(2) are prohibited, including the
following uses:
(a) Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those not associated
with permanent open-space uses;
(b) Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to property, water quality,
or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life;
(c) Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining districts;
(d) Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are removed prior to
flooding and systems associated with recreational areas and Department-approved
campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and chapter COMM 83,
Wisconsin Administrative Code;
(e) Any public or private wells, which are used to obtain potable water, except those for
recreational areas that meet the requirements of local ordinances and chs. NR 811 and NR
812, Wisconsin Administrative Code;
(f) Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
(g) Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under Section NR
110.15(3)(b), Wisconsin Administrative Code;
6
(h) Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or proposed
development located outside the floodway that complies with the regulations for the
floodplain area occupied.
10.04 FLOODFRINGE DISTRICT (FF)
(1) Applicability. This section applies to all floodfringe areas shown on the floodplain zoning maps and
those identified pursuant to Section 10.05(4).
(2) Permitted Uses. Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in the floodfringe district if the
standards in Section 10.04(3) are met, the use is not prohibited by this or any other ordinance or
regulation and all permits or certificates specified in Section 10.07(1) have been issued.
(3) Standards for Development in Floodfringe Areas. Section 10.02(1) shall apply in addition to the
following requirements according to the use requested.
(a) Residential Uses. Any habitable structure, including a manufactured home, which is to be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or moved into the floodfringe area, shall meet or
exceed the following standards;
(1) The elevation of the lowest floor, excluding the basement or crawlway, shall be at or
above the flood protection elevation on fill. The fill shall be one foot or more above
the regional flood elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the
structure. The Department may authorize other floodproofing measures if the
elevations of existing streets or sewer lines makes compliance impractical;
(2) The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood elevation if it is
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is
allowed below the regional flood elevation;
(3) Contiguous dryland access shall be provided from a structure to land outside of the
floodplain, except as provided in paragraph (d);
(4) In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations make compliance with
paragraph (c) impractical, the municipality may permit new development and
substantial improvements where access roads are at or below the regional flood
elevation, if:
(a) The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and emergency
services that rescue and relief will be provided to the structure(s) by wheeled
vehicles during a regional flood event; or
(b) The municipality has a natural disaster plan approved by Wisconsin
Emergency Management and the Department.
(b) Accessory Structures or Uses.
(1) Except as provided in paragraph (b), an accessory structure that is not connected to
a principal structure may be constructed with its lowest floor at or above the regional
flood elevation.
(2) An accessory structure which is not connected to the principal structure and which is
less than 600 square feet in size and valued at less than $10,000 may be
constructed with its lowest floor no more than two feet below the regional flood
elevation if it is subject to flood velocities of no more than two feet per second and it
meets all of the provisions of sections 10.03(3)(b)(1), (2), (3), and (4) and
10.04(3)(e).
(c) Commercial Uses. Any commercial structure, which is erected, altered, or moved into the
floodfringe area, shall meet the requirements of Section 10.04(3)(a). Subject to the
requirements of Section 10.04(3)(e), storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses
may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and
property.
(d) Manufacturing and Industrial Uses. Any manufacturing or industrial structure, which is
erected, altered, or moved into the floodfringe area, shall be protected to the flood protection
elevation using fill, levees, floodwalls, or other flood proofing measures in Section 10.07(5).
Subject to the requirements of Section 10.04(3)(e), storage yards, surface parking lots and
other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to
protect life and property.
(e) Storage of Materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to
property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above
the flood protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with Section 10.07(5). Adequate
measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body during
flooding.
7
(f) Public Utilities, Streets, and Bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges shall be designed to be
compatible with comprehensive floodplain development plans; and
(1) When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger public health or
safety, or where such facilities are deemed essential, construction of and substantial
improvements to such facilities may only be permitted if they are floodproofed in
compliance with Section 10.07(5) to the flood protection elevation;
(2) Minor roads or nonessential utilities may be constructed at lower elevations if they
are designed to withstand flood forces to the regional flood elevation.
(g) Sewage Systems. All on-site sewage disposal systems shall be floodproofed, pursuant to
Section 10.07(5), to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of all local
ordinances and Chapter COMM 83, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(h) Wells. All wells shall be floodproofed, pursuant to Section 10.07(5), to the flood protection
elevation and shall meet the provisions of chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wisconsin Administrative
Code.
(i) Solid Waste Disposal Sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in floodfringe
areas.
(j) Deposition of Materials. Any deposited material must meet all the provisions of this
ordinance.
(k) Manufactured Homes.
(1) Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall provide
adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage, and prepare secure approval
and file an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and escape routes, with local
emergency management authorities.
(2) In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement homes on existing
pads, and substantially improved homes shall:
(a) have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation; and
(b) be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally during a flood.
(3) Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new manufactured home
parks and all single units outside of existing parks, all new, replacement and
substantially improved manufactured homes shall meet the residential development
standards for the floodfringe in Section 10.04(3)(a).
(l) Mobile Recreational Vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that are on site for 180
consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the
elevation and anchoring requirements in Section 10.04(3)(k)(2) and (3). A mobile recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick-disconnect utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
10.05 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GFP)
(1) Applicability. The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains for which flood profiles are not
available or where flood profiles are available but floodways have not been delineated. Floodway and
floodfringe districts shall be delineated when adequate data is available.
(2) Permitted Uses. Pursuant to Section 5.4, it shall be determined whether the proposed use is located
within a floodway or floodfringe area.
Those uses permitted in floodway [Section 10.03(2)] and floodfringe areas [Section 10.04(2)]
are allowed within the general floodplain district, according to the standards of Section 10.05(3),
provided that all permits or certificates required under Section 10.07(1) have been issued.
(3) Standards for Development in the General Floodplain District. Section 10.0 3 applies to floodway
areas, Section 10.04 applies to floodfringe areas. The rest of this ordinance applies to either district.
(4) Determining Floodway and Floodfringe Limits. Upon receiving an application for development within
the general floodplain district, the zoning administrator shall:
(a) Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a plan which shows the
proposed development with respect to the general floodplain district limits, stream channel,
and existing floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the property, fill limits
and elevations, building floor elevations and flood proofing measures;
(b) Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information deemed necessary by the
Department to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional
flood elevation and to determine floodway boundaries:
8
(1) A typical valley cross-section showing the stream channel, the floodplain adjoining
each side of the channel, the cross-sectional area to be occupied by the proposed
development, and all historic high water information;
(2) Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure,
fill or storage elevations; size, location and layout of all proposed and existing
structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary
facilities; soil types and other pertinent information;
(3) Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream;
(4) Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging,
channel improvement, storage, water supply, and sanitary facilities.
(c) Transmit one copy of the information described in paragraphs (1) and (2) to the Department
Regional office along with a written request for technical assistance to establish regional
flood elevations and, where applicable, floodway data. Where the provisions of Section
10.07(1)(b)(3) apply, the applicant shall provide all required information and computations to
delineate floodway boundaries and the effects of the project on flood elevations.
10.06 NONCONFORMING USES
(1) General
(a) APPLICABILITY. If these standards conform with Section 59.69(10), Wisconsin Statutes, for
counties or Section 62.23(7)(h), Wisconsin Statutes, for cities and villages, they shall apply to
all modifications or additions to any nonconforming use or structure and to the use of any
structure or premises which was lawful before the passage of this ordinance or any
amendment thereto.
(b) The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use, which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this ordinance, may continue subject to the following conditions:
(1) No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure shall be permitted
unless they comply with this ordinance. The words "modification" and "addition"
include, but are not limited to, any alteration, addition, modification, structural repair,
rebuilding, or replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory structure
or use. Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered an extension, modification,
or addition; these include painting, decorating, paneling, and the replacement of
doors, windows and other nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or
replacement of existing private sewage or water supply systems or connections to
public utilities. Ordinary maintenance repairs do not include any costs associated
with the repair of a damaged structure.
The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and that is
adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an extension, modification,
or addition. The roof of the structure may extend over a portion of the deck in order to
provide safe ingress and egress to the principal structure.
(2) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for
12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted and any future use of the property,
and any structure or building thereon, shall conform to the applicable requirements
of this ordinance;
(3) The municipality shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming uses and
nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value, the cost of all
modifications or additions which have been permitted, and the percentage of the
structure's total current value those modifications represent;
(4) No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a
nonconforming use, which over the life of the structure would equal or exceed 50% of
its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is
permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance
with the applicable requirements of this ordinance. Contiguous dry land access must
be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with Section
10.04(3)(a). The costs of elevating a nonconforming building or a building with a
nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are excluded from the 50%
provisions of this paragraph;
(5) (a) Except as provided in subd. 2., if any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is substantially damaged,
it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the
structure meet the current ordinance requirements. A structure is
9
considered substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure to
its pre-damaged condition equals or exceeds 50% of the structure’s present
equalized assessed value.
(b) For nonconforming buildings that are damaged or destroyed by a nonflood
disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such nonconforming building
may be permitted in order to restore it after the nonflood disaster, provided
that the nonconforming building will meet all of the minimum requirements
under applicable FEMA regulations (44 CFR Part 60), or the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
(6) A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will not preclude
the structures continued designation as a historic structure, the alteration will comply
with Section 10.03(3)(a), flood resistant materials are used, and construction
practices and floodproofing methods that comply with Section 10.07(5) are used.
(2) Floodway Areas.
(a) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure
with a nonconforming use in a floodway area, unless such modification or addition:
(1) Has been granted a permit or variance, which meets all ordinance requirements;
(2) Meets the requirements of Section 10.06(1);
(3) Will not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood height;
(4) Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed, pursuant to Section
10.07(5), by means other than the use of fill, to the flood protection elevation;
(5) If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is enclosed, the
following standards shall apply:
(a) The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect or engineer to
allow for the efficient entry and exit of flood waters without human
intervention. A minimum of two openings must be provided with a minimum
net area of at least one square inch for every one square foot of the
enclosed area. The lowest part of the opening can be no more than 12
inches above the adjacent grade;
(b) The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed of flood-resistant materials;
(c) Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or
above the flood protection elevation; and
(d) The use must be limited to parking or limited storage.
(b) No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on-site sewage disposal
system, except where an addition has been ordered by a government agency to correct a
hazard to public health, shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair, or
maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the
applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances and chapter COMM 83, Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(c) No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable water shall be allowed
in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair, or maintenance of an existing well in a floodway
area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances and chapters NR
811 and NR 812, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(3) Floodfringe Areas.
(a) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure
with a nonconforming use unless such modification or addition has been granted a permit or
variance by the municipality, and the modification or addition shall be placed on fill or
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation in compliance with the standards for that
particular use in Sections 10.04(3) and 10.07(5), except where Section 10.06(3)(b) is
applicable.
(b) Where compliance with the provisions of paragraph (1) would result in unnecessary hardship
and only where the structure will not be used for human habitation or be associated with a
high flood damage potential, the Board of Adjustment/Appeals, using the procedures
established in Section 10.07(3), may grant a variance from those provisions of paragraph (1)
for modifications or additions, using the criteria listed below. Modifications or additions, which
are protected to elevations lower than the flood protection elevation, may be permitted if:
(1) No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential or commercial
structures;
(2) Human lives are not endangered;
10
(3) Public facilities, such as water or sewer, will not be installed;
(4) Flood depths will not exceed two feet;
(5) Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; and
(6) The structure will not be used for storage of materials as described in Section
10.04(3)(e).
(c) If neither the provisions of paragraph (1) or (2) above can be met, one addition to an existing
room in a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use may be allowed in
the floodfringe, if the addition:
(1) Meets all other regulations and will be granted by permit or variance;
(2) Does not exceed 60 square feet in area; and
(3) In combination with other previous modifications or additions to the building, does
not equal or exceed 50% of the present equalized assessed value of the building.
(d) All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement, repair, or maintenance
of a private sewage disposal system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local
ordinances and chapter COMM 83, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(e) All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair, or maintenance of a well shall meet the
applicable provisions of this ordinance and chapters NR 811 and NR 812, Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
10.07 ADMINISTRATION.
Where a zoning administrator, planning agency or a board of adjustment/appeals has already been
appointed to administer a zoning ordinance adopted under Sections 59.69, 59.692 or 62.23(7), Wisconsin
Statutes, these officials shall also administer this ordinance.
(1) Zoning Administration.
(a) The zoning administrator is authorized to administer this ordinance and shall have the
following duties and powers:
(1) Advise applicants of the ordinance provisions, assist in preparing permit applications
and appeals, and assure that the regional flood elevation for the proposed
development is shown on all permit applications.
(2) Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with provisions of this ordinance,
and issue certificates of compliance where appropriate.
(3) Inspect all damaged floodplain structures and perform a substantial damage
assessment to determine if substantial damage to the structures has occurred.
(4) Keep records of all official actions such as:
(a) All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved;
(b) Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood elevations for
floodplain development;
(c) Records of water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and ordinances,
nonconforming uses and structures including changes, appeals, variances,
and amendments.
(d) All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain structures.
(5) Submit copies of the following items to the Department Regional office:
(a) Within 10 days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on variances,
appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or text amendments;
(b) Copies of any case-by-case analyses, and any other information required by
the Department including an annual summary of the number and types of
floodplain zoning actions taken.
(c) Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all related
correspondence concerning the assessments.
(6) Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this ordinance to the municipal
zoning agency and attorney for prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent
to the Department Regional office.
(7) Submit copies of text and map amendments and biennial reports to the FEMA
Regional office.
(b) Land Use Permit. A land use permit shall be obtained before any new development or any
repair or change in the use of a building or structure, including sewer and water facilities, may
be initiated. Application to the zoning administrator shall include:
(1) General Information.
(a) Name and address of the applicant, property owner, and contractor;
11
(b) Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new construction or a
modification;
(2) Site Development Plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be submitted with the permit
application form and shall contain:
(a) Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot;
(b) Location of the ordinary highwater mark of any abutting navigable
waterways;
(c) Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and
street center lines;
(d) Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water
supply systems;
(e) Location and elevation of existing or future access roads;
(f) Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from the official
floodplain zoning maps;
(g) The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any fill using
vertical datum from the adopted study - either National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD) or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD);
(h) Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in NGVD or NAVD at
the location of the development and to determine whether or not the
requirements of Section 10.03 or 10.04 are met; and
(i) Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an obstruction to
flow or an increase in regional flood height or discharge according to Section
10.02(1). This may include any of the information noted in Section
10.03(3)(a).
(3) Data Requirements to Analyze Developments. The applicant shall provide all survey
data and computations required to show the effects of the project on flood heights,
velocities and floodplain storage, for all subdivision proposals, as "subdivision" is
defined in Section 236, Wisconsin Statutes, and other proposed developments
exceeding 5 acres in area or where the estimated cost exceeds $125,000. The
applicant shall provide:
(a) An analysis of the effect of the development on the regional flood profile,
velocity of flow and floodplain storage capacity;
(b) A map showing location and details of vehicular access to lands outside the
floodplain; and
(c) A surface drainage plan showing how flood damage will be minimized.
The estimated cost of the proposal shall include all structural development,
landscaping, access and road development, utilities, and other pertinent items, but
need not include land costs.
(4) Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this ordinance shall expire 365
days after issuance.
(c) Certificate of Compliance. No land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is
hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, repaired, rebuilt, or replaced shall be
occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning administrator, except where
no permit is required, subject to the following provisions:
(1) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof,
and the proposed use, conform to the provisions of this ordinance;
(2) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a permit;
(3) If all ordinance provisions are met, the certificate of compliance shall be issued
within 10 days after written notification that the permitted work is completed;
(4) The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered professional engineer
or registered land surveyor that the fill, lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are
in compliance with the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also require
certification by a registered professional engineer or registered architect that
floodproofing measures meet the requirements of Section 10.07(5).
(d) Other Permits. The applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state, and local
agencies, including those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344.
(2) Zoning Agency.
(a) The Planning Commission shall:
(1) oversee the functions of the office of the zoning administrator; and
12
(2) review and advise the Governing body on all proposed amendments to this
ordinance, maps and text.
(b) This zoning agency shall not:
(1) grant variances to the terms of the ordinance in place of action by the Board of
Adjustment/Appeals; or
(2) amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the Governing body.
(3) Board of Adjustment/Appeals. The Board of Adjustment/Appeals, created under
Section 59.694, Wisconsin Statutes, for counties or Section 62.23(7)(e), Wisconsin
Statutes, for cities or villages, is hereby authorized or shall be appointed to act for the
purposes of this ordinance. The Board shall exercise the powers conferred by
Wisconsin Statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of business. The zoning
administrator may not be the secretary of the Board.
(a) Powers and Duties. The Board of Adjustment/Appeals shall:
(1) Appeals - Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of
this ordinance.
(2) Boundary Disputes - Hear and decide disputes concerning the
district boundaries shown on the official floodplain zoning map.
(3) Variances - Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the
ordinance standards.
(b) Appeals to the Board.
(1) Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by
any officer or department of the municipality affected by any
decision of the zoning administrator or other administrative officer.
Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days unless otherwise
provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the official whose
decision is in question, and with the board, a notice of appeal
specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision is
in question shall transmit to the board all records regarding the
matter appealed.
(2) Notice and Hearing for Appeals Including Variances.
(a) Notice - The board shall:
(1) Fix a reasonable time for the hearing;
(2) Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin
Statutes, specifying the date, time, place and
subject of the hearing;
(3) Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in
interest and the Department Regional office at
least 10 days in advance of the hearing.
(b) Hearing - Any party may appear in person or by agent. The
board shall:
(1) Resolve boundary disputes according to Section
10.07(3)(c).
(2) Decide variance applications according to Section
10.07(3)(d).
(3) Decide appeals of permit denials according to
Section 10.0(7)(d).
(3) Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance
application shall:
(a) Be made within a reasonable time;
(b) Be sent to the Department Regional office within 10 days of
the decision;
(c) Be a written determination signed by the chairperson or
secretary of the Board;
(d) State the specific facts, which are the basis for the Board's
decision;
(e) Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole
13
or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or grant
or deny the variance application;
(f) Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the
hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a
variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the
Board proceedings.
(c) Boundary Disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the Board in hearing disputes
concerning floodplain district boundaries:
(1) If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or detailed floodplain
studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall prevail in locating the boundary. If none
exist, other evidence may be examined.
(2) In all cases, the person contesting the boundary location shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence to the Board.
(3) If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Board should inform the zoning committee
or the person contesting the boundary location to petition the governing body for a
map amendment according to Section 10.08.
(d) Variance.
(1) The Board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards of this ordinance if
an applicant convincingly demonstrates that:
(a) Literal enforcement of the ordinance provisions will cause unnecessary
hardship;
(b) The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain ordinance and unique
property conditions, not common to adjacent lots or premises. In such case
the ordinance or map must be amended;
(c) The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
(d) The variance is consistent with the purpose of this ordinance in Section
10.01(3).
(2) In addition to the criteria in paragraph (a), to qualify for a variance under FEMA
regulations, the following criteria must be met:
(a) The variance may not cause any increase in the regional flood elevation;
(b) Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than one-half acre and
are contiguous to existing structures constructed below the RFE;
(c) Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and sufficient
cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall not cause increased
risks to public safety or nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue and
relief efforts and shall not be contrary to the purpose of the ordinance.
(3) A variance shall not:
(a) Grant, extend, or increase any use prohibited in the zoning district.
(b) Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss.
(c) Be granted for a hardship, which is self-created.
(d) Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area.
(e) Allow actions without the amendments to this ordinance or map(s) required
in Section 10.08(1).
(f) Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use, which would
preclude its continued designation as an historic structure.
(4) When a floodplain variance is granted the Board shall notify the applicant in writing
that it may increase flood insurance premiums and risks to life and property. A copy
shall be maintained with the variance record.
(4) To Review Appeals of Permit Denials.
(a) The Zoning Agency [Section 10.07(2)] or Board shall review all data related to the appeal.
This may include:
(1) Permit application data listed in Section 10.07(1)(b).
(2) Floodway/floodfringe determination data in Section 10.07(5)(d).
(3) Data listed in Section 10.03(3)(a)(2) where the applicant has not submitted this
information to the zoning administrator.
(4) Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the Board with the appeal.
(b) For appeals of all denied permits, the Board shall:
(1) Follow the procedures of Section 10.07(3);
(2) Consider zoning agency recommendations; and
(3) Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal.
14
(c) For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation, the Board shall:
(1) Uphold the denial where the Board agrees with the data showing an increase in flood
elevation. Increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be allowed after
amending the flood profile and map and all appropriate legal arrangements are
made with all adversely affected property owners.
(2) Grant the appeal where the Board agrees that the data properly demonstrates that
the project does not cause an increase equal to or greater than 0.01 foot provided no
other reasons for denial exist.
(5) Floodproofing.
(a) No permit or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the
structure or development to the flood protection elevation.
(b) Floodproofing measures shall be designed to:
(1) Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact forces and other
regional flood factors;
(2) Protect structures to the flood protection elevation;
(3) Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral movement; and
(4) Insure that structural walls and floors are watertight to the flood protection elevation,
and the interior remains completely dry during flooding without human intervention.
(c) Floodproofing measures could include:
(1) Reinforcing walls and floors to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure or
floating debris.
(2) Adding mass or weight to prevent flotation.
(3) Placing essential utilities above the flood protection elevation.
(4) Installing surface or subsurface drainage systems to relieve foundation wall and
basement floor pressures.
(5) Constructing water supply wells and waste treatment systems to prevent the entry of
flood waters.
(6) Putting cutoff valves on sewer lines or eliminating gravity flow basement drains.
(6) Public Information.
(a) Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the regional flood.
(b) All maps, engineering data, and regulations shall be available and widely distributed.
(c) All real estate transfers should show what floodplain zoning district any real property is in.
10.08 AMENDMENTS
(1) General. The governing body may change or supplement the floodplain zoning district boundaries and
this ordinance in the manner provided by law. Actions, which require an amendment, include, but are
not limited to, the following:
(a) Any change to the official floodplain zoning map, including the floodway line or boundary of
any floodplain area.
(b) Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and floodplain zoning maps.
(c) Any fill in the floodplain, which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height at or above
the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain.
(d) Any fill or floodplain encroachment that obstructs flow, increasing regional flood height 0.01
foot or more.
(e) Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by Section NR 116.05, Wisconsin
Administrative Code, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by the municipality.
(f) All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines or to remove an area
from the floodway or the floodfringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a FIRM
requires prior approval by FEMA.
[Note: Consult the FEMA web site (www.fema.gov) for the map change fee
schedule.]
(2) Procedures. Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of any interested party according to
the provisions of Section 62.23, Wisconsin Statutes, for cities and villages, or 59.69, Wisconsin
Statutes, for counties. Such petitions shall include all necessary data required by Sections 10.05(1)(d)
and 10.07(1)(b).
(a) The proposed amendment shall be referred to the zoning agency for a public hearing and
recommendation to the governing body. The amendment and notice of public hearing shall be
submitted to the Department Regional office for review prior to the hearing. The amendment
15
procedure shall comply with the provisions of Section 62.23, Wisconsin Statutes, for cities
and villages or Section 59.69, Wisconsin Statutes, for counties.
(b) No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the Department.
(c) All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow, increasing regional flood
height 0.01 foot or more, shall obtain flooding easements or other appropriate legal
arrangements from all adversely affected property owners and notify local units of
government before the amendment can be approved by the governing body.
(d) For amendments in areas with no water surface profiles, the zoning agency or board shall
consider data submitted by the Department, the zoning administrator's visual on-site
inspections and other available information. [See Section 10.01(5)(d).]
10.09 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
Any violation of the provisions of this ordinance by any person shall be unlawful and shall be referred
to the municipal attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction,
forfeit to the municipality a penalty of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,000.00, together with a
taxable cost of such action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation
of this ordinance is a public nuisance and the creation may be enjoined and the maintenance may be abated
by action at suit of the municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to Section 87.30, Wisconsin
Statutes.
10.10 DEFINITIONS.
Unless specifically defined, words and phrases in this ordinance shall have their common law meaning
and shall be applied in accordance with their common usage. Words used in the present tense include the
future, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular. The word "may" is
permissive, "shall" is mandatory and is not discretionary.
(1) A Zones: Those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map, which would be inundated by the
regional flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may or may not
be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area.
(2) Accessory Structure or Use: A facility, structure, building or use that is accessory or incidental to the
principal use of a property, structure, or building.
(3) Base Flood: Means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and depicted on a FIRM.
(4) Basement: Any enclosed area of a building having its floor sub-grade, i.e., below ground level, on all
sides.
(5) Building: See “Structure”
(6) Bulkhead Line: A geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by a
municipal ordinance and approved by the Department pursuant to Section 30.11, Wisconsin Statutes,
and which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary highwater mark,
except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this ordinance.
(7) Campground: Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of
providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by 4 or more camping units, or which is advertised or
represented as a camping area.
(8) Camping Unit: Any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in area, used as a temporary
shelter, including but not limited to a camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pick-up truck, tent, or
other mobile recreational vehicle.
(9) Certificate of Compliance: A certification that the construction and the use of land or a building, the
elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this
ordinance.
(10) Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct normal
flow of water.
(11) Crawlways or Crawl Space: An enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building, generally less
than five feet in height, used for access to plumbing and electrical utilities.
(12) Deck: An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has a permeable floor that allows
the infiltration of precipitation.
(13) Department: The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(14) Development: Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited
to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or
alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of any damaged structure or the
improvement or renovation of any structure, regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the
placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining, dredging, filling,
16
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the storage, deposition or extraction of materials or
equipment; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or
water supply facilities.
(15) Dryland Access: A vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and which
connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface
above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
(16) Encroachment: Any fill, structure, equipment, building, use, or development in the floodway.
(17) Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A parcel of land, divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots is
completed before the effective date of this ordinance. At a minimum, this would include the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads.
(18) Expansion to Existing Mobile/Manufactured Home Park: The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This
includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading, or the pouring if
concrete pads.
(19) Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA): The federal agency that administers the National
Flood Insurance Program.
(20) Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): A map of a community on which the Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both special flood hazard areas (the floodplain) and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(21) Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry
land areas caused by one of the following conditions:
-- The overflow or rise of inland waters,
-- The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source,
-- The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels
along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake Superior, or
-- The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or
by some similarly unusual event.
(22) Flood Frequency: The probability of a flood occurrence, which is determined from statistical analyses.
The frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in a
specified number of years or as a percent (%) chance of occurring in any given year.
(23) Floodfringe: That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway that is covered by flood waters
during the regional flood and associated with standing water rather than flowing water.
(24) Flood Hazard Boundary Map: A map designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas
are designated as unnumbered A-Zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations.
This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a Flood Insurance Study and a Flood Insurance Rate
Map.
(25) Flood Insurance Study: A technical engineering examination, evaluation, and determination of the
local flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and
provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide floodway lines.
The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and unnumbered A-Zones. Flood Insurance Rate
Maps, that accompany the Flood Insurance Study, form the basis for both the regulatory and the
insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program.
(26) Floodplain: Land that has been or may be covered by flood water during the regional flood. It includes
the floodway and the floodfringe, and may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory
purposes.
(27) Floodplain Island: A natural geologic land formation within the floodplain that is surrounded, but not
covered, by floodwater during the regional flood.
(28) Floodplain Management: Policy and procedures to insure wise use of floodplains, including mapping
and engineering, mitigation, education, and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations.
(29) Flood Profile: A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the relationship of the water surface
elevation of a flood event to locations of land surface elevations along a stream or river.
(30) Floodproofing: Any combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to properties and
structures, water and sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose
of reducing or eliminating flood damage.
17
(31) Flood Protection Elevation: An elevation of two feet of freeboard above the water surface profile
elevation designated for the regional flood. (Also see “Freeboard”)
(32) Flood Storage: Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account
during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge.
(33) Floodway: The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel
required to carry the regional flood discharge.
(34) Freeboard: A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of feet above a calculated flood
level. Freeboard compensates for any factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated,
including ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways,
the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas due to development and aggregation
of the river or stream bed.
(35) Habitable Structure: Any structure or portion thereof used or designed for human habitation.
(36) Hearing Notice: Publication or posting meeting the requirements of Chapter 985, Wisconsin Statutes
For appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at least one week (7 days) before the hearing, is
required. For all zoning ordinances and amendments, a Class 2 notice, published twice, once each
week consecutively, the last at least a week (7 days) before the hearing. Local ordinances or bylaws
may require additional notice, exceeding these minimums.
(37) High Flood Damage Potential: Damage that could result from flooding that includes any danger to life
or health or any significant economic loss to a structure or building and its contents.
(38) Historic Structure: Any structure that is either:
-- Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by
the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register,
-- Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district,
-- Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior, or
-- Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program, as
determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(39) Increase in Regional Flood Height: A calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevation, equal to or
greater than 0.01 foot, based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions, which
is directly attributable to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of
mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients, and
discharge.
(40) Land Use: Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate. (Also see
“Development”)
(41) Manufactured Home: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent
chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does not include a
"mobile recreational vehicle."
(42) Mobile Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle which is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when
measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently
towable by a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is required and is
designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a
parcel of land, but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model homes, do
not fall within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicles."
(43) Municipality or Municipal: The county, city or village governmental units enacting, administering, and
enforcing this zoning ordinance.
(44) NAVD or North American Verticle Datum: Elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988
adjustment.
(45) NGVD or National Geodetic Vertical Datum: Elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929
adjustment.
(46) New Construction: For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for
which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning
regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it includes any structures for which
18
the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after
December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
(47) Nonconforming Structure: An existing lawful structure or building which is not in conformity with the
dimensional or structural requirements of this ordinance for the area of the floodplain which it
occupies. (For example, an existing residential structure in the floodfringe district is a conforming use.
However, if the lowest floor is lower than the flood protection elevation, the structure is
nonconforming.)
(48) Nonconforming Use: An existing lawful use or accessory use of a structure or building which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this ordinance for the area of the floodplain, which it occupies. (Such
as a residence in the floodway.)
(49) Obstruction to Flow: Any development that blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that this
development alone or together with any future development will cause an increase in regional flood
height.
(50) Official Floodplain Zoning Map: That map, adopted, and made part of this ordinance, as described in
Section 10.01(5)(b), which has been approved by the Department and FEMA.
(51) Open Space Use: Those uses having a relatively low flood damage potential and not involving
structures.
(52) Ordinary Highwater Mark: The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of
surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or
prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized
characteristic.
(53) Person: An individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, municipality, or
state agency.
(54) Private Sewage System: A sewage treatment and disposal system serving one structure with a septic
tank and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative
sewage system approved by the Department of Commerce, including a substitute for the septic tank
or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system located
on a different parcel than the structure.
(55) Public Utilities: Those utilities using underground or overhead transmission lines such as electric,
telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and
storm sewer.
(56) Reasonably Safe from Flooding: Means base flood waters will not inundate the land or damage
structures to be removed from the special flood hazard area and that any subsurface waters related to
the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings.
(57) Regional Flood: A flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have occurred in
Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year, and if depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE.
(58) Start of Construction: The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for
a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
(59) Structure: Any manmade object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or temporarily
attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, stream bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to,
roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts.
(60) Subdivision: Has the meaning given in Section 236.02(12), Wisconsin Statutes.
(61) Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the
structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
(62) Unnecessary Hardship: Where special conditions affecting a particular property, which were not selfcreated,
have made strict conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or
density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of the ordinance.
19
(63) Variance: An authorization by the board of adjustment or appeals for the construction or maintenance
of a building or structure in a manner that is inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses)
contained in the floodplain zoning ordinance.
(64) Violation: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the floodplain
zoning ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation
documentation, floodproofing certificates, or required floodway encroachment calculations is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
(65) Watershed: The entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a watercourse or body of water.
(66) Water Surface Profile: A graphical representation showing the elevation of the water surface of a
watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface
profile of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas.
(67) Well: means an excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or other
methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its intended use.
32
Ch apte r 1 1 –
Z on in g
City of Wisconsin Rapids,
Wisconsin
Adopted July
17, 2018
Effective August
1, 2018

Chapter 11 – Zoning Code
Table of Contents
Article Page
1. General Provisions ..................................................................................................................................... 1
2. Interpretation, Construction, and Definitions ........................................................................................ 5
3. Administrative Bodies ................................................................................................................................ 9
4. General Procedural Requirements ....................................................................................................... 17
5. Specific Procedural Requirements ....................................................................................................... 27
6. Zoning Districts and Land Use ................................................................................................................ 81
7. Building Types ......................................................................................................................................... 105
8. Alternative Development Options ..................................................................................................... 107
9. Floodplain Overlay District ................................................................................................................... 113
10. Reserved ................................................................................................................................................................. 129
11. Shoreland-Wetland Overlay District ................................................................................................................... 131
12. Shoreland Overlay District .................................................................................................................................... 135
13. Wellhead Protection Overlay District ................................................................................................................. 137
14. Downtown Design Overlay District ..................................................................................................................... 141
15. Fencing .................................................................................................................................................................... 145
16. Landscaping ........................................................................................................................................................... 151
17. Parking and Loading Facilities ............................................................................................................................. 163
18. Outdoor Lighting .................................................................................................................................................... 171
19. Nonconformities ..................................................................................................................................................... 175
20. Reserved ................................................................................................................................................................. 179
21. Reasonable Accommodations .......................................................................................................................... 181
22. Enforcement ........................................................................................................................................................... 183
Appendix
A. Land-Use Matrix
B. Land Uses
C. Zoning Districts and Dimensional Standards
D. Building Type Illustrations
E. General Definitions
F. Mapping Requirements
G. History of Amendments
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
1
CHAPTER 11 – ZONING
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
2
Sections
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
11.01.01 Title
11.01.02 Authority
11.01.03 Jurisdiction
11.01.04 Legislative findings
11.01.05 Purpose
11.01.06 Re-enactment and repeal
11.01.07 Compliance
11.01.08 Numbering of sections
11.01.09 Liability
11.01.10 Severability
11.01.11 Additional local regulations
11.01.12 Relationship of this chapter to other
regulations
11.01.13 Relationship of this chapter to private
agreements
11.01.14 Relief from other provisions
11.01.15 Applicability to public entities
11.01.16 Applicability to projects under the
purview of the Public Service Commission
11.01.17 No defense to nuisance action
11.01.18 Copyright protection
11.01.01 Title
This chapter shall be known as the “Zoning Code, City of Wisconsin Rapids, Wisconsin” and may be referred to
herein as this “chapter.”
11.01.02 Authority
(a) Generally. This chapter is adopted under the general authority granted by s. 62.23(7), Wis. Stats.
(b) Wellhead protection. Provisions relating to wellhead protection are adopted under authority granted by
s. 62.23(7), Wis. Stats.
(c) Floodplain regulations. Provisions relating to floodplain development are adopted under authority
granted by s. 62.23(7), Wis. Stats., and the requirements in s. 87.30, Wis. Stats.
(d) Shoreland-wetland regulations. Provisions relating to shoreland-wetland regulations are adopted under
authority granted by s. 62.231, Wis. Stats.
(e) Shoreland regulations. Provisions relating to shoreland regulations are adopted under authority granted
by s. 62.233, Wis. Stats.
(f) Traditional neighborhood development. Provisions related to traditional neighborhood development are
adopted under authority granted by s. 66.1027, Wis. Stats.
11.01.03 Jurisdiction
This chapter shall apply to that land lying within the City of Wisconsin Rapids, the boundary of which may change
over time through annexations and detachments.1
11.01.04 Legislative findings
(a) General findings. The Common Council makes the following legislative findings:
(1) The Common Council adopted a comprehensive plan pursuant to s. 66.1001, Wis. Stats., as set forth in
Chapter 37.
(2) This chapter is intended to be consistent with and further the overall intent of the city’s comprehensive
plan, as may be amended.
(3) The use of land in the City has a direct bearing on the public health, safety, and welfare.
1 Commentary: An annexation removes land from a town and adds it to a city or village. A detachment removes land from a city or village and
adds it to a town or to another city or village.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
3
(4) Standards are needed to ensure that new development is done in a coordinated manner.
(5) The provisions contained in this article are adopted consistent with state statutes.
(6) Each parcel of land in the City is intended to have a zoning designation.
(7) In some instances, state and federal law limit the City’s ability to regulate certain land uses.
(b) Other findings. Other legislative findings are included in various articles, divisions, and sections of this
chapter as may be appropriate.
11.01.05 Purpose
(a) General purpose. This chapter promotes the public health, safety, and welfare and is intended to:
(1) implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the City's comprehensive plan to the greatest extent
practicable;
(2) support the recommendations set forth in the 2009 Downtown Waterfront Plan;
(3) support the plans and programs set forth in the 2016 Riverfront Park Plan;
(4) support the City’s SolSmart designation (i.e., for solar energy);
(5) support the City’s Bird City Wisconsin designation;
(6) encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the City;
(7) conserve the value of buildings;
(8) provide for a variety of housing options;
(9) separate incompatible land uses to the greatest extent possible;
(10) allow different, but compatible land uses (i.e., mixed uses), to occur in specified areas of the City;
(11) avoid, or, as a less preferred alternate, minimize congestion;
(12) avoid, or, as a less preferred alternate, minimize environmental degradation;
(13) establish clear and consistent standards, regulations, and procedures for the review of proposed
development as may be regulated by this chapter; and
(14) establish minimum standards for the use or development of land within the City.
(b) Specific purposes. Pursuant to s. 62.23(7), Wis. Stats., this chapter is intended to:
(1) secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers;
(2) promote health and general welfare;
(3) provide adequate light and air, including access to sunlight for solar collectors and to wind for wind
energy systems;
(4) encourage the protection of groundwater resources;
(5) prevent the overcrowding of land;
(6) avoid undue concentration of population;
(7) facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public
requirements; and
(8) preserve burial sites, as defined in s. 157.70(1)(b), Wis. Stats.
(c) Other purposes. Other purposes may be included in various articles, divisions, and sections of this
chapter as may be appropriate.
11.01.06 Re-enactment and repeal
This chapter carries forward by re-enactment some of the provisions of the regulations governing zoning and
related matters which the Common Council adopted under authority of state law prior to the effective date of
this chapter. This chapter is not intended to repeal those regulations in their entirety, but rather to re-enact and
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
4
continue in force such existing provisions so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are
preserved and may be enforced, unless explicitly surrendered by specific provisions of this chapter. If a provision in
the regulations which were in effect on the date this chapter became effective is not specifically carried forward
in this chapter, such provision is repealed. As to the effect of this section on existing land uses refer to Article 19.
11.01.07 Compliance
(a) Generally. Except as specifically provided, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development
within the City of Wisconsin Rapids. No development shall be undertaken without the prior authorizations required
by this chapter and other applicable rules and regulations of the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
(b) Exception for a previously granted permit or other approval. If a permit or other approval has been
previously granted and the authorized work, in whole or in part, is no longer allowed under the current zoning
regulations, the holder of the permit is authorized to establish the use or undertake the authorized work within one
year of the date of the approval. If the action, as authorized by the permit or other approval, does not
commence within that time period and continue in good faith to completion, such permit shall lapse and be null
and void.
(c) Exception for the establishment a use, structure, building not requiring authorization. If prior to the
adoption of this chapter, or amendment thereto, a land use, structure, or building is actively being established
that did not require a permit or other approval under the zoning regulations in effect at that time, said work may
continue to completion even when such land use, structure, or building (1) now requires a permit or other
authorization under this chapter, (2) is being developed contrary to this chapter, or (3) is otherwise prohibited
under this chapter.
11.01.08 Numbering of sections
Each section number consists of three component parts separated by a period. The first figure refers to the
chapter number, the second figure refers to the article number, and the last figure represents the position of the
section within the article.
11.01.09 Liability
(a) Generally. The City of Wisconsin Rapids and its officials, agencies, employees, agents, and assigns shall
not be liable for any flood damage, sanitation problems, structural damage, or other damages or loss of property
value that may occur as a result of reliance upon and conformance with this chapter.
(b) Floodplain development. The flood protection standards in this chapter are based on engineering
experience and research. Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be increased by man-made or
natural causes. This chapter does not imply or guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses
will be free from flooding and flood damages.
11.01.10 Severability
(a) If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this chapter is determined to be unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected by such
ruling.
(b) If any application of this chapter to a particular structure or parcel is determined to be unconstitutional
or otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such ruling shall not apply to any other structure or
parcel not specifically included in the ruling.
11.01.11 Additional local regulations
In addition to meeting the regulations contained in this chapter, the use and development of land shall comply
with all applicable regulations in the municipal code, including the following:
(1) Subdivision and Platting (Chapter 12)
(2) Official Map (Chapter 13)
(3) Building Code (Chapter 14)
(4) Licenses, Permits, and Business Regulations (Chapter 20)
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
5
(5) Airport (Chapter 21)
(6) Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks (Chapter 24)
(7) Historic Preservation (Chapter 31)
(8) Construction Site Erosion (Chapter 32)
(9) Post-construction Stormwater Management (Chapter 35)
(10) Sign Regulations (Chapter 46)
In all cases, the strictest of the applicable provisions shall apply.
11.01.12 Relationship of this chapter to other regulations
In addition to meeting the requirements contained in this chapter, the use and development of land shall comply
with all applicable regulations of federal and state agencies. In all cases, the strictest of the applicable provisions
shall apply.
11.01.13 Relationship of this chapter to private agreements
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with any easement, covenant, deed
restriction, or other private agreement governing the use and development of land. However, when this chapter
imposes a greater restriction than the aforementioned, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
11.01.14 Relief from other provisions
Nothing in these provisions shall relieve any person from satisfying any condition or requirement associated with a
previous approval issued under this chapter, or any local, state, or federal law or requirement.
11.01.15 Applicability to public entities
This chapter shall apply to all publicly-owned land to the fullest extent allowed by state and federal law. When a
public entity undertakes any development that is exempted by state and federal law from this chapter, in whole
or in part, it is strongly encouraged to meet the provisions of this chapter.
11.01.16 Applicability to projects under the purview of the Public Service Commission
This chapter shall apply to projects under the purview of the Wisconsin Public Service Commission (PSC) to the
fullest extent allowed by state law.2 The Planning Commission or the Common Council, or both, may submit a
written request to the PSC outlining those standards and/or requirements of this chapter that the PSC should
impose as conditions of project approval, if approval is to be granted.
11.01.17 No defense to nuisance action
Compliance with the standards and requirements in this chapter shall not constitute an absolute defense to an
action to abate a public or private nuisance.
11.01.18 Copyright protection
This chapter contains images that are copyright protected and are denoted as such. All such images are used
with permission of the copyright holder for the exclusive purposes of this chapter. Any images subject to copyright
protection may be reproduced as part of this chapter and are subject to the open records law of Wisconsin but
may not be used in other works without the permission of the copyright holder.
2 Commentary: See s. 196.491(3)(i), Wis. Stats., and also American Transmission Co., LLC v. Dane County, 2009 WI App. 126
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
6
Sections
ARTICLE 2
INTERPRETATION, CONSTRUCTION, AND DEFINITIONS
11.02.01 General rules
11.02.02 Interpretation
11.02.03 Delegation of authority
11.02.04 Internal conflicts
11.02.05 Website
11.02.06 Use of graphics, illustrations, headings,
references, and commentary notes
11.02.07 References to state and federal law
11.02.08 Interpretation of boundaries and
designations for base zoning districts
11.02.09 General rules of interpretation
11.02.10 Computation of time
11.02.11 Fractions
11.02.12 Land use descriptions
11.02.13 General definitions
11.02.01 General rules
(a) Generally. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be liberally
construed in favor of the City so the true intent and meaning of this chapter is carried out as set forth in s. 11.01.05.
(b) Minimum requirements. The interpretation and application of any provision of this chapter shall be
held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare
and not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by state statute.
11.02.02 Interpretation
In the event a question arises concerning any provision or the application of any provision of this chapter,
interpretations shall be issued consistent with Article 5 of this chapter.
11.02.03 Delegation of authority
If a provision in this chapter states that an elected official, department supervisor, or some other employee is to
perform an administrative act, such individual may designate, delegate, or authorize a subordinate to perform
the administrative act unless state law or the provision clearly specifies otherwise.
11.02.04 Internal conflicts
More specific provisions of this chapter shall be followed in lieu of more general provisions unless the context
otherwise requires. Additionally, the most restrictive provisions shall apply.
11.02.05 Website
The City may create and maintain a website to share the key aspects of this chapter, including the zoning map, in
an interactive platform. If there is any discrepancy between such website and this chapter, this chapter controls.
11.02.06 Use of graphics, illustrations, headings, references, and commentary notes
(a) Purpose. Graphics, illustrations, headings, references, statutory citations, and commentary notes are
included to improve the readability of this chapter and increase reader comprehension. Specifically, graphics
and illustrations are included to help the reader visualize the meaning of the text. Headings and subheadings
generally state the content of that section and are intended to help the reader quickly find information.
References are included when the section is related to a state or local law or another section in this chapter.
These are included to help the reader understand the relationship among various provisions. Commentary notes
are included to supplement and/or further clarify a sentence or provision but are not part of this chapter.
(b) Interpretation. A graphic, illustration, heading, reference, statutory citation, or commentary note shall
not govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of any provision.
(c) Effect of deficiency. Because the text controls, no provision shall be held invalid by reason of any
deficiency in any graphic, illustration, heading, reference, statutory citation, or commentary note.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
7
11.02.07 References to state and federal law
If a provision in this chapter references a requirement in state law, and that law is subsequently amended, this
chapter shall reflect that change.
If a referenced section is repealed and replaced by another section with comparable subject matter, the
replacement section shall control. If a referenced section is repealed and not replaced, the repealed section
shall control if it is determined by the city attorney that the city has the authority to apply the repealed language.
11.02.08 Interpretation of boundaries and designations for zoning districts
(a) Boundary line interpretations. Interpretations regarding boundaries of zoning districts shall be made
consistent with the following rules:
(1) Municipal boundaries. A boundary shown as following, or approximately following, any municipal
boundary shall be construed as following such line.
(2) Section lines. A boundary shown as following, or approximately following, a section line, half-section
line, or quarter-section line shall be construed as following such line.
(3) Property lines. A boundary shown as following, or approximately following, any property boundary line
shall be construed as following such line.
(4) Centerlines. A boundary shown as following, or approximately following, any railroad, alley, road,
street, highway, or similar feature shall be construed as following the centerline of such feature.
(5) Natural boundaries. A boundary shown as following, or approximately following, any natural feature
such as a stream, river, canal, other bodies of water, or topographical features, such as a watershed
boundary, shall be construed as following such natural feature as verified by field inspection when
necessary.
(6) Shorelines. A boundary shown as following, or approximately following, a shoreline shall be construed
as following the shoreline. In the event the location of the shoreline moves over time, the boundary
shall move as well.
(7) Line extensions. A boundary shown as an extension of a straight line for any of the preceding shall be
so construed.
In the event there is an unresolved question as to the location of a zoning district boundary, the Planning
Commission shall review such matter at a regular or special meeting and render a decision.
(b) Street abandonment. In the event a public road, street, or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the
zoning provisions applicable to the land to which it reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned road,
street, or alley, unless otherwise provided by city action.
11.02.09 General rules of interpretation
In the construction of this chapter, the following shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent
with the text or with the manifest intent of this chapter:
(1) Gender. Words of the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter, and vice versa.
(2) Singular and plural words. Words in the singular include the plural and words in the plural include the
singular.
(3) Tense. Words in the present tense include the past and future tense, and the future tense includes the
present tense.
(4) “Must”, “shall” and “will”. The words “must”, shall” and “will” imply a mandatory condition.
(5) “May” or “should”. The words “may” and “should” imply a permissive condition.
(6) “Includes” or “including”. The words “includes” or “including” shall not limit a provision to the specific
example(s) listed, but are intended to extend their meaning to all other instances or circumstances of
like kind or character.
(7) “Such as”. The phrase “such as” shall not limit a provision to the specific example(s) listed, but is
intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
8
(8) Conjunctions. When used at the end of a series, the word “and” indicates that all listed items apply.
When the word “or” is used at the end of a series, it indicates that one or more of the listed items
apply.
11.02.10 Computation of time
When a time period is specified in this chapter, the first day of the period shall be the first day after the event that
triggered the time clock to start. If the last day of the time period is a Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday
recognized by the state of Wisconsin, that day shall be excluded and the time period shall be extended to the
next business day. For any time period 10 days or less, Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays recognized by the
state of Wisconsin shall not be counted.
11.02.11 Fractions
(a) Required quantities. When a calculation is made to determine the minimum number of a required
quantity (e.g., parking spaces) and results in a fraction, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole
number.
(b) Allowable units. When a calculation is made to determine the number of dwelling units that may be
allowed based on a density factor and results in a fraction, the number shall be rounded down to the next whole
number.
11.02.12 Land use descriptions
For the purpose of chapter, land uses that are permissible in one or more of the zoning districts are described as
set forth in Appendix B. For organizational purposes, similar land uses are grouped together to form a series. The
first 17 series are for principal land uses, accessory land uses are found in Series 18, and temporary land uses are
found in Series 19.
11.02.13 General definitions
(a) Words and phrases not defined. Unless specifically defined in this section, words and phrases used in
this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this
chapter its most reasonable application.
(b) Words and phrases defined. For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined in
Appendix E and shall have the meaning ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
9
This page intentionally left blank.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
10
Divisions
ARTICLE 3
ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES
Sections
DIVISION 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
11.03.01 Establishment
11.03.02 Authority
11.03.03 Composition and appointment of
members
11.03.04 Officers
11.03.05 Commission procedures
11.03.06 Meetings
11.03.07 Meeting minutes
11.03.08 Schedule of meetings
11.03.09 Voting and quorum
11.03.10 Compensation of members
11.03.11 Official oath
11.03.01 Establishment
Pursuant to s. 62.23(1), Wis. Stats., a planning commission is established to undertake the responsibilities as defined
in this chapter and as allowed by state law.
11.03.02 Authority
(a) Generally. The Planning Commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to
perform its functions and promote the proper planning and development for the City of Wisconsin Rapids,
whether enumerated in this section or not.3
(b) Right to enter property. The Planning Commission, its individual members, and employees, and
authorized agents, may enter upon land which is the subject of a pending application it has authority to act on as
set forth in s. 11.04.09.4 The Planning Commission, its members and employees, in the performance of its functions,
may enter upon any land, make examinations and surveys, and place and maintain necessary monuments and
marks thereon.
(c) Staff. The Planning Commission may employ, or contract for the services of, such professional planning
technicians and staff as are considered necessary for the discharge of the duties and responsibilities of the
commission, provided such expense does not exceed the appropriation that may be made for the commission
by the Common Council for such purpose.5
(d) Official map. The Planning Commission may recommend the adoption of or amendment to an official
map.6
(e) Comprehensive plan. The Planning Commission may by resolution recommend to the Common Council
the adoption of or amendment to an adopted comprehensive plan.7
(f) Code amendments. The Planning Commission shall review and submit recommendations to the
Common Council regarding the amendment of this chapter.
(g) Development review. The Planning Commission shall render decisions and recommendations relating to
development applications required by this chapter.
3 Commentary: See s. 62.23(4), Wis. Stats.
4 Commentary: See s. 62.23(4), Wis. Stats.
5 Commentary: See s. 62.23(1)(e), Wis. Stats.
1. Planning Commission
2. Zoning Board of Appeals
3. Groundwater Technical Review Committee
4. Zoning administrator
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
11
6 Commentary: See s. 62.23(6), Wis. Stats.
7 Commentary: See s. 62.23(2), Wis. Stats.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
12
(h) Miscellaneous reports. The Planning Commission may make reports and recommendations relating to
the plan and development of the city to public officials and agencies; public utility companies; civic,
educational, professional, and other organizations; and citizens. It may recommend to the Mayor or Common
Council, programs for public improvements and the financing thereof.
(i) Mandatory referral. Pursuant to state statute, the following shall be referred to the Planning Commission
for report:
(1) the location and architectural design of any public building;
(2) the location of any statue or other memorial;
(3) the location, acceptance, extension, alteration, vacation, abandonment, change of use, sale,
acquisition of land for or lease of land for any street, alley or other public way, park, playground, airport,
area for parking vehicles, or other memorial or public grounds;
(4) the location, extension, abandonment or authorization for any public utility whether publicly or privately
owned;
(5) all plats of lands in the city or within the territory over which the city is given platting jurisdiction by ch.
236, Wis. Stats.;
(6) the location, character and extent or acquisition, leasing, or sale of lands for public or semipublic
housing, slum clearance, relief of congestion, or vacation camps for children;
(7) the amendment or repeal of any ordinance adopted pursuant to this section, and
(8) any other matter provided by statute.
Unless such report is made within 30 days, or such longer period as may be stipulated by the Common Council,
the council or other public body or officer, may take final action without it.
(j) Floodplain management. With respect to floodplain management, the Planning Commission shall
oversee the zoning administrator and the general administration of the floodplain regulations in this chapter, and
review and make recommendations to the Common Council on all proposed amendments to this chapter.
(k) Right to request information. All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the Planning Commission,
within a reasonable time, such available information as it may require for its work. In general, the commission shall
have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote municipal planning.
11.03.03 Composition and appointment of members
(a) Number and appointment. The Planning Commission shall consist of 7 voting members as follows: the
Mayor, one Alderperson, and 5 citizens. The Common Council shall, by a two-thirds vote of its members, elect one
of its number to serve. The Mayor shall make citizen appointments during the month of April for terms that expire in
April or at any other time of the year if a vacancy occurs during the middle of a term.8
(b) Terms. The term of the Mayor shall coincide with his or her elected term. The elected alderperson shall
serve on the commission for a period of one year from and after the first day of May next ensuing. Each citizen
member shall be appointed to a 3-year term.9
(c) Considerations in making citizen appointments. Citizen members shall be persons of recognized
experience and qualifications and shall be residents of the City of Wisconsin Rapids and/or own property in the
City of Wisconsin Rapids.10 The number of non-residents serving on the Planning Commission is limited to two.
(d) Conditions for removal. A citizen member shall be removed from the Planning Commission and the
member's office declared vacant when the member moves outside of the City or no longer owns property in the
City of Wisconsin Rapids. The Mayor may remove any citizen member in his or her discretion. If the Mayor or a
Common Council member serving on the commission resigns or is removed from his or her office, or his or her term
expires, his or her term on the commission shall automatically terminate.
(e) Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as an appointment for a full term.
8 Commentary: See s. 62.23(1)(d), Wis. Stats.
9 Commentary: See s. 62.23(1)(d), Wis. Stats.
10 Commentary: See s. 62.23(1)(a), Wis. Stats.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
13
(f) Ex-officio member. The Director of Public Works, or designee, and a representative of the Park and
Recreation Committee may attend and participate in Planning Commission meetings as non-voting members.
11.03.04 Officers
The Mayor shall serve as the chairperson of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall fill the
following offices by election of its members: vice-chairperson and other officers in their judgment may be
necessary.
11.03.05 Commission procedures
The Planning Commission may adopt rules of procedure to carry out its purposes. All such rules shall conform to
this chapter, other city regulations, and state law and shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.11
11.03.06 Meetings
Meetings of the Planning Commission shall be open to the public unless conducted in closed session as authorized
by state law. All meetings except site visits shall be conducted in the City Hall or in such other public place as may
be selected by the commission.
11.03.07 Meeting minutes
The Planning Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings. The commission may amend previously adopted
minutes provided such revision is based on substantive evidence.
11.03.08 Schedule of meetings
Meetings of the Planning Commission shall be held at the call of the chairperson of the commission and at such
other times as the commission may determine.
11.03.09 Voting and quorum
(a) Requirements for quorum. A quorum of the Planning Commission shall consist of 4 voting members.
(b) Requirements for voting. Unless otherwise specifically stated, a decision of the Planning Commission shall
be approved by a majority vote of the members of the commission present and voting.
(c) Disqualification or voluntary abstention. A member of the Planning Commission shall abstain from voting
on a particular issue or shall be disqualified by majority vote of the remaining members present when (1) the
member has a direct financial interest in the outcome of the matter at issue; (2) the member has such close
personal ties to the applicant, the project, or to a party opposing the application that the member cannot
reasonably be expected to exercise sound judgment in the public interest; (3) the member would violate the
code of ethics set forth in ch. 19, Wis. Stats.; (4) the member would violate the city's code of ethics set forth in
Chapter 26 of the municipal code; (5) participation in the matter might violate the letter or spirit of a member's
code of professional responsibility; or (6) another law precludes participation.
11.03.10 Compensation of members
Members of the Planning Commission may be compensated as determined by the Common Council.
11.03.11 Official oath
Citizen members of the Planning Commission shall take the official oath as required by s. 19.01, Wis. Stats. The City
Clerk shall keep a copy of such oaths.
11.03.12 to 11.03.20 Reserved
11 Commentary: See s. 62.23(2), Wis. Stats.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
14
Sections
DIVISION 2
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
11.03.21 Establishment
11.03.22 Authority
11.03.23 Authority of chairperson
11.03.24 Composition and appointment of
members
11.03.25 Officers
11.03.26 Board procedures
11.03.27 Meetings
11.03.28 Meeting minutes
11.03.29 Schedule of meetings
11.03.30 Voting and quorum
11.03.31 Offices
11.03.32 Appropriations
11.03.33 Compensation of members
11.03.34 Official oath
11.03.35 Legal counsel
11.03.21 Establishment
Pursuant to s. 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats., a Zoning Board of Appeals is established to undertake the responsibilities as
defined in this chapter and state law.
11.03.22 Authority
(a) Administrative appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide administrative appeals
consistent with the requirements in Article 5 of this chapter where it is alleged that the zoning administrator (1)
failed to act as required by this chapter; (2) made an error in issuing a permit or in denying an application; (3)
made an error in enforcement; or (4) made an error in any other determination. In exercising these powers, the
board may compel the administrative official to act as required or reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify
the order, requirement, decision, or determination being appealed and may make such order, requirement,
decision, or determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from
whom the appeal is taken.
(b) Variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide variances consistent with the
requirements in Article 5 of this chapter.
(c) Right to enter. The Zoning Board of Appeals, its individual members, employees, and authorized agents,
may enter upon land which is the subject of a pending application as set forth in s. 11.04.09.
(d) Amendments to this chapter. The Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend amendments to this
chapter it deems appropriate.
11.03.23 Authority of chairperson
The chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals or acting chairperson may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses.12
11.03.24 Composition and appointment of members
(a) Number and appointment. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of 5 regular members as appointed
by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Common Council.13
(b) Alternates. The Mayor shall, subject to confirmation by the Common Council, appoint 2 alternates to the
Zoning Board of Appeals for staggered 3-year terms and annually appoint one of them as the first alternate and
the other as the second alternate.14
(c) Considerations in making appointments. Regular members and alternate members of the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall reside in the City of Wisconsin Rapids.15 A city employee shall not serve as a regular member or as
an alternate. The Mayor or any member of the Common Council may not serve on the Zoning Board of Appeals.
12 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(e)(3), Wis. Stats.
13 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(e)(2), Wis. Stats.
14 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(e)(2), Wis. Stats.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
15
(d) Terms. Each regular member on the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be appointed to hold office for a
period of 3 years, except that for regular members 2 of those first appointed shall serve for one year, 2 for 2 years,
and the fifth for 3 years.
(e) Removal. The Mayor may remove a regular member or an alternate from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(f) Vacancies. Vacancies on the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be filled for the unexpired term of any
member or alternate whose term becomes vacant.
11.03.25 Officers
The Mayor shall designate one regular member to be the chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Board
may elect other officers deemed necessary.
11.03.26 Board procedures
The Zoning Board of Appeals may adopt rules of procedure to carry out its purposes. All such rules shall conform to
this chapter, other City regulations, and state law and shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.
11.03.27 Meetings
Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be open to the public unless conducted in closed session as
authorized by state law.16 Meetings, except for site visits, shall be conducted in the City Hall or in such other public
place as may be selected by the board.
11.03.28 Meeting minutes
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each voting member on
each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact.17 The board may amend previously adopted
minutes provided such revision is based on substantive evidence.
11.03.29 Schedule of meetings
Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals and at such other times as
the Zoning Board of Appeals may determine.
11.03.30 Voting and quorum
(a) Requirements for quorum. A quorum shall consist of 3 voting members.
(b) Requirements for voting. A decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be by majority vote of the
members present at a meeting in which a quorum is in attendance and voting.18
(c) Disqualification or voluntary abstention. A member shall abstain from voting on a particular issue or shall
be disqualified by majority vote of the remaining members present when (1) the member has a direct financial
interest in the outcome of the matter at issue; (2) the member has such close personal ties to the applicant, the
project, or to a party opposing the application that the member cannot reasonably be expected to exercise
sound judgment in the public interest; (3) the member would violate the code of ethics set forth in ch. 19, Wis.
Stats.; (4) the member would violate the city's code of ethics set forth in Chapter 26 of the municipal code; (5)
participation in the matter might violate the letter or spirit of a member's code of professional responsibility; or (6)
another law precludes participation.
(d) Voting by alternates. The first alternate may vote only when one of the regular members of the board is
absent or is not able to vote on a pending matter. The second alternate may vote only when the first alternate is
absent or is not able to vote or when more than one regular member is absent is or is not able to vote.19
15 Commentary: See s. 2-4-4 of the municipal code
16 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(e)(3), Wis. Stats.
17 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(e)(3), Wis. Stats.
18 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(e)(3m), Wis. Stats.
19 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(e)(2), Wis. Stats.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
16
11.03.31 Offices
The Common Council shall provide suitable meeting space for meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
11.03.32 Appropriations
The Common Council shall appropriate funds to carry out duties of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The board shall
have the authority to expend such funds consistent with procedures established by the Common Council.
11.03.33 Compensation of members
The regular members and alternates of the Zoning Board of Appeals may be compensated as determined by the
Common Council.
11.03.34 Official oath
Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take the official oath as required by s. 19.01, Wis. Stats. The City
Clerk shall keep a copy of such oaths.
11.03.35 Legal counsel
The City Attorney shall not represent or advise the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Common Council may
appropriate funds to provide counsel to the Zoning Board of Appeals as needed.
11.03.36 to 11.03.50 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 3
GROUNDWATER TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE
11.03.51 Establishment
A Groundwater Technical Review Committee is established to undertake the responsibilities as defined in this
chapter and state law.
11.03.52 Membership
The Groundwater Technical Review Committee shall consist of:
(1) the Community Development Director,
(2) the city director of public works,
(3) the superintendent/manager of public utilities,
(4) the city engineer,
(5) the council representative of the city's Planning Commission,
(6) the chairperson of the Water Works and Lighting Commission, and
(7) one member appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Common Council,.
11.03.53 Purpose
The purpose of the Groundwater Technical Review Committee is to provide objective and scientific technical
review of those land uses listed as conditional uses in Appendix A and make recommendations to the Planning
11.03.51 Establishment
11.03.52 Membership
11.03.53 Purpose
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
17
Commission to grant or deny conditional use permits based upon the facts discovered in that review, to make
recommendations on any and all conditions placed on a conditional use permit, and to give advice and
educate the public on matters concerning groundwater.
11.03.54 to 11.03.60 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 4
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
11.03.61 Establishment
11.03.62 Appointment
11.03.63 Authority
11.03.64 Conflict of interest
11.03.61 Establishment
The position of zoning administrator is established to undertake the responsibilities as defined in this chapter and
by state law.
11.03.62 Appointment
The Mayor shall appoint, subject to confirmation by the Common Council, a zoning administrator. The Mayor shall
supervise the activities of the zoning administrator.
11.03.63 Authority
(a) General. The zoning administrator shall administer, supervise, and enforce the provisions of this chapter
and in furtherance of those duties shall have the authority to:
(1) meet with applicants to advise them of the requirements of this chapter;
(2) issue administrative permits;
(3) revoke or modify any administratively-issued permit or interpretation with reasonable cause;
(4) render determinations of navigability as provided for in Article 5;
(5) determine the elevation of ordinary high-water marks;
(6) keep a written record of permits issued, inspections, work approved, enforcement activities, and other
similar official actions;
(7) prepare staff reports consistent with this chapter and make recommendations as may be required or
deemed appropriate;
(8) work with the City Clerk in the preparation of meeting agendas for the Planning Commission and
Zoning Board of Appeals and submit them to the appropriate chairperson for review and approval;
(9) develop, amend, and utilize application forms, checklists, and other forms he or she deems appropriate
to administer the development review processes contained in this chapter;
(10) recommend amendments to this chapter and to other chapters of the municipal code of the City of
Wisconsin Rapids relating to land use and development;
(11) assist the building inspector and city attorney with enforcement proceedings as may be requested;
and
(12) undertake any other activity not enumerated in this section but necessary to administer and enforce
this chapter or any other section of the municipal code of the City of Wisconsin Rapids as may be
appropriate.
(b) Floodplain overlay district. In the administration of floodplain zoning, the zoning administrator shall have
the authority to:
(1) issue floodplain permits;
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
18
(2) inspect and assess all structures in the floodplain overlay district that have been damaged to
determine if the damage can be defined as “substantial damage” herein defined;
(3) maintain a list of nonconforming uses and structures as more fully described in s. 11.09.144;
(4) submit an annual summary to the regional office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
describing actions taken in the administration of the floodplain overlay district; and
(5) submit copies of amendments and biennial reports to the regional office of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
11.03.64 Conflict of interest
The zoning administrator and/or authorized designee of the zoning administrator shall not perform work on a
proposed or approved development project in which he or she has a direct financial interest in the outcome of
the matter at issue or otherwise has a conflict of interest.
The remainder of this page intentionally left blank.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
19
Divisions
ARTICLE 4
GENERAL PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
Sections
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
11.04.01 Legislative findings
11.04.02 Purpose
11.04.03 Nature of staff comments
11.04.04 Authority to file an application
11.04.05 Non-confidentiality of submitted
information
11.04.06 Burden of proof
11.04.07 Concurrent review
11.04.08 Withdrawal of application
11.04.09 Permission to enter subject property
11.04.10 Effect of an outstanding violation
11.04.11 Effect of an outstanding obligation
11.04.12 Application review schedule
11.04.13 Application forms
11.04.14 Application fees and other charges
11.04.15 Charge back of professional service fees
11.04.16 Other required approvals
11.04.17 Building permit
11.04.18 Appeals
11.04.19 Revocation or modification of a prior
approval
11.04.20 Compliance with private agreements
11.04.01 Legislative findings
The Common Council makes the following legislative findings:
(1) Development review processes should be easily understood and well-structured, and only involve those
steps and requirements that are needed to properly review the application. Excessive procedural
requirements add unnecessary costs to development projects.
(2) The general public, property owners in the area, and affected agencies have a right to know about
proposed development projects and have meaningful participation in the review process to the extent
allowed or required by this chapter.
(3) Enforcing the rules and regulations contained in this chapter is an important function of government.
11.04.02 Purpose
The development review requirements and procedures in this chapter are intended to:
(1) provide efficient and timely review of applications and ensure fairness and due process,
(2) ensure that applications are reviewed consistently by establishing criteria in making recommendations
and final decisions, and
(3) ensure complete and timely compliance.
11.04.03 Nature of staff comments
Statements and recommendations that are made by the zoning administrator, city staff and officials, and other
representatives prior to or during the application review process shall not be binding on the decision-making body
responsible for making the final decision.
1. Generally
2. Notice requirements
3. Public hearings
4. Site visits
5. Financial guarantees
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
20
11.04.04 Authority to file an application
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, the owner of the property or a person having the power of attorney for
the property owner shall sign the application submitted for review. A person signing an application under the
authority of a power of attorney shall include a copy of the power of attorney with the application.
11.04.05 Non-confidentiality of submitted information
All written information that an applicant submits to the zoning administrator during a pre-submittal meeting or at
any point in the review process is considered part of the public record subject to disclosure under state and local
law.
11.04.06 Burden of proof
(a) During application review process. During the application review process, the applicant has the burden
of proof to show that the application should be approved based on the decision criteria relating to that
application.
(b) During appeal of an administrative decision. During an administrative appeal proceeding, the petitioner
has the burden of proof to show that such decision is not consistent with this chapter.
(c) During enforcement proceedings. During an enforcement proceeding, the zoning administrator or
administrative unit taking enforcement action has the burden of proof to show that the action or development is
in violation of this chapter.
11.04.07 Concurrent review
To the extent possible, a development project requiring multiple reviews should be done concurrently. When one
approval is a condition precedent to approval of another application, the approvals shall be issued in the
requisite order.
11.04.08 Withdrawal of application
(a) Timing of withdrawal. An applicant may withdraw an application anytime after submittal, but prior to a
final decision.
(b) Effect of withdrawal. A request to withdraw an application terminates the review process and no
decision shall be rendered.
(c) Retention of application materials. A withdrawn application and related review documents shall be
kept as a permanent public record.
11.04.09 Permission to enter subject property
Submission of an application as may be required in this chapter authorizes city officials and employees, or other
designated agents to enter the subject property to verify information in the application and to conduct other site
investigations as may be necessary to review the application. This does not authorize any individual to enter any
building on the subject property in the absence of the property owner or his or her authorized agent. Failure to
allow access to the subject property is sufficient grounds to deny the application.
11.04.10 Effect of an outstanding violation
If the zoning administrator determines that a parcel is in violation of this chapter, no permit or approval of any kind
shall be granted under this chapter that would benefit such parcel, except to correct the violation or as may be
required by state law.
11.04.11 Effect of an outstanding obligation
No permit or approval of any kind shall be granted under this chapter that would benefit a parcel for which taxes,
assessments, special assessments, special charges, or other required payments are delinquent and unpaid.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
21
11.04.12 Application review schedule
(a) Authority. The zoning administrator shall from time to time prepare a schedule establishing deadlines for
submitting the various types of applications.
(b) Publication of schedule. The zoning administrator shall make the current review schedule available to
the public and may post it on the city’s website.
11.04.13 Application forms
The zoning administrator shall prepare application forms and may amend them from time to time.
11.04.14 Application fees and other charges
(a) Assessment of fees. From time to time, the Common Council may by resolution establish application
fees and other charges it deems necessary in the administration of this chapter consistent with s. 66.0628, Wis.
Stats.
(b) Timing for payment. Application fees shall be paid at the time the application is submitted for review.
(c) Doubling of application fee. If an activity which requires prior authorization under this chapter is started
before the authorization is granted, the application fee is automatically doubled unless the Common Council
specifically establishes a different fee by resolution. Payment of such fee shall not release the applicant from full
compliance with this chapter nor from prosecution for violation of this chapter.
(d) Refunds. Application fees are nonrefundable, except when the application and fee were accepted by
the zoning administrator or city staff in error.
11.04.15 Charge back of professional service fees
(a) Generally. When specifically authorized by this chapter and pursuant to s. 66.0628, Wis. Stats., an
applicant shall be responsible for paying the professional service fees of individuals or private firms the zoning
administrator elects to hire to assist in the review of a submitted application. Such fees may cover time, materials,
and other related expenses of attorneys, planners, engineers, and other specialists, and their support staff.
Payment of fees is required whether the application is approved or not.
(b) Billing procedure. The City Clerk shall prepare an itemized statement of the professional service fees to
be charged and provide a copy to the applicant. Such statement shall be in writing and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following information:
(1) a statement that the applicant has a specified period of time, not less than 30 days, to pay;
(2) a statement that the applicant may appeal one or more of the itemized charges within 15 days of the
date of the statement to the Common Council; and
(3) a statement that any unpaid charge will be assessed as a delinquent charge against the subject
property.
(c) Appeal of charges. To appeal one or more charges, the applicant shall submit a written appeal to the
City Clerk within the appeal period stated on the statement. The Common Council shall consider the matter at its
next regular meeting, provided the date of the meeting is 10 days or more from the date the appeal is received.
The Common Council shall have the power to approve the charges as assessed or reduce the amount of charges
in whole or in part with cause.
(d) Nonpayment. If the applicant does not appeal the charges within the time period specified in the
statement, the City Treasurer shall automatically charge any unpaid amount as a delinquent tax against the
property as provided by state law. In the event the applicant submits an appeal as provided in this section, no
charges shall be placed on the tax roll unless and until such time the Common Council approves the charges
against the tax roll in whole or in part. In the event the statement provided to the applicant or the time given for
the applicant to pay or following a hearing if the Common Council approves all or part of the charge, it is too late
in the current year for the charge, when it becomes delinquent, to be extended on that year's tax roll, then the
delinquent charge shall be extended to the following year's tax roll.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
22
11.04.16 Other required approvals
It is the responsibility of those undertaking development projects within the city to obtain all applicable permits
and other approvals as may be required by the City of Wisconsin Rapids, Wood County, and federal and state
authorities as may be required.
11.04.17 Building permit
A building permit for the construction of a new building or the expansion of an existing building shall not be issued
until such time as a zoning permit has been issued or a written determination is made that one is not required.
11.04.18 Appeals
If a development project is approved under this chapter, the applicant may, upon receipt of the decision notice
and satisfaction of all precedent conditions of approval, commence the work as authorized under the approval
with the understanding that an aggrieved person may file an appeal with the appropriate review body. Prior to
the end of the appeal period, all such work proceeds at the risk of the applicant. Similarly, any work that is done
while an appeal is pending is done at the risk of the applicant.
11.04.19 Revocation or modification of a prior approval
The reviewing authority may revoke or modify an approval if it determines that information in the application or
otherwise provided by the applicant or the applicant’s agent was incomplete, false, misleading, or inaccurate
and such information would have altered their decision to grant approval or the terms of the approval which
were or were not imposed, including conditions of approval.
11.04.20 Compliance with private agreements
If a property owner submits an application to develop a property and the City approves the same, the property
owner is ultimately responsible for compliance with any and all private agreements (e.g., restrictive covenants)
relating to the subject property.
11.04.21 to 11.04.30 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 2
NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
11.04.31 Generally
11.04.32 When notice is required
11.04.33 Content of required notice
11.04.34 Cost to provide notice
11.04.35 Public notice
11.04.36 Property owner notice
11.04.37 Distribution list notice
11.04.38 Meeting agenda
11.04.39 Affidavit of mailing
11.04.31 Generally
The type of notice that is given for each of the various procedures outlined in this article is dictated by the nature
of the decision. Administrative decisions, such as a zoning permit, involve very little discretion. Either the proposed
development meets the standards in this chapter or it does not. In contrast, there are other decisions that involve
more discretion and judgment based on particular circumstances. The review of a conditional use application, for
example, involves discretion on the part of those involved in making recommendations and a final determination
whether the application should be approved or not. As a general rule, notice for an application is not given for
administrative decisions. More notice is given when a proposed action could potentially affect other parties,
including nearby property owners, other governmental bodies, and the general public. This division outlines when
notice is to be given and the nature of the notice when it is required.
11.04.32 When notice is required
Notice shall be provided as shown in Exhibit 4-1.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
23
Exhibit 4-1. Notice
Division in
Article 5
Public Notice [1]
Property
Owner
Notice [2]
Distribution
List Notice
[3]
Meeting
Type of Action Class 1 Class 2 Agenda [4]
1. Code amendment – map amendment – landowner initiated - X [5] X X X
1. Code amendment – map amendment – city initiated - X [5] - X X
1. Code amendment – text amendment - X [5] - X X
2. Planned unit development - X X - X
3. Conditional use - X X - X
4. Wireless telecommunication facility - X X - X
5. Site plan and plan of operation - - - - X
6. Architectural review - - - - X
7. Special exception - - - - X
8. Minor home occupation [6] - - - - -
9. Zoning permit [6] - - - - -
10. Reserved
11. Certificate of zoning compliance [6] - - - - -
12. Floodplain permit [6] - - - - -
13. Termination of approval – voluntary - - - - X
13. Termination of approval – involuntary - X - - X
14. Registration of a nonconforming use - - - - X
15. Conversion of a nonconforming use - X X - X
16. Expansion of a nonconforming building - - - - X
17. Code interpretation [6] - - - - -
17. Code interpretation on appeal to Planning Commission - - - - X
18. Administrative appeal - X - - X
19. Variance - X X - X
Key: “X” means that the notice is required
“-“ means that the notice is not required
Notes:
1. See s. 11.04.35 for more details
2. See s. 11.04.36 for more details
3. See s. 11.04.37 for more details
4. See s. 11.04.38 for more details
5. If the proposed amendment would have the effect of changing the allowable use of any property, the notice shall include eithe r a map
showing the property affected by the amendment or a description of the property affected by the amendment and a statement that a
map may be obtained from the City Clerk.
6. This is an administrative decision; no public notice is required.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
24
11.04.33 Content of required notice
Notices shall include the information listed in Exhibit 4-2.
Exhibit 4-2. Content of notice
Public
Notice
Property
Owner
Notice
Distribution
List Notice
Applicant name X X X
Subject property address or other description by which the public can locate the subject property X X X
Nature of the application X X X
A description of the proposed project X X X
Name of body or official who will consider the application X X X
Date, time, and location of the public hearing X X X
Location where the public can view the application X X X
The criteria, if any, that will be used to evaluate the proposal - X -
General location map - X -
Key: An “X” means that the indicated information is required; a dash “-“ means that the indicated information is not required
11.04.34 Cost to provide notice
The city shall pay the costs related to the provision of notice required under this division, unless otherwise specified
by the Common Council.
11.04.35 Public notice
When required, the official responsible for processing the application shall place public notice in the official
newspaper consistent with the following provisions:
(1) Time requirements. A class 1 notice shall be published one time at least 7 days before the meeting or
hearing. A class 2 notice shall be published once each week for 2 consecutive weeks, the last one
occurring at least 7 days before the meeting or hearing.20
(2) Content. The notice shall include the information listed in Exhibit 4-2 or as required by state law.
11.04.36 Property owner notice
(a) Generally. When required, the zoning administrator shall mail a notice to property owners within 300 feet
of the subject property involved in the application consistent with the following provisions:
(1) Time requirements. The notice shall be mailed by regular mail at least 10 business days prior to the date
of the meeting at which the matter will be considered.
(2) Content. The notice shall include the information listed in Exhibit 4-2 or as required by state law.
(b) Source of names and addresses. The names and addresses of property owners shall be deemed to be
those listed on the tax records maintained by Wood County.
(c) Failure to notify owner. The failure of a person to receive notice as described in this section shall not
invalidate or otherwise have any effect upon a public hearing or other action taken on the application.
(d) Affidavit of mailing. The person sending the notices shall prepare an affidavit of mailing to certify that
notice was provided as described in this section.
11.04.37 Distribution list notice 21
(a) Establishment of distribution list. The City Clerk shall maintain a list of persons who submit a written
request to receive notice of any proposed regulation or amendment thereof that may affect the allowable use of
the person’s property.
20 Commentary: See ss. 985.01(1m) and 985.07, Wis. Stats.
21 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(d)(4), Wis. Stats.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
25
(b) When notice is required. The body conducting the public hearing shall send a notice, which contains a
copy of the proposed regulation or amendment, to each person on the distribution list whose property, the
allowable use of which may be affected by the proposed regulation or amendment.
(c) Method of distribution of notices. The notice shall be by mail or in any reasonable form that is agreed to
by the person and the City Clerk.
(d) Establishment of charges. The Common Council may from time to time adopt a resolution establishing a
processing fee that shall be charged to each person on the list who is sent a notice. The amount of such fee shall
not exceed the approximate cost of providing the notice to the person.
(e) Effect of failure to send notice. An ordinance or amendment shall take effect if the body conducting
the meeting fails to send the notice as required by this section.
(f) Affidavit of mailing. The person sending the notices shall prepare an affidavit of mailing to certify that
notice was provided as described in this section.
11.04.38 Meeting agenda notice
When required, the body responsible for acting on the application shall place the item on its meeting agenda.
11.04.39 Affidavit of mailing
An affidavit of mailing provides documentary evidence that a mailing as required in this chapter was mailed. An
affidavit of mailing shall be kept as a public record.
11.04.40 to 11.04.50 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 3
PUBLIC HEARINGS
11.04.51 Legislative findings
11.04.52 General requirements
11.04.53 General procedure
11.04.54 Continuances
11.04.55 Public comment
11.04.51 Legislative findings
The Common Council makes the following legislative findings relating to public hearings:
(1) Public hearings should be conducted in an orderly, timely, and efficient manner.
(2) Public input is important and should be encouraged.
11.04.52 General requirements
(a) Meetings to be public. All public hearings shall be conducted in the city hall or in such other public
place as may be selected by the body conducting the hearing.
(b) Notice of meetings. Notice of public hearings shall be given as provided for in Division 2 of this article.
11.04.53 General procedure
The presiding officer conducting the public hearing may follow the procedure listed in this section as a general
guideline. For matters of little complexity or controversy, the presiding officer may adjust the procedures as
appropriate.
(1) Announce the purpose and subject of the public hearing.
(2) Determine whether public notice as required by this chapter has been provided. If notice has not been
provided, the hearing shall be postponed until such time as proper notice has been provided.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
26
(3) Ask if any member of the body conducting the public hearing has a conflict of interest in regard to the
matter being discussed and excuse those who do.
(4) Ask if any member of the body conducting the public hearing believes another member has a conflict
of interest in regard to the matter being discussed. If so, and following a discussion of the alleged
conflict of interest, the members (except the member with the alleged conflict) shall determine by vote
whether a reasonable person may conclude that the member has a conflict of interest and should be
removed from the pending decision.
(5) Ask the applicant to describe the proposal.
(6) Ask the staff to present a staff report, if required.
(7) Allow members of the body conducting the public hearing to direct questions to the applicant and
staff, if present.
(8) Ask for statements from the public.
(9) Read aloud written comments which were submitted when the individual submitting the comments is
not in attendance.
(10) Call for questions of the members of the body conducting the public hearing during which time they
may ask questions of a member of the public, the applicant, and the staff, if present.
(11) Ask the applicant if he or she wishes to (1) respond to any comment made by an individual during the
proceeding, (2) submit additional information, (3) amend the application, or (4) request a continuance.
(12) Announce that the body shall not accept any additional comment from the applicant or any member
of the public once the public hearing is closed.
(13) Ask for a motion and second to close the public hearing.
11.04.54 Continuances
(a) Prior to start of public hearing. In the event the applicant or the applicant’s agent is not present for the
public hearing, the body conducting the public hearing may authorize a continuance.
(b) During a public hearing. Prior to the close of the public hearing, the applicant may request a
continuance and the body conducting the public hearing may agree to the continuance upon a showing of
good cause. Likewise, the body conducting the public hearing may ask the applicant for a continuance, but the
applicant is not required to grant such request. If the applicant does not grant a continuance, the body shall act
on the information at its disposal.
(c) Effect. A continuance stops the time clock, if any, for making a decision.
(d) Notice requirements. A public hearing may be continued to a later date without again providing public
notice, provided the location, date, and time for the continued hearing are announced at the time of the
continuance.
11.04.55 Public comment
(a) Time limitations on public comment. The presiding officer may impose a time limit on members of the
public who wish to address the body conducting the public hearing to assure completion of the agenda in a
timely manner. Under no circumstance shall such time limit be less than 3 minutes.
(b) Written comment. Prior to the close of the public hearing, members of the public may submit written
comments to the body conducting the public hearing. Such documents shall be retained and made part of the
public record for the proceeding.
11.04.56 to 11.04.70 Reserved
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
27
Sections
DIVISION 4
SITE VISITS
11.04.71 Authorization
11.04.72 Open meeting requirements
11.04.73 General rules of conduct
11.04.74 Site visit during a public hearing
11.04.75 Site visit not part of a public hearing
11.04.71 Authorization
The Zoning Board of Appeals and the Planning Commission may conduct a site visit to inspect a property as it
relates to a pending development application.
11.04.72 Open meeting requirements
A site visit is a public meeting and must comply with Wisconsin's open meeting requirements and the requirements
of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
11.04.73 Rules of conduct
(a) Participation. To ensure everyone hears what is being said during a site visit, participants should stay
together as they tour the subject property.
(b) Comments. No recommendations can be offered, and no decisions can be made during a site visit.
(c) Quorum required. A site visit must be attended by a quorum of the review authority.
(d) Overview of site visit. When the review authority reconvenes their meeting or public hearing, the
presiding officer should initiate a discussion of the members to document the major points that were discussed
and/or observations made on the site visit.
11.04.74 Site visit during a public hearing
If a site visit is conducted as part of a public hearing, discussion is strictly limited to points of clarification, such as
(1) the location of features (e.g., property boundary lines), (2) placement of proposed improvements, (3) features
to be retained or removed as part of the proposed project, and the like. The merits of the proposal must not be
discussed during the site visit.
11.04.75 Site visit not part of a public hearing
If a site visit is not part of a public hearing, the petitioner and Planning Commission members may engage in a
general discussion related to the pending application. Such discussion should however be limited to what is
observed during the tour as it relates to the proposed project.
11.04.76 to 11.04.90 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 5
FINANCIAL GUARANTEES
11.04.91 Performance bond
11.04.92 Letter of credit
11.04.93 Cash deposit
11.04.94 Insufficient funds
11.04.91 Performance bond
For the purpose of this chapter, a performance bond is not an acceptable financial guarantee.
11.04.92 Letter of credit
(a) Form. The letter of credit shall be irrevocable and shall be in a form acceptable to the city attorney.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
28
(b) Amount. The amount of the letter of credit shall conform to the amount established in this chapter. If an
amount is not specified in this chapter, the Common Council shall establish the amount.
(c) Acceptance required. A letter of credit is not accepted by the City until formal action by the Common
Council board upon the recommendation of the city attorney.
(d) Minimum requirements for issuer. The bank, savings and loan, or other financial institution issuing the
letter of credit must be authorized to do business in the state of Wisconsin and have a financial standing
acceptable to the city attorney.
(e) Obligation of private party. The provision of a letter of credit shall not remove the burden of performing
the work the letter of credit is intended to guarantee.
11.04.93 Cash deposit
(a) Generally. If a cash deposit is provided under this chapter, the City is not obligated to pay interest
thereon. Any such cash deposit shall remain in the custody of the City Treasurer.
(b) Amount. The amount of the cash deposit shall conform to the amount established in this chapter. If an
amount is not specified in this chapter, the Common Council shall establish the amount.
(c) Acceptance required. A cash bond is not accepted by the City until formal action by the Common
Council.
(d) Obligation of private party. The provision of a cash deposit shall not remove the burden of performing
the work the cash deposit is intended to guarantee.
(e) Administrative fee. When a cash deposit is offered as a financial guarantee, the City may charge a fee
for the additional work required of the City Clerk and City Treasurer to monitor and handle the cash deposit. The
amount of such fee shall be set by the Common Council from time-to-time by resolution.
11.04.94 Insufficient funds
If the City exercises its right to use a financial guarantee and the cost of performing the authorized work exceeds
the amount of the financial guarantee, the City shall send a bill to the property owner for the outstanding
balance. If the property owner does not pay such costs within 30 days after billing, such costs shall constitute a
special charge under s. 66.0627, Wis. Stats., or as otherwise authorized by state law.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
29
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
30
Divisions
ARTICLE 5
SPECIFIC PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
Sections
DIVISION 1
CODE AMENDMENT
11.05.01 Generally
11.05.02 Initiation
11.05.03 Review procedure
11.05.04 Effective date of adopted ordinance
11.05.05 Basis of decision
11.05.06 Imposition of conditions
11.05.07 Application content
11.05.08 Staff report content
11.05.09 Appeal
11.05.01 Generally
From time to time, it may be necessary or desirable to amend the text of this chapter and the zoning map. This
division describes the procedures and requirements to amend this chapter and the zoning map.
11.05.02 Initiation
Any of the following may submit an application to amend the text of this chapter or the zoning map:
(1) a property owner in the area to be affected by the proposed amendment,
(2) the zoning administrator,
(3) the Planning Commission,
(4) the Zoning Board of Appeals,
1. Code amendment
2. Planned development district
3. Conditional use
4. Wireless telecommunication facility
5. Site plan and plan of operation
6. Architectural review
7. Special exception
8. Home Occupation
9. Zoning permit
10. Reserved
11. Certificate of zoning compliance
12. Floodplain permit
13. Termination of approval
14. Registration of a nonconforming use
15. Conversion of a nonconforming use
16. Expansion of a nonconforming building
17. Code interpretation
18. Administrative appeal
19. Variance
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
31
(5) the Mayor, and
(6) the Common Council.
11.05.03 Review procedure1
The general steps outlined below shall be used to amend the text of this chapter and the zoning map.
(1) Submittal of application materials. The applicant submits a complete application to the zoning
administrator along with the application fee as may be established by the Common Council.
(2) Distribution to Department of Natural Resources. If the proposed amendment would revise floodplain or
shoreland-wetland regulations in this chapter, the zoning administrator sends a copy of the application
to the regional office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources within 5 work days of receipt.
(3) Determination of completeness. The zoning administrator reviews the submittal within 10 days of
receiving the application and other required materials to make sure it is complete and ready for further
review. If it is not complete, the zoning administrator will notify the applicant in writing of such
deficiencies and that the applicant has 3 months from the date of the notice to resubmit the
application or forfeit the application fee. The zoning administrator will take no further steps to process
the application until the deficiencies are remedied. The incomplete application is retained as a public
record.
(4) Review date. When the zoning administrator determines the application is complete, he or she
schedules the review with the Planning Commission consistent with its adopted calendar.
(5) Special notice to airport. If the application is for any change in an airport affected area, as defined in s.
62.23(6)(am)1.b., Wis. Stats., the zoning administrator mails a copy of the notice by regular mail to the
owner or operator of the airport bordered by the airport affected area.
(6) Special notice to specified municipalities. At least 10 calendar days prior to the date of the public
hearing, the zoning administrator gives notice of the proposed amendment to the clerk of any
municipality whose boundary are within 1,000 feet of any lands included in the proposed amendment.
(7) Special notice to Department of Natural Resources. If the proposed amendment would revise the
floodplain regulations in this chapter, the zoning administrator sends a copy of the public hearing notice
to the regional office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources at least 10 calendar days
before the date of the public hearing.2
(8) General notice by type of application. If a proposed amendment would revise the text of this chapter,
the zoning administrator provides for class 2 public notice, distribution list notice, and meeting agenda
notice consistent with Division 2 of Article 4. If a property owner initiates a proposed amendment that
would revise the zoning map, the zoning administrator provides for class 2 public notice, property owner
notice, distribution list notice, and meeting agenda notice consistent with Division 2 of Article 4. If the
City initiates a proposed amendment that would revise the zoning map, the zoning administrator
provides for class 2 public notice, distribution list notice, and meeting agenda notice consistent with
Division 2 of Article 4.
(9) Staff report preparation and distribution. The zoning administrator prepares a written staff report as
described in this division and provides a copy of it to each member of the Planning Commission and
Common Council, the applicant, and any other interested person upon request.
(10) Public hearing. Allowing for proper notice, the Planning Commission conducts a public hearing to
review the application consistent with Division 3 of Article 4. Prior to the close of the public hearing, the
applicant or the Planning Commission may request a continuance consistent with Division 3 of Article 4.
If the public hearing is adjourned, the Planning Commission may direct the zoning administrator, the city
engineer, and/or city attorney to conduct additional research and to prepare such documents it
deems necessary, including a preliminary decision document.
(11) Recommendation. After considering the public comments received at the public hearing and the staff
report, the Planning Commission, no more than 40 calendar days after the public hearing, makes a
recommendation to the Common Council based on the decision criteria contained in this division to (i)
approve the amendment, (ii) approve the amendment with conditions, or (iii) deny the amendment.
1 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats.
2 Commentary: See s NR 116.20(2)(c) and ch. NR 117, Wis. Admin. Code
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
32
(12) General notice. Consistent with Division 2 of Article 4, the zoning administrator places the matter on the
meeting agenda of the Common Council.
(13) Common Council meeting. Allowing for proper notice, the Common Council considers the application
at a regular or special meeting.
(14) Decision. The Common Council after considering the Planning Commission’s recommendation makes a
decision based on the decision criteria contained in this division to (i) approve the amendment, (ii)
approve the amendment with conditions, or (iii) deny the amendment.
(15) Required vote with downzoning. An amendment must be approved by at least two-thirds of the
members-elect if the amendment would decrease the development density of the land to be less
dense than was allowed under its previous usage or that would reduce the number of permitted uses of
the land to fewer uses than were allowed under its previous usage. If a person requests or agrees to
such downzoning, the ordinance may be enacted by a simple majority of the members-elect.3
(16) Required vote with a protest by qualified property owners. Prior to January 1, 2019, an amendment to
the zoning map may not become effective except upon a favorable vote of three-quarters of the
Common Council members voting on the proposed change when (i) those owning 20 percent or more
of the land area within the proposed map amendment file a written protest, (ii) those owning 20
percent or more of the land area within 100 feet of the proposed map amendment file a written
protest, or (iii) those owning 20 percent or more of the land directly opposite of the proposed map
amendment but within 100 feet of the street frontage file a written protest.4
(17) Required vote with protest of airport. If a proposed amendment would make any change in an airport
affected area, as defined under s. 62.23(6)(am)1.b., Wis. Stats., and the owner or operator of the airport
bordered by the airport affected area files a protest against the proposed amendment, no ordinance
which makes such change may be approved except by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the
members of the Common Council present and voting.5
(18) Preparation of decision document. If the Common Council approves the proposed amendment, the
zoning administrator prepares a final ordinance.
(19) Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following the Common Council’s decision, the zoning
administrator mails the decision document to the applicant by regular mail.
(20) Notification to Department of Natural Resources. If the proposed amendment is approved and modifies
the floodplain regulations in this chapter, the zoning administrator mails a copy of the ordinance to the
regional office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources within 10 calendar days of the date of
decision.
(21) Preparation of new zoning map. If the proposed amendment is approved and modifies the zoning map,
the zoning administrator shall cause a new zoning map to be prepared consistent with Article 6.
11.05.04 Effective date of adopted ordinance
(a) Generally. An adopted ordinance shall take effect as prescribed in state law.
(b) Exceptions. An amendment involving floodplain regulations shall not become effective until it is
reviewed and approved by the regional office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. An
amendment that modifies official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines, or water surface profiles shall not
become effective until it is reviewed and approved by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
11.05.05 Basis of decision
(a) Text amendment. If a proposed amendment would revise the text of this chapter, the Planning
Commission in making its recommendation and the Common Council in making its decision shall consider the
following factors:
(1) whether the amendment is consistent with the City’s comprehensive plan;
3 Commentary: See s. 66.10015(3), Wis. Stats
4 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(d)(2m)(a), Wis. Stats.
5 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(d)(2m)(b), Wis. Stats.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
33
(2) whether the amendment is consistent with other planning documents adopted by the Common
Council;
(3) whether this chapter with the amendment is internally consistent;
(4) whether the amendment is the least restrictive approach to address issues of public health, safety, and
welfare;
(5) the extent to which the text amendment will likely create new nonconforming uses and structures;
(6) if the proposed amendment relates to floodplain regulations, whether the chapter as amended
complies with ss. 62.23 and 87.30, Wis. Stats., ch. NR 116, Wis. Admin. Code, and other state laws;
(7) if the proposed amendment relates to shoreland-wetland regulations, whether the chapter as
amended complies with s. 62.231, Wis. Stats.; ch. NR 117, Wis. Admin. Code; and other state laws;
(8) whether the proposed amendment is needed to comply with a new or revised state or federal law; and
(9) any other factor not specifically or generally listed, but deemed appropriate by the Planning
Commission or Common Council given the particular circumstances.
(b) Zoning map amendment. If a proposed amendment would revise the zoning map, the Planning
Commission in making its recommendation and the Common Council in making its decision shall consider the
following factors:
(1) whether the amendment is consistent with the City’s comprehensive plan, including future land use
maps or similar maps;
(2) whether the amendment is consistent with other planning documents adopted by the Common
Council;
(3) the extent to which the amendment will or will likely increase or decrease the number of nonconforming
uses and structures; and
(4) any other factor not specifically or generally listed, but deemed appropriate by the Planning
Commission or Common Council given the particular circumstances.
(c) Special review criteria for amendments to the shoreland-wetland overlay district boundary. To ensure
this chapter remains consistent with the shoreland protection objectives of s. 144.26, Wis. Stats., the Common
Council shall not rezone a wetland in a shoreland-wetland zoning district, or any portion thereof, where the
proposed rezoning may result in a significant adverse impact upon any of the following wetland functions:
(1) storm and flood water storage capacity;
(2) maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of
groundwater from a wetland to another area or the flow of groundwater through a wetland;
(3) filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise
drain into navigable waters;
(4) shoreline protection against erosion;
(5) fish spawning, breeding, nursery, or feeding grounds;
(6) wildlife habitat; or
(7) areas of special recreational, scenic, or scientific interest, including scarce wetland types and habitat of
endangered species.
11.05.06 Imposition of conditions
(a) Generally. The Planning Commission may recommend and the Common Council may impose one or
more conditions of approval as may be necessary to grant approval.
(b) Mandatory conditions of approval relating to certain existing land uses. If a proposed amendment
would revise the zoning map and is initiated by a property owner and the subject property hosts a land use that
at the time of application is not permitted in the proposed zoning district, such use shall be removed as a
condition of approval. If the subject property hosts a land use that at the time of application is classified as a
conditional use in the proposed zoning district, the property owner shall as a condition of approval submit a
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
34
conditional use application and obtain approval for that land use or, if conditional use approval is not granted,
remove such use.
11.05.07 Application content
(a) Landowner-initiated map amendment. An application for a landowner-initiated zoning map
amendment shall include the following:
(1) an application form as may be used by the City,
(2) a project map prepared at an appropriate scale depicting the information listed in Appendix F, and
(3) other supporting information the applicant deems appropriate.
(b) Other amendments. For all other types of amendments, the application shall include the following:
(1) an application form as may be used by the City, and
(2) other supporting information the applicant deems appropriate.
11.05.08 Staff report content
The staff report should contain the following:
(1) preliminary findings for the decision criteria listed in this division;
(2) proposed revisions, if appropriate; and
(3) other information deemed necessary.
11.05.09 Appeal
An aggrieved person may appeal a final decision made pursuant to this division by filing an appeal with a court
of competent jurisdiction within 30 calendar days of the final decision.
11.05.10 to 11.05.20 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 2
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
11.05.21 Generally
11.05.22 Initiation
11.05.23 Where allowed
11.05.24 Ownership
11.05.25 Minimum size
11.05.26 Development agreement
11.05.27 Allowable uses
11.05.28 Review procedure
11.05.29 Basis of decision
11.05.30 Imposition of conditions
11.05.31 Application form and content
11.05.32 Staff report content
11.05.33 Effect of approval
11.05.34 Effect of approved planned development
district on land division standards
11.05.35 Review of actual development within an
approved planned development district
11.05.36 Amendment of an approved planned
development district
11.05.37 Expiration of an approval
11.05.38 Appeal
11.05.21 Generally
A planned development district allows for more flexibility in the development of land while ensuring substantial
compliance with the intent of this chapter and the City’s comprehensive plan.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
35
11.05.22 Initiation
The owner of the subject property may submit an application for the establishment of a planned development
district.
11.05.23 Where allowed
A planned development district may be established in those area listed in Exhibit 6-1.
11.05.24 Ownership
At the time of establishment, all land within a planned development district shall be under single ownership or
control.
11.05.25 Minimum size
To qualify for consideration as a planned development district, the area shall include at least 5 acres.
11.05.26 Development agreement
If a planned development district is established pursuant to this division, the City and developer may enter into a
development agreement that specifies the duties and obligations of both parties with respect to the
development project.
11.05.27 Allowable uses
Land uses allowed in the underlying zoning district(s) may be allowed in a planned development district as
specified in a general development plan. When the underlying zoning district is a residential or commercial
district, a combination of residential, recreational, and/or commercial uses may be allowed. When the underlying
zoning is an industrial district, a combination of commercial and industrial uses may be allowed. A planned
development district with a mix of residential and industrial uses is prohibited.
11.05.28 Review procedure
Establishment of a planned development district involves a two-step process. The review of a proposed project
begins with a general development plan. If the general development plan is approved (i.e., an ordinance is
adopted), a precise implementation plan for all or a part of the project is reviewed. If the precise implementation
plan is approved, the project is officially approved. The general steps outlined below shall be used in the review of
an application for the establishment of a planned development district.
Step One – General Development Plan
(1) Pre-submittal meeting with zoning administrator. The applicant or the applicant's agent meets with the
zoning administrator to review (i) applicable regulations and procedures, (ii) applicable sections of the
City’s comprehensive plan, and (iii) the proposal. Upon request, the zoning administrator may waive the
requirement to hold a pre-submittal meeting when he or she determines such meeting is not necessary
given the nature of the project and/or the extent to which the applicant understands the City’s zoning
requirements.
(2) Pre-application conference with Planning Commission. The applicant meets with the Planning
Commission for an informal discussion relating to the proposed project. At that meeting, the applicant
shall provide the Planning Commission with materials that describe the proposed project in sufficient
detail for a preliminary, non-binding review.
(3) Submittal of application materials. The applicant submits a completed application and other required
materials to the zoning administrator along with the application fee as may be established by the
Common Council.
(4) Determination of completeness. The zoning administrator reviews the submittal within 10 days of
receiving the application and other required materials to make sure it is complete and ready for further
review. If it is not complete, the zoning administrator will notify the applicant in writing of such
deficiencies and that the applicant has 3 months from the date of the notice to resubmit the
application or forfeit the application fee. The zoning administrator will take no further steps to process
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
36
the application until the deficiencies are remedied. The incomplete application is retained as a public
record.
(5) Review date. When the zoning administrator determines the application is complete, he or she
schedules the review with the Planning Commission consistent with its adopted calendar.
(6) General notice. Consistent with Division 2 of Article 4, the zoning administrator provides for class 2 public
notice, property owner notice, and meeting agenda notice.
(7) Staff report preparation and distribution. The zoning administrator prepares a written staff report as
described in this division and provides a copy of it to each member of the Planning Commission and
Common Council, the applicant, and any other interested person upon request.
(8) Public hearing. Allowing for proper notice, the Planning Commission conducts a public hearing to
review the application consistent with Division 3 of Article 4. Prior to the close of the public hearing, the
applicant or the Planning Commission may request a continuance consistent with Division 3 of Article 4.
If the public hearing is adjourned, the Planning Commission may direct the zoning administrator to
conduct additional research related to the proposed district.
(9) Staff follow-up. After the close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission may direct the zoning
administrator, city engineer, and/or the city attorney to prepare a preliminary decision document.
(10) Recommendation. No more than 60 calendar days after the public hearing, the Planning Commission
makes a recommendation to the Common Council based on the decision criteria contained in this
division to (i) approve the general development plan, subject to approval of a precise implementation
plan; (ii) approve the general development plan with conditions, subject to approval of a precise
implementation plan; or (iii) deny the general development plan.
(11) General notice. Consistent with Division 2 of Article 4, the zoning administrator places the matter on the
meeting agenda of the Common Council.
(12) Common Council meeting. Allowing for proper notice, the Common Council considers the application
at a regular or special meeting.
(13) Decision. The Common Council after considering the Planning Commission’s recommendation makes a
decision based on the decision criteria contained in this division to (i) approve the general
development plan, subject to approval of a precise implementation plan; (ii) approve the general
development plan with conditions, subject to approval of a precise implementation plan; or (iii) deny
the general development plan.
(14) Preparation of decision document. If the general development plan is approved, the zoning
administrator prepares a final ordinance.
(15) Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following the Common Council’s decision, the zoning
administrator mails the decision document to the applicant by regular mail.
(16) Acceptance by property owner. If the general development plan is approved, the property owner must
sign the decision document to acknowledge the terms of the approval and return the same to the
zoning administrator within 2 months of the decision. Prior to the expiration of the previously specified
time period, the property owner may submit a petition to the City Clerk requesting an extension and the
zoning administrator may, with cause, extend the period within which the decision document must be
signed. If the signed decision document is not returned within the initial or extended time period, if any,
the decision shall become null and void without any further action by the City. The decision document
shall only become effective when all of the property owner signatures have been obtained and the
original signature copy is returned to the zoning administrator.
Step Two – Precise implementation plan
(1) Submittal of precise implementation plan. The applicant submits a precise implementation plan and
other required materials to the zoning administrator along with the application fee as may be
established by the Common Council. At the discretion of the applicant, such materials may be
submitted concurrently with the review of the general development plan.
(2) Determination of completeness. The zoning administrator reviews the submittal within 10 days of
receiving the application and other required materials to make sure it is complete and ready for further
review. If it is not complete, the zoning administrator will notify the applicant in writing of such
deficiencies and that the applicant has 3 months from the date of the notice to resubmit the
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
37
application or forfeit the application fee. The zoning administrator will take no further steps to process
the application until the deficiencies are remedied. The incomplete application is retained as a public
record.
(3) Review date. When the zoning administrator determines the application is complete, he or she
schedules the review with the Planning Commission consistent with its adopted calendar.
(4) General notice. Consistent with Division 2 of Article 4, the zoning administrator shall provide for a
meeting agenda notice.
(5) Staff report preparation and distribution. The zoning administrator prepares a staff report that evaluates
whether the precise implementation plan is consistent with the approved general development plan
and the suitability of the proposed plan given the additional information provided in the plan and
supplemental materials. The zoning administrator provides a copy of it to each member of the Planning
Commission and Common Council, the applicant, and any other interested person upon request.
(6) Meeting. Allowing for proper notice, the Planning Commission reviews the precise implementation plan
and the staff report.
(7) Determination of consistency. The Planning Commission determines whether the precise
implementation plan is generally consistent with the approved general development plan with respect
to density/intensity and permissible land uses. If the Planning Commission determines that the precise
implementation plan is not generally consistent, the Planning Commission shall render that decision in
writing and take no further action on the precise implementation plan.
(8) Recommendation. If the precise implementation plan is deemed to be consistent with the general
development plan, the Planning Commission makes a recommendation to the Common Council based
on the decision criteria contained in this division to (i) approve the precise implementation plan, (ii)
approve the precise implementation plan with conditions, or (iii) deny the precise implementation plan.
(9) General notice. Consistent with Division 2 of Article 4, the zoning administrator places the matter on the
meeting agenda of the Common Council.
(10) Common Council meeting. Allowing for proper notice, the Common Council considers the application
at a regular or special meeting.
(11) Decision. The Common Council after considering the Planning Commission’s recommendation makes a
decision based on the decision criteria contained in this division to (i) approve the precise
implementation plan, (ii) approve the precise implementation plan with conditions, or (iii) deny the
precise implementation plan.
(12) Preparation of decision document. Based on the action of the Common Council, the zoning
administrator prepares a decision document consistent with this division.
(13) Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following the Common Council’s decision, the zoning
administrator mails the decision document to the applicant by regular mail.
(14) Acceptance by property owner. If an approval includes one or more conditions of approval, the
property owner must sign the decision document to acknowledge the imposition of such condition or
conditions and return the same to the zoning administrator within 2 months of the decision. Prior to the
expiration of the previously specified time period, the property owner may submit a petition to the City
Clerk requesting an extension and the zoning administrator may, with cause, extend the period within
which the decision document must be signed. If the signed decision document is not returned within
the initial or extended time period, if any, the decision shall become null and void without any further
action by the City. The decision document shall only become effective when all required signatures
have been obtained and the original signature copy is returned to the zoning administrator.
11.05.29 Basis of decision
In the review of a general development plan and the precise implementation plan, the Planning Commission in
making its recommendation and the Common Council in making its decision shall consider the following factors:
(1) whether development in the proposed project is in keeping with the spirit and intent of this chapter;
(2) whether development in the proposed project is consistent with the City’s comprehensive plan;
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
38
(3) the effects of development in the proposed project on traffic safety and efficiency, both within and
outside of the district;
(4) whether the proposed plan for development in the proposed project is properly planned and is properly
coordinated with the existing and anticipated land uses on properties in the immediate and
surrounding area;
(5) the extent to which the natural features, open space, and/or farmland on the site are preserved;
(6) whether development in the proposed project complies with provisions of this chapter and other land
development regulations of the City that may apply;
(7) the effects of development in the proposed project on public services and facilities;
(8) whether adequate water and sanitary sewer facilities can be provided;
(9) the proposed means of maintaining any undeveloped areas of the proposed project for the purpose
for which it was set aside;
(10) effects of the proposed use on surrounding properties, including existing and anticipated uses;
(11) effects of the proposed use on the normal and orderly development and improvement of the
surrounding property for uses permitted in the zoning district and adjoining districts;
(12) whether the plan for development is clearly superior to development that is permitted based on the
design and development standards of the underlying zoning district; and
(13) any other factor that relates to the purposes of this chapter set forth in s. 11.01.05 or as allowed by state
law.
11.05.30 Imposition of conditions
(a) Generally. The Planning Commission may recommend and the Common Council may impose
conditions as may be necessary to grant approval. Such conditions may relate to any of the factors it considered
in reaching its decision. In addition, the Planning Commission may recommend and the Common Council may
require the provision of off-site exactions that may be necessary to approve the establishment of the planned
development district project.
(b) Effect on contracts with another party. The Common Council shall not condition or withhold approval
based upon the property owner entering into a contract or discontinuing, modifying, extending, or renewing any
contract, with a third party under which the third party is engaging in a lawful use of the property.6
11.05.31 Application form and content
(a) General development plan. The application submittal for a general development plan shall include the
following:
(1) an application form as may be used by the City;
(2) a general development plan prepared at an appropriate scale depicting the information listed in
Appendix F;
(3) a preliminary draft of covenants if any are to be imposed; and
(4) a development schedule, if the project is to be constructed in phases, which includes the anticipated
beginning date and ending date of each phase and a description of those project-related elements to
be completed in each phase.
(b) Precise implementation plan. The application submittal for a precise implementation plan shall include
the following:
(1) an application form as may be used by the City;
(2) a precise implementation plan prepared at an appropriate scale depicting the information listed in
Appendix F;
6 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(gm), Wis. Stats. The City, for example, could not require an applicant to terminate an existing contract with another
party that is engaged in a lawful use of the property.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
39
(3) a final draft of covenants if any are to be imposed;
(4) homeowners association documents, if proposed or required;
(5) a development agreement, if proposed or required; and
(6) a development schedule, if the project is to be constructed in phases, which includes the anticipated
beginning date and ending date of each phase and a description of those project-related elements to
be completed in each phase.
11.05.32 Staff report content
The staff report should contain the following:
(1) preliminary findings for the decision criteria listed in this division;
(2) a preliminary list of recommended conditions of approval; and
(3) other information deemed necessary.
11.05.33 Effect of approval
If the Common Council approves a planned development district, the approval shall run with the land and is
binding on all subsequent property owners.
11.05.34 Effect of approved planned development district on land division standards
Development in a planned development district is subject to the City’s land division regulations to the extent
applicable, except that the Planning Commission or Common Council may waive a development standard in the
land division regulations as provided therein.
11.05.35 Review of actual development within an approved planned development district
If the Common Council approves a planned development district, proposed development in the district shall be
reviewed consistent with the requirements of this article as may apply (e.g., building, site, and plan of operation).
11.05.36 Amendment of an approved planned development district
If the Common Council approves a planned development district, the Planning Commission and Common
Council shall review all proposed changes to the project plan that was approved at the time of approval. If in the
opinion of the Common Council, the proposed change constitutes a minor alteration, the Common Council may
approve the requested change at a regular or special meeting of the Common Council. If the proposed change
constitutes a major alteration, the review procedure in this division shall be followed.
11.05.37 Expiration of an approval
If any portion of a planned development district that can be developed remains substantially undeveloped 3
years after final approval, the Common Council may rescind the approval, in whole or in part, following a public
hearing. Upon written petition, the Common Council may with good cause grant a one-time extension not to
exceed 4 years. In the event the Common Council rescinds an approval, the Common Council shall at that time
reclassify undeveloped lands in the district based on the zoning regulations in effect at that time. Developed
portions of the planned development district may either be allowed to retain the planned development district
designation or reclassified based on the zoning regulations in effect at that time.
11.05.38 Appeal
An aggrieved person may appeal a final decision made pursuant to this division by filing an appeal with a court
of competent jurisdiction within 30 calendar days of the final decision.
11.05.39 to 11.05.50 Reserved
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
40
Sections
DIVISION 3
CONDITIONAL USE
11.05.51 Generally
11.05.52 Applicability
11.05.53 Initiation
11.05.54 Review procedure
11.05.55 Basis of decision
11.05.56 Imposition of conditions
11.05.57 Application form and content
11.05.58 Staff report content
11.05.59 Content of decision document
11.05.60 Effect of approval
11.05.61 Expiration of an approval
11.05.62 Amendment of an approved conditional
use
11.05.63 Appeal
11.05.51 Generally
Although each zoning district is primarily intended for a predominant type of land use, there are a number of uses
that may be appropriate under certain conditions. These are referred to as conditional uses. This division describes
the requirements and procedures for reviewing a conditional use, including an amendment of an approved
conditional use.
11.05.52 Applicability
Those land uses designated as conditional uses in the land-use matrix (Appendix A) must comply with the
requirements in this division.
11.05.53 Initiation
The owner of the subject property may submit an application for the establishment of a conditional use.
11.05.54 Review procedure
The general steps outlined below shall be used in the review of a conditional use.
(1) Pre-submittal meeting. Before submitting an application, the applicant or the applicant's agent shall
meet with the zoning administrator to review (i) applicable regulations and procedures, (ii) applicable
sections of the City’s comprehensive plan, and (iii) the proposal. Upon request, the zoning administrator
may waive the requirement to hold a pre-submittal meeting when he or she determines such meeting is
not necessary given the nature of the project and/or the extent to which the applicant understands the
City’s zoning requirements.
(2) Submittal of application materials. The applicant submits a completed application and other required
materials to the zoning administrator along with the application fee as may be established by the
Common Council.
(3) Determination of completeness. The zoning administrator reviews the submittal within 10 days of
receiving the application and other required materials to make sure it is complete and ready for further
review. If it is not complete, the zoning administrator will notify the applicant in writing of such
deficiencies and that the applicant has 3 months from the date of the notice to resubmit the
application or forfeit the application fee. The zoning administrator will take no further steps to process
the application until the deficiencies are remedied. The incomplete application is retained as a public
record.
(4) Review date. When the zoning administrator determines the application is complete, he or she
schedules the review with the Common Council and the Planning Commission consistent with its
adopted calendar.
(5) Special notice to Department of Natural Resources. If the application relates to the floodplain
regulations in this chapter, the zoning administrator shall send a copy of the application and public
hearing notice to the regional office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources at least 10
calendar days before the date of the public hearing.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
41
(6) General notice. Consistent with Division 2 of Article 4, the zoning administrator shall provide for a class 2
public notice, property owner notice, and meeting agenda notice.
(7) Staff report preparation and distribution. The zoning administrator prepares a written staff report as
described in this division and provides a copy of it to each member of the Planning Commission and
Common Council, the applicant, and any other interested person upon request.
(8) Public hearing. Allowing for proper notice, the Common Council and the Planning Commission conduct
a joint public hearing to review the application consistent with Division 3 of Article 4. Prior to the close of
the public hearing, the applicant, Common Council, or the Planning Commission may request a
continuance consistent with Division 3 of Article 4. If the public hearing is adjourned, the Common
Council and/or Planning Commission may direct the zoning administrator, the city engineer, and/or city
attorney to conduct additional research. In addition, the Planning Commission may direct the zoning
administrator to prepare such documents it deems necessary, including a preliminary decision
document.
(9) Staff follow-up. After the close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission may direct the zoning
administrator to prepare a preliminary decision document.
(10) Recommendation. After considering all of the information submitted by the applicant, public comments
received at the public hearing, and the staff report, the Planning Commission makes a
recommendation based on the decision criteria contained in this division to (i) approve the conditional
use, (ii) approve the conditional use with conditions, or (iii) deny the conditional use.
(11) City Council meeting. Allowing for proper notice, the City Council shall consider the application at a
regular or special meeting.
(12) Decision. After considering all of the information submitted by the applicant, public comments received
at the public hearing, the staff report, and the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the City
Council makes a decision to (i) approve the conditional use, (ii) approve the conditional use with
conditions, or (iii) deny the conditional use.
(13) Preparation of final decision document. Based on the action of the Common Council, the zoning
administrator prepares a final decision document consistent with this division.
(14) Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following the Common Council’s decision, the zoning
administrator mails the decision document to the applicant by regular mail.
(15) Notification to Department of Natural Resources. If the application relates to the floodplain regulations in
this chapter, the zoning administrator mails a copy of the decision document to the regional office of
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources within 10 calendar days of the date of decision.
(16) Acceptance by property owner. If the application is approved, the property owner must sign the
decision document to acknowledge the terms of the approval and return the same to the zoning
administrator within 6 months of the decision. Prior to the expiration of the previously specified time
period, the property owner may submit a petition to the City Clerk requesting an extension and the
zoning administrator may, with cause, extend the period within which the decision document must be
signed. If the signed decision document is not returned within the initial or extended time period, if any,
the decision shall become null and void without any further action by the City. The decision document
shall only become effective when all required signatures have been obtained and the original signature
copy is returned to the zoning administrator.
(17) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is retained as a public record.
(18) Recording of decision document. If the property owner returns the decision document within the
required time period with the required signatures, the zoning administrator records the decision
document against the subject property in the office of the Wood County register of deeds.
(19) Administrative steps. If the conditional use is approved and the zoning administrator has created a map
showing conditional uses, the zoning administrator adds the conditional use to that map.
11.05.55 Basis of decision
(a) Generally. When reviewing conditional uses other than nonconforming conditional uses, the review
authority shall consider the following factors:
(1) the size of the parcel on which the proposed use will occur;
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
42
(2) the presence of and compatibility with other uses on the subject property, if any;
(3) the location of the proposed use on the subject property (e.g., proximity of the proposed use to other
existing or potential land uses);
(4) effects of the proposed use on traffic safety and efficiency and pedestrian circulation, both on-site and
off-site;
(5) the suitability of the subject property for the proposed use;
(6) effects of the proposed use on the natural environment;
(7) effects of the proposed use on surrounding properties, including operational considerations relating to
hours of operation and creation of potential nuisances;
(8) effects of the proposed use on the normal and orderly development and improvement of the
surrounding property for uses permitted in the zoning district and adjoining districts; and
(9) any other factor that relates to the purposes of this chapter set forth in s. 11.01.05 or as allowed by state
law.
Any final decision must be based on substantial evidence.
(b) Nonconforming conditional uses. When reviewing nonconforming conditional uses, the review authority
shall make the following determinations:
(1) The nonconforming use will not be adverse to the public health, safety, or welfare.
(2) The nonconforming use is in keeping with the spirit and intent of this chapter.
(3) The nonconforming use would not be otherwise detrimental to the area and in particular the
surrounding properties.
The review authority shall grant approval for a nonconforming conditional use only if an affirmative finding for all
of the criteria listed in this subsection can be made based on substantial evidence.
11.05.56 Imposition of conditions
(a) Generally. In approving a conditional use, the review authority may impose one or more conditions of
approval as may be necessary to grant approval. Such conditions and restrictions may relate to the
establishment, location, construction, maintenance, operation of the use, off-site impacts, and any other aspect
of the use that impacts the public health, safety, or general welfare and must be based on substantial evidence.
Examples of such conditions are listed below.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
43
Issue Potential Condition
1. Hours of operation Limit hours of operation to hours to be more compatible with surrounding uses.
2. Buffering Require more of a buffer than what is otherwise required by this chapter. Buffering
may include landscaping, walls or fences, berms, and other features to physically
separate adjoining uses.
3. Maximum floor area Establish a maximum floor area that may be less than what is otherwise allowed.
4. Maximum number of
patrons
Limit the size of the use by establishing maximum patron loads, often by seats
and/or tables
5. Uses within buildings Limit commercial uses to the first floor of a multistory building.
6. Number and/or
location of entrances
Design the site and building so that entrances are located in areas away from
adjoining properties.
7. Outdoor activity Restrict locations and/or times of outdoor activity.
8. Outdoor storage Establish a maximum area for outdoor storage that may be less than what is
otherwise allowed.
9. Take-out food
service
Prohibit drive-up service windows and/or walk-up service windows in certain areas
of the property (e.g., near a residential use). If these are allowed, limitations could
be set.
10. Delivery services Prohibit deliver services that entail frequent trips or establish upper limits on the
activity.
11. Signage Prohibit signage in areas of the property that may cause an impact on surrounding
areas.
(b) Limitation on imposing conditions. A condition of approval shall not lessen a development standard or
other requirement contained in this chapter.
(c) Effect on contracts with another party. The review authority shall not condition or withhold approval
based upon the property owner entering into a contract or discontinuing, modifying, extending, or renewing any
contract, with a third party under which the third party is engaging in a lawful use of the property.7
(d) Special condition for business as property owner. As a condition of approval of a conditional use, the
property owner if it is a business entity, such as a limited liability company or a corporation, shall for the life of the
conditional use continuously maintain a registered office in the state of Wisconsin as evidenced by registration
with the Wisconsin Department of Financial Institutions.
11.05.57 Application form and content
The application submittal shall include an application form as may be used by the City and a project map
prepared at an appropriate scale depicting the information listed in Appendix F.
11.05.58 Staff report content
The staff report should contain preliminary findings for the decision criteria listed in this division and other
information deemed appropriate.
11.05.59 Content of decision document
(a) Approval. If the application for a conditional use is approved, the decision document should include
the following:
(1) a statement that the conditional use is approved;
7 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(gm), Wis. Stats. The City, for example, could not require an applicant to terminate an existing contract with another
party that is engaged in a lawful use of the property.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
44
(2) a description of the conditional use;
(3) a description of where the conditional use will occur on the property;
(4) reasons for the decision based on the criteria listed in this division;
(5) conditions of approval that must be satisfied prior to the establishment of the conditional use, if any;
(6) conditions of approval that must be complied with during the life of the conditional use, if any;
(7) a statement indicating that the property owner must sign the decision document and return it to the
zoning administrator to acknowledge acceptance of the same;
(8) a statement that the applicant may appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction;
(9) a statement that an aggrieved person, other than the applicant, may appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction and that any work done by the applicant as authorized by the approval is done
at the applicant’s risk;
(10) a statement indicating the nature of the approval (i.e., personal to the property owner or runs with the
land);
(11) other information the reviewing authority or zoning administrator deems appropriate;
(12) the signature of the zoning administrator on behalf of the reviewing authority; and
(13) the date of the decision.
(b) Denial. If the application for a conditional use is denied, the decision document should include the
following:
(1) a statement that the conditional use is denied,
(2) a description of the project, including acreage and proposed use characteristics,
(3) reasons for the decision based on the criteria listed in this division,
(4) a statement indicating that the denial does not limit the applicant's ability to resubmit a revised
application for consideration,
(5) a statement that the decision may be appealed as provided for in this division,
(6) other information the reviewing authority or zoning administrator deems appropriate,
(7) the signature of the zoning administrator on behalf of the reviewing authority, and
(8) the date of the decision.
11.05.60 Effect of approval
(a) Generally. Unless otherwise specified in the conditional use order, approvals run with the land.
(b) Temporary uses. If a use is listed as a temporary use in Appendix A and is approved by the Planning
Commission as a conditional use, the use may be re-established with the written approval of the zoning
administrator if he or she determines that the use to be re-established is substantially the same as what was
originally approved and that the approved use did not create any potentially adverse impacts on the public
health, safety, or welfare.
11.05.61 Expiration of an approval
(a) Non-establishment of use. If the zoning administrator determines that substantial work as authorized by
a conditional use approval did not commence within 12 months of the date of approval or if substantial work did
commence within 12 months of the date of approval but has not continued in good faith to completion, he or
she shall initiate the process to terminate the approval pursuant to Division 13 of this article. Upon written petition
and with cause, the zoning administrator may grant a one-time extension not to exceed 6 months provided (i) the
permit holder requests the extension prior to the expiration of the approval, (ii) the permit holder clearly
demonstrates that circumstances beyond his or her control prevented the start of construction and the
continuation of the same, and (iii) the project complies with this chapter in effect at the time the extension is
granted.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
45
(b) Cessation of use. If the zoning administrator determines that a conditional use has ceased to operate
for any reason, whether intentional or otherwise, for more than 12 continuous months, he or she shall initiate the
process to terminate the approval pursuant to Division 13 of this article.
11.05.62 Amendment of an approved conditional use
Following approval of a conditional use, the Planning Commission shall review all proposed changes to the
approval. If in the opinion of the Planning Commission, the proposed change constitutes a minor alteration, the
Planning Commission may approve the requested change in writing at a regular or special meeting of the
Planning Commission without following the review procedure in this division. If the proposed change constitutes a
major alteration, the review procedure in effect at the time of submittal shall be followed.
11.05.63 Appeal
An aggrieved person may appeal a final decision made pursuant to this division by filing an appeal with a court
of competent jurisdiction within 30 calendar days of the final decision.
11.05.64 to 11.05.70 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 4
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY
11.05.71 Review procedure
11.05.72 Application form
11.05.73 Imposition of conditions
11.05.74 Expiration of an approval
11.05.75 Amendment of an approval
11.05.76 Fees
11.05.71 Review procedure
(a) Planning Commission review of new telecommunication tower and Class 1 collocation. The general
steps outlined below shall be used to review an application for a new telecommunication tower and a Class 1
collocation as designated in the land-use matrix (Appendix A).
(1) Submittal of application materials. The applicant submits a completed application to the zoning
administrator along with the application fee as may be established by the Common Council.
(2) Determination of completeness. The zoning administrator reviews the application and determines
whether the application is complete. If the application includes all of the required information, the
application shall be found to be complete. The zoning administrator notifies the applicant in writing
within 10 days of receiving the application if it is found not to be complete, and such notice shall
specify in detail the required information that was incomplete. Applicants are allowed to resubmit their
application as often as necessary until it is complete.
(3) Review date. When the zoning administrator determines the application is complete, he or she
schedules the review with the Planning Commission consistent with its adopted calendar.
(4) General notice. Consistent with Division 2 of Article 4, the zoning administrator provides for a class 2
public notice, property owner notice, and meeting agenda notice.
(5) Staff report preparation and distribution. The zoning administrator prepares a written staff report and
provides a copy of it to each member of the Planning Commission, the applicant, and any other
interested person upon request.
(6) Public hearing. Allowing for proper notice, the Planning Commission conducts a public hearing to
review the application consistent with Division 2 of Article 4. Prior to the close of the public hearing, the
applicant or the Planning Commission may request a continuance consistent with Division 3 of Article 4.
(7) Staff follow-up. If the Planning Commission does not render a decision immediately following the public
hearing, the Planning Commission may direct the zoning administrator to prepare a preliminary decision
document.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
46
(8) Decision. After considering all of the information submitted by the applicant, public comments
received at the public hearing, and the staff report, the Planning Commission, no more than 40
calendar days after the public hearing, makes a decision to (i) approve the application, (ii) approve
the application with conditions, or (iii) deny the application.
(9) Preparation of final decision document. Based on the action of the Planning Commission, the zoning
administrator prepares a final decision document.
(10) Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following the Planning Commission's decision, the
zoning administrator mails the decision document to the applicant by regular mail.
(11) Acceptance by property owner. If the application is approved, the property owner must sign the
decision document to acknowledge the terms of the approval and return the same to the zoning
administrator within 6 months of the decision. Prior to the expiration of the previously specified time
period, the property owner may submit a petition to the City Clerk requesting an extension and the
Planning Commission may, with cause, extend the period within which the decision document must be
signed. If the signed decision document is not returned within the initial or extended time period, if any,
the decision is null and void without any further action by the City. The decision document shall only
become effective when all required signatures have been obtained and the original signature copy is
returned to the zoning administrator.
(12) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is retained as a public record.
(13) Recording of decision document. If the property owner returns the decision document within the
required time period with the required signatures, the zoning administrator records the decision
document against the subject property in the Wood County register of deeds office.
In the event an applicant believes the City has exceeded its authority as set forth in s. 66.0404, Wis. Stats., and
other such laws as may apply which may include 47 USCA s. 1455, the applicant shall notify the zoning
administrator in writing and the reviewing authority reserves the right to reconsider the matter, to ensure that
applicable laws are followed.
(b) Class 2 collocation. The general steps outlined below shall be used to review an application for a Class
2 collocation which is allowed in all zoning districts.
(1) Submittal of application materials. The applicant submits a completed application to the zoning
administrator along with the application fee as may be established by the Common Council.
(2) Determination of completeness. The zoning administrator reviews the application and determines
whether the application is complete. If the application includes all of the required information, the
application shall be found to be complete. The zoning administrator must notify the applicant in writing
within 5 days of receiving the application if it is found not to be complete, and such notice shall specify
in detail the required information that was incomplete. Applicants are allowed to resubmit their
application as often as necessary until it is complete.
(3) Decision. The zoning administrator makes a decision on the application within 45 days of the date the
application is deemed complete, unless the time is extended by the applicant. The decision shall be
stated in writing. If approval is not granted, the reasons therefor must be stated.
(4) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is retained as a public record.
In the event an applicant believes the City has exceeded its authority as set forth in s. 66.0404, Wis. Stats., and
other such laws as may apply which may include 47 USCA s. 1455, the applicant shall notify the zoning
administrator in writing and the reviewing authority reserves the right to reconsider the matter, to ensure that
applicable laws are followed.
11.05.72 Application form
(a) New telecommunication tower and Class 1 collocation. An application form for a new
telecommunication tower or a Class 1 collocation must include all of the following information as appropriate:
(1) The name and business address of, and the contact individual for, the applicant.
(2) The location of the proposed tower or affected tower.
(3) The location of the proposed mobile service facility.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
47
(4) If an application is to substantially modify an existing telecommunication tower, a construction plan
which describes the proposed modifications to the tower, and equipment and network components,
including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and related
equipment associated with the proposed modifications.
(5) If an application is to construct a new telecommunication tower, a construction plan which describes
the proposed tower and equipment and network components, including antennas, transmitters,
receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and related equipment to be placed on or around
the new tower.
(6) If an application is to construct a new telecommunication tower, an explanation as to why the
applicant chose the proposed location, and why the applicant did not choose collocation, including a
sworn statement from the responsible party attesting that collocation within the applicant’s service
area would not result in the same mobile service functionality, coverage, and capacity; is technically
infeasible; or is economically burdensome.
(b) Class 2 collocation. An application form for a Class 2 collocation must include the following information:
(1) The name and business address of, and the contact individual for, the applicant.
(2) The location of the proposed tower or affected tower.
(3) The location of the proposed mobile service facility.
11.05.73 Imposition of conditions
(a) Generally. The reviewing authority may impose one or more conditions of approval as may be
necessary to grant approval. Such conditions may relate to any aspect of the use that impacts the public health,
safety, or general welfare, subject to subsection (b) below.
(b) Limitations. The reviewing authority may not impose any of the following as a condition of approval:
(1) A requirement relating to environmental testing, sampling, or monitoring.
(2) A requirement relating to radio frequency emissions.
(3) A requirement to pay a reoccurring fee.
(4) A requirement that the structure or mobile service facility owner must provide space on or near the
structure for the use of or by the City at less than the market rate, or to provide the City other services
via the structure or facilities at less than the market rate.
(5) Limit the duration of the approval.
(6) A requirement that the applicant must indemnify or insure the city in connection with the political
subdivision’s exercise of its authority to approve the application.
(7) A requirement that the applicant must give the city the right to place at or collocate with the
applicant’s support structure any mobile service facilities provided or operated by, whether in whole or
in part, the city or an entity in which the City has a governance, competitive, economic, financial, or
other interest.
11.05.74 Expiration of an approval
(a) Non-establishment of use. If the zoning administrator determines that substantial work as authorized by
the approval did not commence within 12 months of the date of approval or if substantial work did commence
within 12 months of the date of approval but has not continued in good faith to completion, he or she shall initiate
the process to terminate the approval pursuant to Division 13 of this article. Upon written petition and with cause,
the zoning administrator may grant a one-time extension not to exceed 6 months provided (1) the permit holder
requests the extension prior to the expiration of the approval, (2) the permit holder clearly demonstrates that
circumstances beyond his or her control prevented the start of construction and the continuation of the same,
and (3) the project complies with this chapter in effect at the time the extension is granted.
(b) Cessation of use. If the zoning administrator determines that a conditional use has ceased to operate
for any reason, whether intentional or otherwise, for more than 12 continuous months, he or she shall initiate the
process to terminate the approval pursuant to Division 13 of this article.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
48
11.05.75 Amendment of an approval
Following approval, the Planning Commission shall review all proposed changes to the approval. If in the opinion
of the Planning Commission, the proposed change constitutes a minor alteration, the Planning Commission may
approve the requested change in writing at a regular or special meeting of the Planning Commission without
following the review procedure in this division. If the proposed change constitutes a major alteration, the review
procedure in effect at the time of submittal shall be followed.
11.05.76 Fees
(a) Professional service reimbursement. Costs incurred by the City in obtaining legal, planning, engineering,
and other technical and professional advice in connection with an application shall be charged to the applicant
as set forth in s. 11.04.15.
(b) Limitation on fees. The total of all fees, excluding professional service reimbursement, associated with
the review of an application shall not exceed the limits established by s. 66.0404(4)(d), Wis. Stats.
11.05.77 to 11.05.90 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 5
SITE PLAN AND PLAN OF OPERATION
11.05.91 Generally
11.05.92 Applicability
11.05.93 Initiation
11.05.94 Review procedure
11.05.95 Basis of decision
11.05.96 Imposition of conditions
11.05.97 Application form and content
11.05.98 Staff report content
11.05.99 Content of decision document
11.05.100 Effect of approval
11.05.101 Expiration of an approval
11.05.102 Amendment of an approval
11.05.103 Appeal
11.05.91 Generally
(a) Site plans. The way in which a land use occupies a lot has a direct effect on the overall functionality of
the site, the extent to which the land use can be expanded on the site in the future, effects of the land use on
nearby properties, and impacts on existing and anticipated public and private infrastructure. This division
describes the requirements and procedures for reviewing a site plan.
(b) Plan of operations. The way in which many land uses operate has a direct effect on the nature of the
use and potential effects on nearby properties, including existing and anticipated land uses. This division describes
the requirements and procedures for reviewing a plan of operation.
11.05.92 Applicability
Those land uses designated as requiring site plan review (SP) or plan of operation review (PO) in the land-use
matrix (Appendix A) must comply with the requirements in this division.
11.05.93 Initiation
The owner of the subject property may submit an application for a site plan and plan of operation.
11.05.94 Review procedure
The general steps outlined below shall be used in the review of a site plan and plan of operation application.
(1) Submittal of application materials. The applicant submits a completed application and other required
materials to the zoning administrator along with the application fee as may be established by the
Common Council.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
49
(2) Determination of completeness. The zoning administrator reviews the submittal within 10 days of
receiving the application and other required materials to make sure it is complete and ready for further
review. If it is not complete, the zoning administrator will notify the applicant in writing of such
deficiencies and that the applicant has 3 months from the date of the notice to resubmit the
application or forfeit the application fee. The zoning administrator will take no further steps to process
the application until the deficiencies are remedied. The incomplete application is retained as a public
record.
(3) Review date. When the zoning administrator determines the application is complete, he or she
schedules the review with the Planning Commission consistent with its adopted calendar.
(4) Staff report preparation and distribution. The zoning administrator prepares a written staff report as
described in this division and provides a copy of it to each member of the Planning Commission and the
applicant prior to the meeting at which the matter will be considered. The zoning administrator will also
provide a copy to interested people upon request.
(5) General notice. Consistent with Division 2 of Article 4, the zoning administrator places the matter on the
meeting agenda of the Planning Commission.
(6) Meeting. Allowing for proper notice, the Planning Commission considers the application at a regular or
special meeting.
(7) Decision. The Planning Commission makes a decision to (i) approve the site plan/plan of operation, (ii)
approve the site plan/plan of operation with conditions, or (iii) deny the site plan/plan of operation. The
Planning Commission may render its decision at the same meeting the matter was initially considered or
at a subsequent meeting, but no later than 40 calendar days after the initial meeting unless the
applicant agrees to an extension of a specified duration.
(8) Preparation of decision document. Based on the action of the Planning Commission, the zoning
administrator prepares a decision document consistent with this division.
(9) Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following the Planning Commission’s decision, the
zoning administrator mails the decision document to the applicant by regular mail.
(10) Acceptance by property owner. If the application is approved, the property owner and the operator, if
different, must sign the decision document to acknowledge the terms of the approval and return the
same to the zoning administrator within 6 months of the decision. Prior to the expiration of the previously
specified time period, the property owner or operator, if different, may submit a petition to the City
Clerk requesting an extension and the zoning administrator may, with cause, extend the period within
which the decision document must be signed. If the signed decision document is not returned within
the initial or extended time period, if any, the decision shall become null and void without any further
action by the City. The decision document shall only become effective when all required signatures
have been obtained and the original signature copy is returned to the zoning administrator.
(11) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is retained as a public record.
11.05.95 Basis of decision
(a) Site plan. The review authority shall consider the following factors in making their decision:
(1) effects of the project on traffic safety and efficiency and pedestrian circulation, both on-site and offsite;
(2) effects of the project on the natural environment;
(3) effects of the project on surrounding properties;
(4) compliance with the general site design principles enumerated in s. 11.06.184;
(5) compliance with the design principles for parking lots enumerated in s. 11.17.03;
(6) compliance with other applicable requirements contained in this chapter; and
(7) any other factor that relates to the purposes of this chapter set forth in s. 11.01.05 or as allowed by state
law.
(b) Plan of operation. The review authority shall consider the following factors in making their decision:
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
50
(1) the nature of the land use with regard to the number of employees, nature and extent of truck
shipments to and from the site, hours of operation, use of hazardous substances, and other operational
characteristics;
(2) the nature and extent of anticipated positive and negative effects on properties in the area;
(3) actions the applicant will undertake to mitigate the negative effects, if any, of the proposed land use;
and
(4) any other factor that relates to the purposes of this chapter set forth in s. 11.01.05 or as allowed by state
law.
11.05.96 Imposition of conditions
(a) Site plan. In approving a site plan, the Planning Commission may impose one or more conditions
deemed necessary to further the intent and purposes of this chapter. Such conditions, for example, may relate to
landscaping and screening, revisions to the site design, and outdoor lighting.
(b) Plan of operation. In approving a plan of operation, the Planning Commission may impose one or more
conditions deemed necessary to further the intent and purposes of this chapter. Such conditions, for example,
may relate to operational characteristic of the land use, including hours of operation and processes or activities
related to the land use.
(c) Effect on contracts with another party. The Planning Commission shall not condition or withhold approval
based upon the property owner entering into a contract or discontinuing, modifying, extending, or renewing any
contract, with a third party under which the third party is engaging in a lawful use of the property.8
11.05.97 Application form and content
The application submittal shall include an application form as may be used by the City.
11.05.98 Staff report content
The staff report should contain the following:
(1) a description of the proposed project;
(2) preliminary findings for the decision criteria listed in this division;
(3) a recommendation to approve the application, approve the application with conditions, or deny the
application;
(4) a preliminary list of conditions whether the staff recommendation is for approval or denial; and
(5) other information deemed necessary.
11.05.99 Content of decision document
(a) Approval. If the application for a site plan or plan of operation is approved, the decision document
should include the following:
(1) a statement that the site plan/plan of operation is approved;
(2) a description of the land use along with operational characteristics;
(3) reasons for the decision based on the criteria listed in this division;
(4) conditions of approval, if any;
(5) a statement indicating that the property owner and operator, if different, must sign the decision
document and return it to the zoning administrator to acknowledge acceptance of the same;
(6) a statement that the applicant may appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction;
(7) a statement that an aggrieved person, other than the applicant, may appeal the decision and that
any work done by the applicant as authorized by the approval is done at the applicant’s risk;
8 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(gm), Wis. Stats. The City, for example, could not require an applicant to terminate an existing contract with another
party that is engaged in a lawful use of the property.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
51
(8) other information the reviewing authority or zoning administrator deems appropriate;
(9) the signature of the zoning administrator on behalf of the reviewing authority; and
(10) the date of the decision.
(b) Denial. If the application for a site plan or plan of operation is denied, the decision document should
include the following:
(1) a statement that the site plan/plan of operation is denied,
(2) a description of the land use,
(3) reasons for the decision based on the criteria listed in this division,
(4) a statement indicating that the denial does not limit the applicant's ability to resubmit a revised
application for consideration,
(5) a statement that the decision may be appealed as provided for in this division,
(6) other information the reviewing authority or zoning administrator deems appropriate,
(7) the signature of the zoning administrator on behalf of the reviewing authority, and
(8) the date of the decision.
11.05.100 Effect of approval
The approval of a site plan and a plan of operation plan shall run with the land and is binding on all subsequent
property owners.
11.05.101 Expiration of an approval
An approval of a site plan/plan of operation shall automatically expire 12 months after the date of issuance unless
substantial work has commenced under the permit and continues in good faith to completion. Upon petition and
with cause, the zoning administrator may grant a one-time extension not to exceed 12 months provided (i) the
permit holder requests the extension prior to the expiration of the permit, (ii) the permit holder clearly
demonstrates that circumstances beyond his or her control prevented the start of construction and the
continuation of the same, and (iii) the project complies with this chapter in effect at the time the extension is
granted.
11.05.102 Amendment of an approval
Following approval of a site plan or plan of operation, the Planning Commission shall review all proposed changes
to the approval. If in the opinion of the Planning Commission, the proposed change constitutes a minor alteration,
the Planning Commission may approve the requested change in writing at a regular or special meeting of the
Planning Commission without following the review procedure in this division. If the proposed change constitutes a
major alteration, the review procedure in effect at the time of submittal shall be followed.
11.05.103 Appeal
An aggrieved person may appeal a final decision made pursuant to this division by filing an appeal with a court
of competent jurisdiction within 30 calendar days of the final decision
11.05.104 to 11.05.110 Reserved
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
52
Sections
DIVISION 6
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW
11.05.111 Generally
11.05.112 Applicability
11.05.113 Initiation
11.05.114 Review procedure
11.05.115 Basis of decision
11.05.116 Imposition of conditions
11.05.117 Application form and content
11.05.118 Content of decision document
11.05.119 Effect of approval
11.05.120 Expiration of an approval
11.05.121 Amendment of an approval
11.05.122 Appeal
11.05.111 Generally
Architectural review is intended to ensure that buildings fit in to the context in which they occur.
11.05.112 Applicability
Those land uses designated as requiring architectural review in the land-use matrix (Appendix A) must comply
with the requirements in this division. The exterior of an existing building designated as requiring architectural
review may be resided or re-roofed with the same or similar type of materials.
11.05.113 Initiation
The owner of the subject property may submit an application for architectural review.
11.05.114 Review procedure
The general steps outlined below shall be used in the review of an architectural plan application.
(1) Submittal of application materials. The applicant submits a completed application and other required
materials to the zoning administrator along with the application fee as may be established by the
Common Council.
(2) Determination of completeness. The zoning administrator reviews the submittal within 10 days of
receiving the application and other required materials to make sure it is complete and ready for further
review. If it is not complete, the zoning administrator will notify the applicant in writing of such
deficiencies and that the applicant has 3 months from the date of the notice to resubmit the
application or forfeit the application fee. The zoning administrator will take no further steps to process
the application until the deficiencies are remedied. The incomplete application is retained as a public
record.
(3) Review date. When the zoning administrator determines the application is complete, he or she
schedules the review with the Planning Commission consistent with its adopted calendar.
(4) General notice. Consistent with Division 2 of Article 4, the zoning administrator places the matter on the
meeting agenda of the Planning Commission.
(5) Meeting. Allowing for proper notice, the Planning Commission considers the application at a regular or
special meeting.
(6) Decision. The Planning Commission makes a decision to (i) approve the architectural plan, (ii) approve
the architectural plan with conditions, or (iii) deny the architectural plan. The Planning Commission may
render its decision at the same meeting the matter was initially considered or at a subsequent meeting,
but no later than 40 calendar days after the public meeting unless the applicant agrees to an extension
of a specified duration.
(7) Preparation of decision document. Based on the action of the Planning Commission, the zoning
administrator prepares a decision document consistent with this division.
(8) Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following the Planning Commission’s decision, the
zoning administrator mails the decision document to the applicant by regular mail.
(9) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is retained as a public record.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
53
11.05.115 Basis of decision
The review authority shall determine whether the building complies with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
11.05.116 Imposition of conditions
(a) Generally. In approving an architectural plan, the review authority may impose one or more conditions
deemed necessary to further the intent and purposes of this chapter.
(b) Effect on contracts with another party. The review authority shall not condition or withhold approval
based upon the property owner entering into a contract or discontinuing, modifying, extending, or renewing any
contract, with a third party under which the third party is engaging in a lawful use of the property.9
11.05.117 Application form and content
The application submittal shall include an application form as may be used by the City and a set of architectural
plans prepared at an appropriate scale.
11.05.118 Content of decision document
(a) Approval. If the architectural plan is approved, the decision document should include the following:
(1) a statement that the architectural plan is approved;
(2) a description of the project;
(3) reasons for the decision based on the criteria listed in this division;
(4) conditions of approval, if any;
(5) if one or more conditions of approval are imposed, a statement indicating that the property owner must
sign the decision document and return it to the zoning administrator to acknowledge acceptance of
the same;
(6) a statement that the applicant may appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction;
(7) a statement that an aggrieved person, other than the applicant, may appeal the decision and that
any work done by the applicant as authorized by the approval is done at the applicant’s risk;
(8) other information the reviewing authority or administrator deems appropriate;
(9) the signature of the zoning administrator on behalf of the reviewing authority on appeal; and
(10) the date of the decision.
(b) Denial. If the architectural plan is denied, the decision document should include the following:
(1) a statement that the architectural plan is denied,
(2) a description of the project,
(3) reasons for the decision based on the criteria listed in this division,
(4) a statement indicating that the denial does not limit the applicant's ability to resubmit a revised
application for consideration,
(5) a statement that the decision may be appealed as provided for in this division,
(6) other information the reviewing authority or zoning administrator deems appropriate,
(7) the signature of the zoning administrator on behalf of the reviewing authority on appeal, and
(8) the date of the decision.
11.05.119 Effect of approval
An approval of an architectural plan shall run with the land and is binding on all subsequent property owners.
9 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(gm), Wis. Stats. The City, for example, could not require an applicant to terminate an existing contract with another
party that is engaged in a lawful use of the property.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
54
11.05.120 Expiration of an approval
An approval of an architectural plan shall automatically expire 12 months after the date of issuance unless
substantial work has commenced and continues in good faith to completion. Upon petition and with cause, the
zoning administrator may grant a one-time extension not to exceed 12 months provided (i) the permit holder
requests the extension prior to the expiration of the permit, (ii) the permit holder clearly demonstrates that
circumstances beyond his or her control prevented the start of construction and the continuation of the same,
and (iii) the project complies with this chapter in effect at the time the extension is granted.
11.05.121 Amendment of an approval
Following approval of an architectural plan, the Planning Commission shall review all proposed changes to the
approval. If in the opinion of the Planning Commission, the proposed change constitutes a minor alteration, the
Planning Commission may approve the requested change in writing at a regular or special meeting of the
Planning Commission without following the review procedure in this division. If the proposed change constitutes a
major alteration, the review procedure in effect at the time of submittal shall be followed.
11.05.122 Appeal
An aggrieved person may appeal a final decision made pursuant to this division by filing an appeal with a court
of competent jurisdiction within 30 calendar days of the final decision
11.05.123 to 11.05.130 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 7
SPECIAL EXCEPTION
11.05.131 Generally
11.05.132 Initiation
11.05.133 Review procedure
11.05.134 Basis of decision
11.05.135 Imposition of conditions
11.05.136 Limitations on issuing a special exception
11.05.137 Application form and content
11.05.138 Staff report content
11.05.139 Content of decision document
11.05.140 Effect of approval
11.05.141 Expiration of an approval
11.05.142 Appeal
11.05.131 Generally
Upon written petition, the Planning Commission may, on a case-by-case basis, grant a special exception for those
development standards specifically noted as special exceptions in this chapter.
11.05.132 Initiation
The owner of the subject property may submit an application for a special exception.
11.05.133 Review procedure
Planning Commission review. The general steps outlined below shall be used in the review of a special exception
application.
(1) Submittal of application materials. The applicant submits a completed application and other required
materials to the zoning administrator along with the application fee as may be established by the
Common Council.
(2) Determination of completeness. The zoning administrator reviews the submittal within 10 days of
receiving the application and other required materials to make sure it is complete and ready for further
review. If it is not complete, the zoning administrator will notify the applicant in writing of such
deficiencies and that the applicant has 3 months from the date of the notice to resubmit the
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
55
application or forfeit the application fee. The zoning administrator will take no further steps to process
the application until the deficiencies are remedied. The incomplete application is retained as a public
record.
(3) Review date. When the zoning administrator determines the application is complete, he or she
schedules the review with the Planning Commission consistent with its adopted calendar.
(4) Staff report preparation and distribution. The zoning administrator prepares a written staff report as
described in this division and provides a copy of it to each member of the Planning Commission and the
applicant prior to the meeting at which the matter will be considered. The zoning administrator will also
provide a copy to interested people upon request.
(5) General notice. Consistent with Division 2 of Article 4, the zoning administrator places the matter on the
meeting agenda of the Planning Commission.
(6) Meeting. Allowing for proper notice, the Planning Commission considers the application at a regular or
special meeting.
(7) Decision. After considering all of the information submitted by the applicant and the staff report, the
Planning Commission makes a decision based on the decision criteria contained in this division to (i)
approve the special exception, (ii) approve the special exception with conditions, or (iii) deny the
special exception.
(8) Preparation of final decision document. Based on the action of the Planning Commission, the zoning
administrator prepares a final decision document consistent with this division.
(9) Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following the Planning Commission’s decision, the
zoning administrator mails the decision document to the applicant by regular mail.
(10) Acceptance by property owner. If the application is approved, the property owner must sign the
decision document to acknowledge the terms of the approval and return the same to the zoning
administrator within 6 months of the decision. Prior to the expiration of the previously specified time
period, the property owner may submit a petition to the City Clerk requesting an extension and the
zoning administrator may, with cause, extend the period within which the decision document must be
signed. If the signed decision document is not returned within the initial or extended time period, if any,
the decision shall become null and void without any further action by the City. The decision document
shall only become effective when all required signatures have been obtained and the original signature
copy is returned to the zoning administrator.
(11) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is retained as a public record.
11.05.134 Basis of decision
The review authority shall consider the following factors:
(1) the size of the property in comparison to other properties in the area;
(2) the extent to which the issuance of the special exception would be in keeping with the overall intent of
this chapter;
(3) whether there are any unique circumstances and the nature of those circumstances that warrant the
issuance of the special exception;
(4) the nature and extent of anticipated impacts to the natural environment that could potentially occur if
the special exception was granted;
(5) the nature and extent of anticipated positive and negative effects on properties in the area;
(6) actions the applicant will undertake to mitigate the negative effects, if any, of the proposed special
exception;
(7) a factor specifically listed under a section of this chapter authorizing the issuance of a special
exception; and
(8) any other factor that relates to the purposes of this chapter set forth in s. 11.01.05 or as allowed by state
law.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
56
11.05.135 Imposition of conditions
(a) Generally. In approving a special exception, the review authority may impose one or more conditions
deemed necessary to further the intent and purposes of this chapter.
(b) Effect on contracts with another party. The review authority shall not condition or withhold approval
based upon the property owner entering into a contract or discontinuing, modifying, extending, or renewing any
contract, with a third party under which the third party is engaging in a lawful use of the property.10
11.05.136 Limitations on issuing a special exception
A special exception shall only be approved in those instances where issuance is specifically authorized in this
chapter.
11.05.137 Application form and content
The application submittal shall include an application form as may be used by the City and a site plan prepared
at a scale of 1” = 20’ or other appropriate scale depicting the information listed in Appendix F.
11.05.138 Staff report content
The staff report should contain the following:
(1) a description of the requested special exception;
(2) preliminary findings for the decision criteria listed in this division;
(3) a recommendation to approve the application, approve the application with conditions, or deny the
application;
(4) a preliminary list of conditions whether the staff recommendation is for approval or denial; and
(5) other information deemed necessary.
11.05.139 Content of decision document
(a) Approval. If the application for a special exception is approved, the decision document should include
the following:
(1) a statement that the special exception is approved;
(2) a description of the special exception;
(3) reasons for the decision based on the criteria listed in this division;
(4) conditions of approval, if any;
(5) a statement indicating that the property owner must sign the decision document and return it to the
zoning administrator to acknowledge acceptance of the same;
(6) a statement that the applicant may appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction;
(7) a statement that an aggrieved person, other than the applicant, may appeal the decision and that
any work done by the applicant as authorized by the approval is done at the applicant’s risk;
(8) other information the review authority or zoning administrator deems appropriate;
(9) the signature of the zoning administrator on behalf of the reviewing authority; and
(10) the date of the decision.
(b) Denial. If the application for a special exception is denied, the decision document should include the
following:
(1) a statement that the special exception is denied,
(2) a description of the special exception,
10 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(gm), Wis. Stats. The City, for example, could not require an applicant to terminate an existing contract with another
party that is engaged in a lawful use of the property.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
57
(3) reasons for the decision based on the criteria listed in this division,
(4) a statement indicating that the denial does not limit the applicant's ability to resubmit a revised
application for consideration,
(5) a statement that the decision may be appealed as provided for in this division,
(6) other information the review authority or zoning administrator deems appropriate,
(7) the signature of the zoning administrator on behalf of the reviewing authority, and
(8) the date of the decision.
11.05.140 Effect of approval
If a special exception is approved, such approval shall run with the land and is binding on all subsequent property
owners.
11.05.141 Expiration of an approval
An approval for a special exception shall automatically expire 12 months after the date of issuance unless
substantial work has commenced under the permit and continues in good faith to completion. Upon petition and
with cause, the zoning administrator may grant a one-time extension not to exceed 12 months provided (i) the
permit holder requests the extension prior to the expiration of the permit, (ii) the permit holder clearly
demonstrates that circumstances beyond his or her control prevented the start of construction and the
continuation of the same, and (iii) the project complies with this chapter in effect at the time the extension is
granted.
11.05.142 Appeal
An aggrieved person may appeal a final decision made pursuant to this division by filing an appeal with a court
of competent jurisdiction within 30 calendar days of the final decision.
11.05.143 to 11.05.150 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 8
MINOR HOME OCCUPATION
11.05.151 Generally
11.05.152 Initiation
11.05.153 Review procedure
11.05.154 Basis of decision
11.05.155 Effect of approval
11.05.156 Appeal
11.05.151 Generally
For the purposes of this chapter, home occupations have potential impacts on public health, safety, and
welfare. This division describes the requirements and procedures for reviewing home occupations
11.05.152 Initiation
The owner of the subject property may submit an application for a home occupation.
11.05.153 Review procedure
The general steps outlined below shall be used in the review of an application for a minor home occupation.
(1) Submittal of application materials. The applicant submits a completed application and other required
materials to the zoning administrator along with the application fee as may be established by the
Common Council.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
58
(2) Determination of completeness. The zoning administrator reviews the submittal within 10 days of
receiving the application and other required materials to make sure it is complete and ready for further
review. If it is not complete, the zoning administrator will notify the applicant in writing of such
deficiencies and that the applicant has 3 months from the date of the notice to resubmit the
application or forfeit the application fee. The zoning administrator will take no further steps to process
the application until the deficiencies are remedied. The incomplete application is retained as a public
record.
(3) Decision. When the zoning administrator determines the application is complete, he or she makes a
decision to (i) approve the permit for the home occupation, (ii) approve the permit with conditions, or
(iii) deny the permit.
(4) Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following his or her decision to approve or deny the
application, the zoning administrator mails the decision document to the applicant by regular mail.
(5) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is retained as a public record.
11.05.154 Basis of decision
In determining whether to approve or deny an application for a home occupation, the zoning
administrator shall determine whether the proposed use is consistent with this chapter, and in particular the
requirements in Appendix B.
11.05.155 Effect of approval
An approval to establish a home occupation is personal to the petitioner and may not be transferred to any
other person. Such approval shall be valid for one year and, therefore, must be renewed annually.
11.05.156 Appeal
An aggrieved person may appeal a final decision made pursuant to this division by filing an administrative appeal
with the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30 calendar days of the final decision.
11.05.157 to 11.05.170 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 9
ZONING PERMIT
11.05.171 Generally
11.05.172 Applicability
11.05.173 Initiation
11.05.174 Review procedure
11.05.175 Basis of decision
11.05.176 Expiration of an approval
11.05.177 Appeal
11.05.171 Generally
A zoning permit is administrative in nature and is intended to ensure that certain types of land uses are in
compliance with this chapter and any precedent approvals (e.g., conditional use approval).
11.05.172 Applicability
Those land uses designated as requiring a zoning permit in the land-use matrix (Appendix A) must comply with the
requirements in this division when a new use is being established and when there is a change in occupancy of an
existing non-residential building.
11.05.173 Initiation
The owner of the subject property may submit an application for a zoning permit.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
59
11.05.174 Review procedure
The general steps outlined below shall be used in the review of an application for a zoning permit.
(1) Submittal of application materials. The applicant submits a completed application and other required
materials to the zoning administrator along with the application fee as may be established by the
Common Council.
(2) Determination of completeness. The zoning administrator reviews the submittal within 10 days of
receiving the application and other required materials to make sure it is complete and ready for further
review. If it is not complete, the zoning administrator will notify the applicant in writing of such
deficiencies and that the applicant has 3 months from the date of the notice to resubmit the
application or forfeit the application fee. The zoning administrator will take no further steps to process
the application until the deficiencies are remedied. The incomplete application is retained as a public
record.
(3) Decision. When the zoning administrator determines the application is complete, he or she makes a
decision to (i) approve the zoning permit, (ii) approve the zoning permit with conditions, or (iii) deny the
zoning permit
(4) Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following his or her decision to approve or deny the
application, the zoning administrator mails the decision document to the applicant by regular mail.
(5) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is retained as a public record.
11.05.175 Basis of decision
In determining whether to issue a zoning permit or deny the permit, the zoning administrator shall determine
whether the proposed use is consistent with (i) any prior approvals, such as conditional use approval, (ii) this
chapter, and (iii) other provisions of the municipal code.
11.05.176 Expiration of an approval
(a) Project involving construction. For a project involving any construction, a zoning permit shall
automatically expire 12 months after the date of issuance unless substantial work has commenced under the
permit and continues in good faith to completion. Upon petition and with cause, the zoning administrator may
grant a one-time extension not to exceed 12 months provided (i) the permit holder requests the extension prior to
the expiration of the permit, (ii) the permit holder clearly demonstrates that circumstances beyond his or her
control prevented the start of construction and the continuation of the same, and (iii) the project complies with
this chapter in effect at the time the extension is granted.
(b) Change in use. For a change in use, the zoning permit shall automatically expire 6 months after the
date of issuance if the applicant does not move into the vacant space.
11.05.177 Appeal
An aggrieved person may appeal a final decision made pursuant to this division by filing an administrative appeal
with the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30 calendar days of the final decision.
11.05.178 to 11.05.190 Reserved
DIVISION 10
RESERVED
11.05.191 to 11.05.210 Reserved
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
60
Sections
DIVISION 11
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE
11.05.211 Generally
11.05.212 Applicability
11.05.213 Initiation
11.05.214 Review procedure
11.05.215 Basis of decision
11.05.216 Appeal
11.05.211 Generally
A certificate of zoning compliance provides proof that a new building or expansion complies with the zoning
code and any related approvals. A certificate must therefore be obtained before the building is occupied.
11.05.212 Applicability
All principal land uses, except for single-family residences, must comply with the requirements in this division.
11.05.213 Initiation
The owner of the subject property may submit an application for a certificate of zoning compliance.
11.05.214 Review procedure
The general steps outlined below shall be used in the review of an application for a certificate of zoning
compliance.
(1) Submittal of application materials. The applicant submits a completed application and other required
materials to the zoning administrator along with the application fee as may be established by the
Common Council.
(2) Determination of completeness. The zoning administrator reviews the submittal within 10 days of
receiving the application and other required materials to make sure it is complete and ready for further
review. If it is not complete, the zoning administrator will notify the applicant in writing of such
deficiencies and that the applicant has 3 months from the date of the notice to resubmit the
application or forfeit the application fee. The zoning administrator will take no further steps to process
the application until the deficiencies are remedied. The incomplete application is retained as a public
record.
(3) Decision. When the zoning administrator determines the application is complete, he or she makes a
decision to (i) approve the certificate of zoning compliance, (ii) approve the certificate with conditions,
or (iii) deny the certificate.
(4) Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following his or her decision to approve or deny the
application, the zoning administrator mails the decision document to the applicant by regular mail.
(5) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is retained as a public record.
11.05.215 Basis of decision
In determining whether to issue a certificate of zoning compliance deny the certificate, the zoning administrator
shall determine whether the use is consistent with (i) the zoning permit if any (ii) any prior approvals, such as
conditional use approval, (iii) this chapter, and (iv) other provisions of the municipal code.
11.05.216 Expiration of an approval
A certificate of zoning compliance does not expire.
11.05.217 Appeal
An aggrieved person may appeal a final decision made pursuant to this division by filing an administrative appeal
with the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30 calendar days of the final decision.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
61
11.05.218 to 11.05.230 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 12
FLOODPLAIN PERMIT
11.05.231 Generally
11.05.232 Applicability
11.05.233 Initiation
11.05.234 Review procedure
11.05.235 Basis of decision
11.05.236 Application form and content
11.05.237 Expiration of an approval
11.05.238 Appeal
11.05.231 Generally
A floodplain permit is administrative in nature and is intended to ensure that land uses located in the floodplain
overlay district comply with the requirements in Article 9.
11.05.232 Applicability
A floodplain permit must be obtained before any of the following is initiated in the floodplain overlay district:
(1) new development, broadly construed;
(2) repair, modification, or addition to an existing structure; or
(3) change in the use of a building or structure.
11.05.233 Initiation
The owner of the subject property may submit an application for a floodplain permit.
11.05.234 Review procedure
The general steps outlined below shall be used in the review of an application for a floodplain permit.
(1) Submittal of application materials. The applicant submits a completed application and other required
materials to the zoning administrator along with the application fee as may be established by the
Common Council.
(2) Determination of completeness. The zoning administrator reviews the submittal within 10 days of
receiving the application and other required materials to make sure it is complete and ready for further
review. If it is not complete, the zoning administrator will notify the applicant in writing of such
deficiencies and that the applicant has 3 months from the date of the notice to resubmit the
application or forfeit the application fee. If the application is deemed incomplete or if additional
information is requested, the zoning administrator will take no further steps to process the application
until the deficiencies are remedied or the information is provided. The incomplete application is
retained as a public record.
(3) Decision. When the zoning administrator determines the application is complete, he or she makes a
decision based on the decision criteria contained in this division to (i) approve the floodplain permit, (ii)
approve the floodplain permit with conditions, or (iii) deny the floodplain permit.
(4) Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following his or her decision to approve or deny the
application, the zoning administrator mails the decision document to the applicant by regular mail.
(5) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is retained as a public record.
11.05.235 Basis of decision
In determining whether to issue a floodplain permit or deny the permit, the zoning administrator shall determine
whether the proposed use is consistent with the standards in Article 12.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
62
11.05.236 Application form and content
The application submittal shall include an application form as may be used by the City and a site plan prepared
at a scale of 1” = 20’ or other appropriate scale depicting the information listed in Appendix F. The application at
a minimum shall include the following:
(1) name and address of the property owner;
(2) legal description of the subject property;
(3) a description of the proposed project;
(4) the elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any fill using the vertical datum from the
adopted study – either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD);
(5) data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in NGVD or NAVD at the location of the
development and to determine whether or not the requirements of Division 4 or 6 [3.0 or 4.0]of Article 12
are met; and
(6) data to determine if the proposed development will cause an obstruction to flow or an increase in
regional flood height or discharge according to s. 11.12.142 [2.1]. This may include any of the
information noted in s. 11.12.63. [3.3(1)]
In addition to the information listed in Appendix F, the following shall be depicted on the site map:
(1) elevation of existing and proposed roads located in the floodplain,
(2) elevation of existing and proposed wellheads located in the floodplain, and
(3) elevation of existing and proposed buildings located in the floodplain.
11.05.237 Expiration of an approval
(a) Project involving construction. For a project involving any construction, a floodplain permit shall
automatically expire 12 months after the date of issuance unless substantial work has commenced under the
permit and continues in good faith to completion. Upon petition and with cause, the zoning administrator may
grant a one-time extension not to exceed 12 months provided (i) the permit holder requests the extension prior to
the expiration of the permit, (ii) the permit holder clearly demonstrates that circumstances beyond his or her
control prevented the start of construction and the continuation of the same, and (iii) the project complies with
this chapter in effect at the time the extension is granted.
(b) Change in use. For a change in use, the floodplain permit shall automatically expire 6 months after the
date of issuance if the applicant does not move into the vacant space.
11.05.238 Appeal
An aggrieved person may appeal a final decision made pursuant to this division by filing an administrative appeal
with the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30 calendar days of the final decision.
11.05.239 to 11.05.250 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 13
TERMINATION OF APPROVAL
11.05.251 Generally
11.05.252 Initiation
11.05.253 Review procedure for voluntary
termination
11.05.254 Review procedure for involuntary
termination
11.05.255 Basis of decision
11.05.256 Application form and content
11.05.257 Content of decision document
11.05.258 Compliance with requirements of zoning
district
11.05.259 Appeal
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
63
11.05.251 Generally
There are certain situations when the approval for a land use may be terminated. This division describes the
procedures for terminating an approved use.
11.05.252 Initiation
(a) Voluntary termination of a conditional use. The property owner is authorized to submit an application to
terminate a conditional use approval for his or her property.
(b) Involuntary termination of conditional use approval due to cessation. The zoning administrator is
authorized to submit an application to terminate a conditional use approval when he or she determines the land
use authorized by such approval has ceased to operate for more than 12 months.
(c) Involuntary termination of a conditional use approval due to violation. The zoning administrator is
authorized to submit an application to terminate a conditional use approval when he or she determines that the
property owner has violated one or more conditions of approval and action has not been taken to correct the
violation.
(d) Involuntary termination of a specified land use due to cessation. The zoning administrator is authorized
to submit an application to terminate an approved land use when he or she determines that such use is no longer
in use for the time period specified for such use.
(e) Involuntary termination of a nonconforming use. The zoning administrator is authorized to submit an
application to terminate a nonconforming use when he or she determines that such use is having a significant
harmful effect on the public health, safety, and welfare or the nonconforming use has ceased to operate for the
period of time required by this chapter to retain designation as a nonconforming use.
11.05.253 Review procedure for voluntary termination
The general steps outlined below shall be used in the review of an application to voluntarily terminate an
approval of a land use authorized under this chapter.
(1) Submittal of application materials. The applicant submits a completed application and other required
materials to the zoning administrator along with the application fee as may be established by the
Common Council.
(2) Determination of completeness. The zoning administrator reviews the submittal within 10 days of
receiving the application and other required materials to make sure it is complete and ready for further
review. If it is not complete, the zoning administrator will notify the applicant in writing of such
deficiencies and that the applicant has 3 months from the date of the notice to resubmit the
application or forfeit the application fee. The zoning administrator will take no further steps to process
the application until the deficiencies are remedied. The incomplete application is retained as a public
record.
(3) General notice. Consistent with Division 2 of Article 4, the zoning administrator places the matter on the
meeting agenda of the Planning Commission.
(4) Meeting. Allowing for proper notice, the Planning Commission considers the application at a regular or
special meeting.
(5) Decision. The Planning Commission makes a decision to (i) approve the termination, (ii) approve the
termination with conditions, or (iii) deny the termination. The Planning Commission may render its
decision at the same meeting the matter was initially considered or at a subsequent meeting, but no
later than 40 calendar days after the date of the initial meeting unless the applicant agrees to an
extension of a specified duration.
(6) Preparation of decision document. Based on the action of the Planning Commission, the zoning
administrator prepares a decision document consistent with this division.
(7) Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following the Planning Commission's decision, the
zoning administrator mails the decision document to the applicant by regular mail.
(8) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is retained as a public record.
(9) Administrative steps. If the application is approved, the zoning administrator updates any city records to
indicate that the use as specified in the application has been terminated.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
64
11.05.254 Review procedure for involuntary termination
The general steps outlined below shall be used in the review of an application to involuntarily terminate an
approval of a land use authorized under this chapter.
(1) Submittal of application materials. The zoning administrator shall complete an application and other
required materials.
(2) Determination of completeness. The zoning administrator reviews the submittal within 10 days of
receiving the application and other required materials to make sure it is complete and ready for further
review. If it is not complete, the zoning administrator will notify the applicant in writing of such
deficiencies and that the applicant has 3 months from the date of the notice to resubmit the
application or forfeit the application fee. The zoning administrator will take no further steps to process
the application until the deficiencies are remedied. The incomplete application is retained as a public
record.
(3) Review date. When the zoning administrator determines the application is complete, he or she
schedules the review with the Common Council and the Planning Commission consistent with its
adopted calendar.
(4) Special notice to property owner. The zoning administrator mails a written notice to the property owner
by regular and certified mail at least 30 calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing. Such
notice shall state (i) the reasons why the zoning administrator has submitted an application to terminate
the specified use; (ii) the date and time of the public hearing; (iii) contact information for the zoning
administrator, including telephone number; and (iv) other information deemed appropriate by the
zoning administrator. If the action is intended to terminate a conditional use for a violation, the notice
shall state the alleged violation along with supporting evidence. If the action is intended to terminate
an inactive land use, the notice shall state the time period when the land use was not in use along with
supporting evidence.
(5) General public notice. Consistent with Division 2 of Article 4, the zoning administrator provides for a class
2 public notice, property owner notice, and meeting agenda notice.
(6) Public hearing. Allowing for proper notice, the Common Council and the Planning Commission conduct
a joint public hearing consistent with Division 3 of Article 4. Prior to the close of the public hearing, the
applicant, the Common Council, or the Planning Commission may request a continuance consistent
with Division 3 of Article 4. If the public hearing is adjourned, the Common Council or the Planning
Commission may direct the zoning administrator, the city engineer, and/or city attorney to conduct
additional research. In addition, the Planning Commission may direct the zoning administrator to
prepare such documents it deems necessary, including a preliminary decision document
(7) Recommendation. After considering all of the information submitted by the applicant, public comments
received at the public hearing, the Planning Commission, no more than 40 calendar days after the
public hearing, makes a recommendation to the Common Council based on the decision criteria
contained in this division to (i) approve the termination, (ii) approve the termination with conditions, or
(iii) deny the termination.
(8) General notice. Consistent with Division 2 of Article 4, the zoning administrator places the matter on the
meeting agenda of the Common Council.
(9) Common Council meeting. Allowing for proper notice, the Common Council considers the application
at a regular or special meeting.
(10) Decision. After considering all of the information submitted by the applicant, public comments received
at the public hearing, and the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the Common Council makes a
decision based on the decision criteria contained in this division to (i) approve the termination, (ii)
approve the termination with conditions, or (iii) deny the termination.
(11) Preparation of decision document. Based on the action of the Common Council, the zoning
administrator prepares a final decision document consistent with this division.
(12) Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following the Common Council’s decision, the zoning
administrator mails the decision document by regular mail to the property owner.
(13) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is retained as a public record.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
65
(14) Administrative steps. If the application is approved, the zoning administrator updates any city records to
indicate that the use as specified in the application has been terminated.
11.05.255 Basis of decision
The Planning Commission in making its recommendation and the Common Council in making its decision shall
consider the following factors:
(1) the nature of those buildings or other structures, if any, on the subject property that relate to the use
and the extent to which they are or are not otherwise permitted in the district in which the subject
property is located;
(2) effects of the existing use on surrounding properties, including detriment to the full and complete use of
such properties and potential for concerns related to possible nuisances;
(3) effects of the existing use on the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding
property for those uses permitted in the zoning district in which they are located; and
(4) any other factor that relates to the purposes of this chapter set forth in s. 11.01.05 or as allowed by state
law.
11.05.256 Application form and content
The application submittal shall include an application form as may be used by the City. The application form shall
request the following information:
(1) the subject property location;
(2) a description of the original approval, including conditions of approval, if any;
(3) verification that the property owner is voluntarily seeking termination of a conditional use approval or
evidence supporting the assertion that the use may be involuntarily terminated consistent with this
division;
(4) a description of those buildings or other structures, if any, on the subject property that relate to the use
and the extent to which they are or are not otherwise permitted in the district in which the subject
property is located; and
(5) other information deemed necessary.
11.05.257 Content of decision document
(a) Approval. If the application to terminate an approval is approved, the decision document should
include the following:
(1) a statement that the specified use is terminated;
(2) a description of the land use being terminated;
(3) reasons for the decision based on the criteria listed in this division;
(4) requirements for the removal of any building or other structure, if any, on the subject property that are
related to the terminated use and that are not otherwise permitted in the zoning district in which the
subject property is located;
(5) a statement that the decision may be appealed as provided for in this division;
(6) other information the Common Council or zoning administrator deems appropriate;
(7) the signature of the zoning administrator on behalf of the Common Council; and
(8) the date of the decision.
(b) Denial. If the application to terminate an approval is denied, the decision document should include the
following:
(1) a statement that the specified use continues to be an approved use,
(2) a description of the land use,
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
66
(3) reasons for the decision based on the criteria listed in this division,
(4) a statement that the decision may be appealed as provided for in this division,
(5) other information the Common Council or zoning administrator deems appropriate,
(6) the signature of the zoning administrator on behalf of the Common Council, and
(7) the date of the decision.
11.05.258 Compliance with requirements of zoning district
If the Common Council terminates an approval under this division, the property owner shall bring the subject
property into conformity with the permitted use regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located.
The Common Council shall establish a timeframe it determines appropriate to bring the property into compliance.
In making such determination, the Common Council should consider the type of actions the property owner will
need to take to bring the property into compliance and weather conditions. In no event, shall the compliance
period be less than 30 calendar days or more than 9 months.
11.05.259 Appeal
The property owner or other person having a development interest in the terminated use may appeal a final
decision made pursuant to this division by filing an appeal with a court of competent jurisdiction within 30
calendar days of the final decision.
11.05.260 to 11.05.270 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 14
REGISTRATION OF A NONCONFORMING USE
11.05.271 Generally
11.05.272 Initiation
11.05.273 Review procedure
11.05.274 Basis of decision
11.05.275 Application form and content
11.05.276 Content of decision document
11.05.277 Effect of decision
11.05.278 Appeal
11.05.271 Generally
There may be now or in the future certain uses of land that are not in compliance with this chapter, but which
were legally established. These uses are referred to as “nonconforming uses,” and consistent with the provisions of
Article 19 are allowed to continue to operate within certain parameters. For this reason, it is necessary to
document those uses that are considered nonconforming. Registration of a use as a nonconforming use provides
documentary evidence establishing (i) when the use was first established; (ii) that the use was established
consistent with the rules and regulations in effect at the time, if any; (iii) that the use has operated continuously,
without cessation of more than 12 continuous months; and (iv) the nature of the use. Failure to register a
nonconforming use does not result in prohibition of the use, but in any future situation where the owner asserts the
use is a nonconforming use, the property owner shall have the burden of so proving.
11.05.272 Initiation
Any of the following may submit an application to determine whether a use should be registered as a
nonconforming use:
(1) a person having a financial interest in the property or in the use occurring on the property;
(2) the zoning administrator;
(3) the Planning Commission, or any member thereof;
(4) the Mayor; or
(5) the Common Council, or any member thereof.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
67
11.05.273 Review procedure
The general steps outlined below shall be used to determine if an existing use should be registered as a
nonconforming use.
(1) Submittal of application materials. The applicant submits a completed application and other required
materials to the zoning administrator along with the application fee as may be established by the
Common Council.
(2) General notice. Consistent with Division 2 of Article 4, the zoning administrator places the matter on the
meeting agenda of the Planning Commission.
(3) Special notice to property owner. If the application process is not initiated by the property owner, the
zoning administrator mails a written notice to the property owner by regular and certified mail at least
60 calendar days prior to the date of the Planning Commission meeting. Such notice shall invite the
property owner to submit evidence relating to the pending determination. In addition, the notice shall
state (i) the reasons why the application has been submitted; (ii) the date and time of the meeting; (iii)
contact information for the zoning administrator, including telephone number; and (iv) other
information deemed appropriate by the zoning administrator.
(4) Meeting. Allowing for proper notice, the Planning Commission considers the application at a regular or
special meeting.
(5) Decision. The Planning Commission determines whether it has sufficient evidence to make a decision,
and if so whether the use should or should not be classified as a nonconforming use. The Planning
Commission may render its decision at the same meeting the matter was initially considered or at a
subsequent meeting, but no later than 40 calendar days after the date of the initial meeting unless the
applicant agrees to an extension of a specified duration.
(6) Preparation of decision document. Based on the action of the Planning Commission, the zoning
administrator within 15 calendar days of such decision prepares a decision document consistent with
this division.
(7) Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following the Planning Commission’s decision, the
administrator mails the decision document to the property owner by regular mail.
(8) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is retained as a public record.
(9) Inclusion in registry. If the use is determined to be a nonconforming use, the zoning administrator shall
include the nonconforming use in the registry authorized in Article 6.
11.05.274 Basis of decision
In making its decision, the review authority shall determine whether there is sufficient evidence to show that (i) the
use in question was legally established; (ii) such use does not now comply with one or more of the requirements of
this chapter; and (iii) such use has continued from the date, or approximate date, of establishment to the current
date without an interruption of more than 12 continuous months.
11.05.275 Application form and content
The application submittal shall include an application form as may be used by the City and scaled drawing of the
property and the location of the land use on the property. At a minimum, the application shall request the
following information:
(1) the date, or approximate date, the use was first established or believed to be first established;
(2) evidence showing that the use at the time of establishment was legally established;
(3) the date, or approximate date, when the use became nonconforming;
(4) the section of the zoning regulation causing the use to be nonconforming;
(5) evidence showing that the use has continued from the date, or approximate date, of establishment to
the current date without an interruption of more than 12 continuous months; and
(6) the nature of the use and location on the property.
Sources of such information may be derived from any of the following:
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
68
(1) written document (e.g., business license, meeting minutes, reports, planning documents, or a permit or
other authorization) maintained by a local, state, or federal governmental body;
(2) a newspaper article;
(3) a dated photograph;
(4) an aerial photograph;
(5) a sworn affidavit supplied by the applicant or any other person; and
(6) any other authoritative source as approved by the zoning administrator.
11.05.276 Content of decision document
(a) Approval. If the application for registering a nonconforming use is approved, the decision document
should include the following:
(1) a statement that the application is approved,
(2) a description of the use,
(3) reasons for the decision based on the criteria listed in this division,
(4) a statement that the applicant may appeal the decision as provided for in this division,
(5) other information the review authority or the zoning administrator deems appropriate,
(6) the signature of the zoning administrator on behalf of the review authority, and
(7) the date of the decision.
(b) Denial. If the application for registering a nonconforming use is denied, the decision document should
include the following:
(1) a statement that the application is denied,
(2) a description of the use,
(3) reasons for the decision based on the criteria listed in this division,
(4) a statement indicating that the denial does not limit the applicant's ability to resubmit a revised
application for consideration,
(5) a statement that the applicant may appeal the decision as provided for in this division,
(6) other information the review authority or the zoning administrator deems appropriate,
(7) the signature of the zoning administrator on behalf of the review authority, and
(8) the date of the decision.
11.05.277 Effect of decision
If the review authority determines that a land use meets the criteria for a nonconforming use, such decision
constitutes documentary evidence establishing the legitimacy and nature of the use as a nonconforming use.
11.05.278 Appeal
An aggrieved person may appeal a final decision made pursuant to this division by filing an appeal with a court
of competent jurisdiction within 30 calendar days of the final decision
11.05.279 to 11.05.290 Reserved
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
69
Sections
DIVISION 15
CONVERSION OF A NONCONFORMING USE
11.05.291 Generally
11.05.292 Initiation
11.05.293 Review procedure
11.05.294 Basis of decision
11.05.295 Imposition of conditions
11.05.296 Application form and content
11.05.297 Staff report content
11.05.298 Content of conversion order
11.05.299 Content of decision document
11.05.300 Effect of approval
11.05.301 Expiration of an approval
11.05.302 Amendment of an approval
11.05.303 Appeal
11.05.291 Generally
An existing nonconforming use (i.e., a tavern in a residential district) may be converted to another nonconforming
use provided the new use is less nonconforming (e.g., from a tavern to a restaurant).
11.05.292 Initiation
The owner of the subject property may submit an application for a conversion of a nonconforming use, but only
when the nonconforming use has been registered as a nonconforming use pursuant to Division 14 of this article.
11.05.293 Review procedure
(a) Planning Commission review. The general steps outlined below shall be used in the review of an
application for a conversion of a nonconforming use.
(1) Pre-submittal meeting. Before submitting an application, the applicant or the applicant's agent shall
meet with the zoning administrator to review (i) applicable regulations and procedures, (ii) applicable
sections of the City’s comprehensive plan, and (iii) the proposal. Upon request, the zoning administrator
may waive the requirement to hold a pre-submittal meeting when he or she determines such meeting is
not necessary given the nature of the project and/or the extent to which the applicant understands the
City’s zoning requirements.
(2) Submittal of application materials. The applicant submits a completed application and other required
materials to the zoning administrator along with the application fee as may be established by the
Common Council.
(3) Determination of completeness. The zoning administrator reviews the submittal within 10 days of
receiving the application and other required materials to make sure it is complete and ready for further
review. If it is not complete, the zoning administrator will notify the applicant in writing of such
deficiencies and that the applicant has 3 months from the date of the notice to resubmit the
application or forfeit the application fee. The zoning administrator will take no further steps to process
the application until the deficiencies are remedied. The incomplete application is retained as a public
record.
(4) Review date. When the zoning administrator determines the application is complete, he or she
schedules the review with the Planning Commission consistent with its adopted calendar.
(5) Staff report preparation and distribution. The zoning administrator prepares a written staff report as
described in this division and provides a copy of it to each member of the Planning Commission and
Common Council, the applicant, and any other interested person upon request.
(6) General notice. Consistent with Division 2 of Article 4, the zoning administrator provides for a class 2
public notice, property owner notice, and meeting agenda notice.
(7) Public hearing. Allowing for proper notice, the Planning Commission conducts a public hearing to
review the application consistent with Division 3 of Article 4. Prior to the close of the public hearing, the
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
70
applicant or the Planning Commission may request a continuance consistent with Division 3 of Article 4.
If the public hearing is adjourned, the Planning Commission may direct the zoning administrator, the city
engineer, and/or city attorney to conduct additional research and to prepare such documents it
deems necessary, including a preliminary decision document.
(8) Staff follow-up. After the close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission may direct the zoning
administrator to prepare a preliminary decision document.
(9) Decision. After considering all of the information submitted by the applicant, public comments received
at the public hearing, and the staff report, the Planning Commission makes a decision based on the
decision criteria contained in this division to (i) approve the conversion, (ii) approve the conversion with
conditions, or (iii) deny the conversion.
(10) Preparation of decision document. Based on the action of the Planning Commission, the zoning
administrator prepares a final decision document consistent with this division, and a conversion order if
approved.
(11) Applicant notification. If the application is denied, the zoning administrator, within a reasonable time
following the Planning Commission's decision, mails the decision document to the applicant by regular
mail.
(12) Acceptance by property owner. If the application is approved, the property owner must sign the
conversion order to acknowledge the terms of the approval and return the same to the zoning
administrator within 6 months of the decision. Prior to the expiration of the previously specified time
period, the property owner may submit a petition to the City Clerk requesting an extension and the
zoning administrator may, with cause, extend the period within which the decision document must be
signed. If the signed decision document is not returned within the initial or extended time period, if any,
the decision shall become null and void without any further action by the City. The conversion order
shall only become effective when all required signatures have been obtained and the original signature
copy is returned to the zoning administrator.
(13) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is retained as a public record.
(14) Recordation. If the property owner signs the approved conversion order, the zoning administrator
records the conversion order in the office of the Wood County register of deeds.
(b) Common Council review on appeal. If a final decision of the Planning Commission is appealed as
provided for in this division, the general steps outlined below shall be used in the review of an application for a
conversion of a nonconforming use.
(1) Submittal of application materials. The zoning administrator forwards the application and other materials
the applicant submitted, minutes of the Planning Commission meeting(s), and the decision document
approved by the Planning Commission to the Common Council.
(2) General notice. Consistent with Division 2 of Article 4, the zoning administrator places the matter on the
meeting agenda of the Common Council.
(3) Meeting. Allowing for proper notice, the Common Council considers the application at a regular or
special meeting.
(4) Decision. After reviewing the written record, the Common Council makes a decision to (i) approve the
conversion, (ii) approve the conversion with conditions, or (iii) deny the conversion. The Common
Council may render its decision at the same meeting the matter was initially considered or at a
subsequent meeting, but no later than 40 calendar days after the date of the initial meeting unless the
applicant agrees to an extension of a specified duration.
(5) Preparation of decision document. Based on the action of the Common Council, the zoning
administrator within 15 calendar days of such decision prepares a decision document consistent with
this division.
(6) Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following the Common Council’s decision, the
administrator mails the decision document to the applicant by regular mail.
(7) Acceptance by property owner. If the application is approved, the property owner and the operator, if
different, must sign the decision document to acknowledge the terms of the approval and return the
same to the zoning administrator within 6 months of the decision. Prior to the expiration of the previously
specified time period, the property owner or the operator, if different, may submit a petition to the City
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
71
Clerk requesting an extension and the zoning administrator may, with cause, extend the period within
which the decision document must be signed. If the signed decision document is not returned within
the initial or extended time period, if any, the decision shall become null and void without any further
action by the City. The decision document shall only become effective when all required signatures
have been obtained and the original signature copy is returned to the zoning administrator.
(8) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is retained as a public record.
(9) Recording of decision document. If the property owner returns the decision document within the
required time period with the required signatures, the zoning administrator records the decision
document against the subject property in the office of the Wood County register of deeds.
11.05.294 Basis of decision
The review authority shall compare the known and anticipated impacts of the existing nonconforming use on
properties in the area and those of the proposed nonconforming use. The review authority shall not approve a
conversion when the new nonconforming use would be more of a nonconformity than the existing
nonconforming use.
11.05.295 Imposition of conditions
(a) Generally. In approving a conversion, the review authority may impose one or more conditions
deemed necessary to further the intent and purposes of this chapter. Such conditions, for example, may relate to
landscaping and screening, outdoor lighting, and hours of operation.
(b) Effect on contracts with another party. The review authority shall not condition or withhold approval
based upon the property owner entering into a contract or discontinuing, modifying, extending, or renewing any
contract, with a third party under which the third party is engaging in a lawful use of the property.11
11.05.296 Application form and content
The application submittal shall include an application form as may be used by the City and a site plan prepared
at a scale of 1” = 20’ or other appropriate scale depicting the information listed in Appendix F.
11.05.297 Staff report content
The staff report should contain the following:
(1) a description of the requested conversion;
(2) preliminary findings for the decision criteria listed in this division;
(3) a recommendation to approve the application, approve the application with conditions, or deny the
application;
(4) a preliminary list of conditions whether the staff recommendation is for approval or denial; and
(5) other information deemed necessary.
11.05.298 Content of decision document
(a) Approval. If the application for a conversion is approved, the decision document should include the
following:
(1) a statement that the conversion is approved;
(2) a description of the new nonconforming use;
(3) a statement indicating that the property owner must sign the conversion order and return it to the
zoning administrator;
(4) a statement that the applicant may appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction;
11 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(gm), Wis. Stats. The City, for example, could not require an applicant to terminate an existing contract with another
party that is engaged in a lawful use of the property.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
72
(5) a statement that an aggrieved person, other than the applicant, may appeal the decision and that
any work done by the applicant as authorized by the approval is done at the applicant’s risk;
(6) other information the review authority or zoning administrator deems appropriate;
(7) the signature of the zoning administrator on behalf of the review authority;
(8) the date of the decision; and
(9) the copy of the conversion order described in s. 11.05.299.
(b) Denial. If the application for a conversion is denied, the decision document should include the
following:
(1) a statement that the application is denied,
(2) a description of the proposed conversion,
(3) reasons for the decision based on the criteria listed in this division,
(4) a statement indicating that the denial does not limit the applicant's ability to resubmit a revised
application for consideration,
(5) a statement that the decision may be appealed as provided for in this division,
(6) other information the review authority or zoning administrator deems appropriate,
(7) the signature of the zoning administrator on behalf of the review authority, and
(8) the date of the decision.
11.05.299 Content of conversion order
If the conversion is approved, a conversion order shall be prepared and adopted that contains (i) a description of
the subject property’s location (e.g., address, parcel number, reference to a parcel in a certified survey map or
subdivision plat); (ii) a description of the existing and of the new nonconforming use; (iii) conditions of approval, if
any; and (iv) other provisions deemed necessary given the nature of the approval.
11.05.300 Effect of approval
If the review authority approves the conversion, such approval shall run with the land and is binding on all
subsequent property owners.
11.05.301 Expiration of an approval
If the zoning administrator determines that substantial work as authorized by a conversion approval did not
commence within 12 months of the date of approval or if substantial work did commence within 12 months of the
date of approval but has not continued in good faith to completion, he or she shall initiate the process to
terminate the approval pursuant to Division 13 of this article. Upon written petition and with cause, the zoning
administrator may grant a one-time extension not to exceed 6 months.
11.05.302 Amendment of an approval
Following approval of a conversion, the Planning Commission shall review all proposed changes to the approval.
If in the opinion of the Planning Commission, the proposed change constitutes a minor alteration, the Planning
Commission may approve the requested change in writing at a regular or special meeting of the Planning
Commission without following the review procedure in this division. If the proposed change constitutes a major
alteration, the review procedure in effect at the time of submittal shall be followed.
11.05.303 Appeal
An aggrieved person may appeal a final decision made pursuant to this division by filing an appeal with a court
of competent jurisdiction within 30 calendar days of the final decision
11.05.304 to 11.05.310 Reserved
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
73
Sections
DIVISION 16
EXPANSION OF A NONCONFORMING BUILDING
11.05.311 Generally
11.05.312 Initiation
11.05.313 Review procedure
11.05.314 Basis of decision
11.05.315 Imposition of conditions
11.05.316 Application form and content
11.05.317 Content of decision document
11.05.318 Effect of decision
11.05.319 Expiration of an approval
11.05.320 Appeal
11.05.311 Generally
A nonconforming building (i.e., a building built too close to a lot line) with a conforming use may be expanded in
compliance with all requirements of the zoning code and with the procedures and requirements of this division.
11.05.312 Initiation
The owner of the subject property may submit an application to expand a nonconforming building with a
conforming use.
11.05.313 Review procedure
(a) Planning Commission review. The general steps outlined below shall be used in the review of an
application to expand a nonconforming building.
(1) Pre-submittal meeting. Before submitting an application, the applicant or the applicant's agent may
meet with the zoning administrator to review applicable regulations and procedures and the proposal.
(2) Submittal of application materials. The applicant submits a completed application and other required
materials to the zoning administrator along with the application fee as may be established by the
Common Council.
(3) Determination of completeness. The zoning administrator reviews the submittal within 10 days of
receiving the application and other required materials to make sure it is complete and ready for further
review. If it is not complete, the zoning administrator will notify the applicant in writing of such
deficiencies and that the applicant has 3 months from the date of the notice to resubmit the
application or forfeit the application fee. The zoning administrator will take no further steps to process
the application until the deficiencies are remedied. The incomplete application is retained as a public
record.
(4) Review date. When the zoning administrator determines the application is complete, he or she
schedules the review with the Planning Commission consistent with its adopted calendar.
(5) Staff report preparation and distribution. The zoning administrator prepares a written staff report as
described in this division and provides a copy of it to each member of the Planning Commission and the
applicant prior to the meeting at which the matter will be considered. The zoning administrator will also
provide a copy to interested people upon request.
(6) General notice. Consistent with Division 2 of Article 4, the zoning administrator places the matter on the
meeting agenda of the Planning Commission.
(7) Meeting. Allowing for proper notice, the Planning Commission considers the application at a regular or
special meeting.
(8) Decision. The Planning Commission makes a decision to (i) approve the expansion, (ii) approve the
expansion with conditions, or (iii) deny the expansion. The Planning Commission may render its decision
at the same meeting the matter was initially considered or at a subsequent meeting, but no later than
40 calendar days after the public hearing unless the applicant agrees to an extension of a specified
duration.
(9) Preparation of decision document. Based on the action of the Planning Commission, the zoning
administrator prepares a decision document consistent with this division.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
74
(10) Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following the Planning Commission’s decision, the
zoning administrator mails the decision document to the applicant by regular mail.
(11) Acceptance by property owner. If the application is approved, the property owner must sign the
decision document to acknowledge the imposition of such condition or conditions and return the same
to the zoning administrator within 6 months of the decision. Prior to the expiration of the previously
specified time period, the property owner may submit a petition to the City Clerk requesting an
extension and the zoning administrator may, with cause, extend the period within which the decision
document must be signed. If the signed decision document is not returned within the initial or extended
time period, if any, the decision shall become null and void without any further action by the City. The
decision document shall only become effective when all required signatures have been obtained and
the original signature copy is returned to the zoning administrator.
(12) Recording of decision document. The decision document is recorded in the Wood County register of
deeds office when approval is granted.
(13) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is retained as a public record.
(b) Common Council review on appeal. If a final decision of the Planning Commission is appealed as
provided for in this division, the general steps outlined below shall be used in the review of an application to
expand a nonconforming building.
(1) Submittal of application materials. The zoning administrator forwards the application and other materials
the applicant submitted, minutes of the Planning Commission meeting(s), and the decision document
approved by the Planning Commission to the Common Council.
(2) General notice. Consistent with Division 2 of Article 4, the zoning administrator places the matter on the
meeting agenda of the Common Council.
(3) Meeting. Allowing for proper notice, the Common Council considers the application at a regular or
special meeting.
(4) Decision. After reviewing the written record, the Common Council makes a decision to (i) approve the
expansion, (ii) approve the expansion with conditions, or (iii) deny the expansion. The Common Council
may render its decision at the same meeting the matter was initially considered or at a subsequent
meeting, but no later than 40 calendar days after the date of the initial meeting unless the applicant
agrees to an extension of a specified duration.
(5) Preparation of decision document. Based on the action of the Common Council, the zoning
administrator within 15 calendar days of such decision prepares a decision document consistent with
this division.
(6) Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following the Common Council’s decision, the
administrator mails the decision document to the applicant by regular mail.
(7) Acceptance by property owner. If the application is approved, the property owner must sign the
decision document to acknowledge the imposition of such condition or conditions and return the same
to the zoning administrator within 6 months of the decision. Prior to the expiration of the previously
specified time period, the property owner may submit a petition to the City Clerk requesting an
extension and the zoning administrator may, with cause, extend the period within which the decision
document must be signed. If the signed decision document is not returned within the initial or extended
time period, if any, the decision shall become null and void without any further action by the City. The
decision document shall only become effective when all required signatures have been obtained and
the original signature copy is returned to the zoning administrator.
(8) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is retained as a public record.
(9) Recording of decision document. If the property owner returns the decision document within the
required time period with the required signatures, the zoning administrator records the decision
document against the subject property in the office of the Wood County register of deeds.
11.05.314 Basis of decision
The review authority shall consider the following factors:
(1) the degree of the existing nonconformity (i.e., 1 foot into the setback or 1 foot from the property
boundary line),
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
75
(2) the size and configuration of the lot,
(3) whether the lot conforms to the dimensional standards of the zoning district in which it is located,
(4) the size and location of the existing nonconforming building,
(5) the size and location of other existing structures and those structures reasonably anticipated on the lot,
(6) the impact, if any, that the expansion may have on adjoining properties,
(7) whether the proposed expansion would violate the intent of this chapter, and
(8) any other factor that relates to the purposes of this chapter set forth in s. 11.01.05 or as allowed by state
law.
11.05.315 Imposition of conditions
(a) Generally. In approving an expansion of a nonconforming building, the review authority may impose
one or more conditions of approval deemed necessary to further the intent and purposes of this chapter. Such
conditions, for example, may relate to landscaping, screening, and the maximum size of the building(s), or impose
limitations on additional buildings otherwise allowed on the subject property under the applicable zoning district
regulations.
(b) Effect on contracts with another party. The review authority shall not condition or withhold approval
based upon the property owner entering into a contract or discontinuing, modifying, extending, or renewing any
contract, with a third party under which the third party is engaging in a lawful use of the property.12
11.05.316 Application form and content
The application submittal shall include an application form as may be used by the City and a site plan prepared
at a scale of 1” = 20’ or other appropriate scale depicting the information listed in Appendix F.
11.05.317 Content of decision document
(a) Approval. If the application for an expansion of a nonconforming building is approved, the decision
document should include the following:
(1) a statement that the building expansion is approved;
(2) a description of the building project;
(3) reasons for the decision based on the criteria listed in this division;
(4) conditions of approval, if any;
(5) a statement that the applicant may appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction;
(6) a statement that an aggrieved person, other than the applicant, may appeal the decision and that
any work done by the applicant as authorized by the approval is done at the applicant’s risk;
(7) other information the review authority or zoning administrator deems appropriate;
(8) the signature of the zoning administrator on behalf of the review authority; and
(9) the date of the decision.
(b) Denial. If the application for expansion of a nonconforming building is denied, the decision document
should include the following:
(1) a statement that the building expansion is denied,
(2) reasons for the decision based on the criteria listed in this division,
(3) a statement indicating that the denial does not limit the applicant's ability to resubmit a revised
application for consideration,
(4) a statement that the applicant may appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction,
12 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(gm), Wis. Stats. The City, for example, could not require an applicant to terminate an existing contract with another
party that is engaged in a lawful use of the property.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
76
(5) other information the review authority or zoning administrator deems appropriate,
(6) the signature of the zoning administrator on behalf of the review authority, and
(7) the date of the decision.
11.05.318 Effect of decision
If the review authority approves the expansion of a nonconforming building, the approval runs with the land and
is binding on all subsequent property owners.
11.05.319 Expiration of an approval
An approval to expand a nonconforming building shall automatically expire 12 months after the date of issuance
unless substantial work has commenced under the permit and continues in good faith to completion. Upon
petition and with cause, the zoning administrator may grant a one-time extension not to exceed 12 months
provided (i) the permit holder requests the extension prior to the expiration of the permit, (ii) the permit holder
clearly demonstrates that circumstances beyond his or her control prevented the start of construction and the
continuation of the same, and (iii) the project complies with this chapter in effect at the time the extension is
granted.
11.05.320 Appeal
An aggrieved person may appeal a final decision made pursuant to this division by filing an appeal with a court
of competent jurisdiction within 30 calendar days of the final decision
11.05.321 to 11.05.330 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 17
CODE INTERPRETATION
11.05.331 Generally
11.05.332 Initiation
11.05.333 Limitations on interpretations
11.05.334 Review procedure
11.05.335 Basis of decision
11.05.336 Interpretation content
11.05.337 Repeal or revision of an interpretation
11.05.338 Effect of an interpretation
11.05.339 Compilation of interpretations
11.05.340 Appeal
11.05.331 Generally
From time to time, there may be instances where a person may have a question concerning a provision of this
chapter or the application of a provision of this chapter. To ensure this chapter is consistently interpreted over
time, a mechanism is needed to issue written interpretations. This division describes the procedures and
requirements to issue such interpretations.
11.05.332 Initiation
Any person, including the zoning administrator, may submit a question for interpretation.
11.05.333 Limitations on interpretations
The responsibility for issuing an interpretation shall not be construed as overriding the responsibilities specifically
given to any commission, board, or official named in any other part of this chapter.
11.05.334 Review procedure
(a) Zoning administrator review. The general steps outlined below shall be used to render an interpretation.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
77
(1) Submittal of question. The individual requesting the interpretation shall submit the question in writing to
the zoning administrator and the application fee as may be established by the Common Council.
(2) Decision. In consultation with the city attorney, the zoning administrator shall make a written decision
within 60 calendar days of when the petition was submitted.
(3) Notification of decision. Within a reasonable time following completion of the interpretation, the zoning
administrator mails a duplicate copy of the interpretation by regular mail to the individual requesting
the interpretation and provides a copy of the same to the Planning Commission, the city attorney, and
those city employees and agents involved in the administration of this chapter, as appropriate.
(4) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the interpretation is retained as a public record.
(b) Planning Commission review on appeal. If a final decision of the zoning administrator is appealed as
provided for in this division, the general steps outlined below shall be used to render an interpretation.
(1) Submittal of application materials. The zoning administrator forwards the application and other materials
the applicant submitted to the Planning Commission along with the administrator's interpretation.
(2) General notice. Consistent with Division 2 of Article 4, the zoning administrator places the matter on the
meeting agenda of the Planning Commission.
(3) Meeting. Allowing for proper notice, the Planning Commission considers the appeal at a regular or
special meeting.
(4) Decision. In consultation with the city attorney, the Planning Commission makes a written decision within
60 calendar days of when the zoning administrator’s decision was appealed.
(5) Preparation of decision document. Based on the action of the Planning Commission, the zoning
administrator within 15 calendar days of such decision prepares a decision document consistent with
this division.
(6) Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following the Planning Commission’s decision, the
administrator mails the decision document to the applicant by regular mail.
(7) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is retained as a public record.
11.05.335 Basis of decision
(a) General. In consultation with the city attorney and others as appropriate, the review authority shall (i)
evaluate the section of this chapter in question and those that are related, (ii) consider the purposes of this
chapter set forth in s. 11.01.05 and other parts of the chapter along with applicable legislative findings contained
in this chapter, and (iii) consider other applicable interpretations that have previously been made and make a
decision consistent with this division giving this chapter its most reasonable application. If the review authority
cannot make a reasonable interpretation, a determination shall not be issued.
(b) Floodplain zoning. If an unclear provision relates to the floodplain regulations and is required by ch. NR
116, Wis. Admin. Code, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the standards in ch. NR 116 in effect on the
date of the adoption of this ordinance or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this
ordinance.
(c) Shoreland-wetland zoning. If an unclear provision relates to the shoreland-wetland regulations and is
required by ch. NR 117, Wis. Admin. Code, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the standards in ch. NR 117
in effect on the date of the adoption of this ordinance or in effect on the date of the most recent text
amendment to this ordinance.
(d) Similarity of land uses. In making a determination as allowed under s. 11.06.32 with respect to similarity
of land uses, the zoning administrator should consider (i) the nature of the requested use; (ii) whether the
requested use is consistent with the City’s comprehensive plan; and (iii) whether the requested use is consistent
with the purposes of each of the zoning districts where the similar use is allowed either by right or as a conditional
use.
11.05.336 Repeal or revision of an interpretation
The review authority may rescind or modify an interpretation the review authority issued if such interpretation is
deemed to be incorrect in whole or in part.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
78
11.05.337 Interpretation content
An interpretation shall be in writing and contain the following:
(1) the name of the person posing the question,
(2) the section number of this chapter in question,
(3) the question or alleged ambiguity,
(4) the factors that were considered in making the interpretation,
(5) the interpretation,
(6) other information the review authority deems appropriate,
(7) the signature of the zoning administrator, and
(8) the date of decision.
11.05.338 Effect of interpretation
An interpretation once rendered shall have full effect as if set forth in this chapter. Where appropriate,
interpretations should be addressed through the amendment process. If the review authority determines that it is
not possible to make a reasonable interpretation, such decision shall not affect the validity of any section of this
chapter.
11.05.339 Compilation of interpretations
The zoning administrator shall keep a written record of all interpretations in effect and make them available for
public inspection during normal office hours.
11.05.340 Appeal
An aggrieved person may, without time constraint, appeal an interpretation made pursuant to this division by
filing an appeal with the Planning Commission. Following the final decision of the Planning Commission, an
aggrieved person may appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction without time constraint.
11.05.341 to 11.05.350 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 18
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL
11.05.351 Generally
11.05.352 Initiation
11.05.353 Review procedure
11.05.354 Basis of decision
11.05.355 Effect of appeal
11.05.356 Appeal
11.05.351 Generally
Recognizing that there may be situations where a property owner or another party believes that the zoning
administrator made an error in administering a zoning code, the state legislature established a mechanism to
allow the Zoning Board of Appeals to review alleged administrative errors. This division describes the requirements
and procedures for reviewing an alleged administrative error.
11.05.352 Initiation
Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the zoning administrator may file an appeal with the Zoning Board of
Appeals consistent with this division.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
79
11.05.353 Review procedure
The general steps outlined below shall be used in the review of an administrative appeal.
(1) Submittal of appeal. The applicant submits a written appeal to the City Clerk within 30 calendar days of
the date of the administrative decision being appealed, unless a different timeframe is established.
(2) Notification of appeal. The City Clerk provides a duplicate copy of the appeal to the Zoning Board of
Appeals and the zoning administrator.
(3) Compilation and submittal of record. The zoning administrator compiles a complete and accurate
record relating to the action being appealed and transmits it to the Zoning Board of Appeals in a timely
manner.
(4) Special notice to Department of Natural Resources. If the administrative appeal relates to a decision
relating to the floodplain regulations or shoreland-wetland regulations in this chapter, the zoning
administrator mails a copy of the application and public hearing notice to the regional office of the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources at least 10 calendar days before the date of the public
hearing.
(5) Special notice to parties in interest. The chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals gives notice for the
public hearing to the parties in interest, including the applicant and the zoning administrator.
(6) General notice. The chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals provides a class 2 public notice and
meeting agenda notice consistent with Division 2 of Article 4.
(7) Public hearing. Allowing for proper notice, the Zoning Board of Appeals conducts a public hearing
consistent with Division 3 of Article 4. Prior to the close of the public hearing, the applicant or the Zoning
Board of Appeals may request a continuance consistent with Division 3 of Article 4.
(8) Decision. After the public hearing has been closed, the Zoning Board of Appeals makes a decision to
affirm the zoning administrator’s decision, set aside the decision, or modify the decision. The Zoning
Board of Appeals may render its decision at the same meeting the matter was initially considered or at
a subsequent meeting, but no later than 40 calendar days after the date of the initial meeting unless
the applicant agrees to an extension of a specified duration.
(9) Notification of decision. Within a reasonable time following the Zoning Board of Appeals’ decision, the
clerk mails the decision document to the applicant by regular mail and provides a duplicate copy of
the same to the zoning administrator and the Planning Commission.
(10) Notification to Department of Natural Resources. If the administrative appeal relates to a decision
relating to the floodplain regulations or shoreland-wetland regulations in this chapter, the zoning
administrator mails a copy of the decision document to the regional office of the Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources.
(11) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is retained as a public record.
11.05.354 Basis of decision
(a) Generally. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine if the zoning administrator made an error in
judgment as applied to the instance being appealed.
(b) Historic property. In an action involves a historic property, as defined in s. 44.31(3), Wis. Stats., the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall consider any suggested alternatives or recommendations submitted by the landmarks
commission, if one has been established, or the Planning Commission.
11.05.355 Effect of appeal
An appeal shall stay all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action from which the appeal is made, unless the
zoning administrator certifies in writing to the Zoning Board of Appeals that a stay would, in his or her opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order, which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by a court of record on application,
with notice to the zoning administrator from whom appeal is made.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
80
11.05.356 Appeal
An aggrieved person may appeal a final decision made pursuant to this division by filing an appeal with a court
of competent jurisdiction within 30 calendar days of the final decision.
11.05.357 to 11.05.370 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 19
VARIANCE
11.05.371 Generally
11.05.372 Initiation
11.05.373 Review procedure
11.05.374 Basis of decision
11.05.375 Limitations on issuing a variance
11.05.376 Imposition of conditions
11.05.377 Application form and content
11.05.378 Staff report content
11.05.379 Content of decision document
11.05.380 Effect of approval
11.05.381 Effect of denial
11.05.382 Expiration of an approval
11.05.383 Appeal
11.05.371 Generally
Recognizing that there may be situations where a zoning regulation that if enforced would cause unnecessary
hardship to individual landowners, the state legislature established a mechanism to allow a municipality to issue a
variance in those instances where a minor deviation would be appropriate to alleviate such hardship without
circumventing or undermining the intent of the municipality’s zoning regulations. This division describes the
requirements and procedures for reviewing variance applications for dimensional standards.
11.05.372 Initiation
The owner of the subject property may submit an application for a variance.
11.05.373 Review procedure
The general steps outlined below shall be used in the review of a variance application.
(1) Submittal of application materials. The applicant submits a completed application and other required
materials to the zoning administrator along with the application fee as may be established by the
Common Council.
(2) Determination of completeness. The zoning administrator reviews the submittal within 10 days of
receiving the application and other required materials to make sure it is complete and ready for further
review. If it is not complete, the zoning administrator will notify the applicant in writing of such
deficiencies and that the applicant has 3 months from the date of the notice to resubmit the
application or forfeit the application fee. The zoning administrator will take no further steps to process
the application until the deficiencies are remedied. The incomplete application is retained as a public
record.
(3) Review date. When the zoning administrator determines the application is complete, he or she
schedules the review with the Zoning Board of Appeals consistent with its adopted calendar.
(4) Special notice to Department of Natural Resources. If the application relates to the floodplain
regulations or shoreland-wetland regulations in this chapter, the zoning administrator mails a copy of the
application and public hearing notice to the regional office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources at least 10 calendar days before the date of the public hearing.
(5) General notice. Consistent with Division 2 of Article 4, the zoning administrator provides for class 2 public
notice, property owner notification, and meeting agenda notice.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
81
(6) Staff report preparation and distribution. The zoning administrator prepares a written staff report as
described in this division and provides a copy to each member of the Zoning Board of Appeals and the
applicant. The zoning administrator provides a copy to interested people upon request.
(7) Public hearing. Allowing for proper notice, the Zoning Board of Appeals holds a public hearing
consistent with Division 3 of Article 4. Prior to the close of the public hearing, the applicant or the board
may request a continuance consistent with Division 3 of Article 4. If the public hearing is adjourned, the
Zoning Board of Appeals may direct the zoning administrator, the city engineer, and/or city attorney to
conduct additional research and to prepare such documents it deems necessary, including a
preliminary decision document.
(8) Decision. After the public hearing has been closed, the Zoning Board of Appeals after considering the
comments and the staff report makes a decision based on the decision criteria contained in this division
to (i) approve the variance, (ii) approve the variance with conditions, or (iii) deny the variance. The
Zoning Board of Appeals may render its decision at the same meeting the public hearing is conducted
or at a subsequent meeting, but no later than 40 calendar days after the public hearing unless the
applicant agrees to an extension of a specified duration.
(9) Preparation of decision document. Based on the action of the Zoning Board of Appeals, the zoning
administrator prepares a decision document consistent with this division.
(10) Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following the Zoning Board of Appeals’ decision, the
zoning administrator mails the decision document to the applicant by regular mail.
(11) Notification to Department of Natural Resources. If the application relates to the floodplain regulations
or shoreland-wetland regulations in this chapter, the zoning administrator mails a copy of the decision
document to the regional office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(12) Acceptance by property owner. If the Zoning Board of Appeals grants the variance with one or more
condition of approval, the property owner must sign the decision document to acknowledge the
imposition of such condition or conditions and return the same to the zoning administrator within 6
months of the decision. Prior to the expiration of the previously specified time period, the property
owner may submit a petition to the City Clerk requesting an extension and the zoning administrator
may, with cause, extend the period within which the decision document must be signed. If the signed
decision document is not returned within the initial or extended time period, if any, the decision shall
become null and void without any further action by the City. The decision document shall only become
effective when all required signatures have been obtained and the original signature copy is returned
to the zoning administrator.
(13) Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision document is retained as a public record.
(14) Additional procedural steps. If the Zoning Board of Appeals grants the variance, the applicant shall then
follow other review procedures as may be required.
11.05.374 Basis of decision
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall base its decision upon the standard for a variance described in s. 62.23(7)(e)(7),
Wis. Stats., and applicable judicial interpretations of such statute.
11.05.375 Limitations on issuing a variance
The following actions shall not be allowed by an area variance, and shall be deemed to be a use variance
subject to the use variance standard in s. 62.23(7)(e)7.(d), Wis. Stats.:
(1) expansion of a nonconforming use (e.g., expansion of area, increase in operational characteristics,
etc.), or
(2) modification to lot size requirements so as to increase the permitted density or intensity of use.
11.05.376 Imposition of conditions
In approving a variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals may impose such conditions and restriction as may be
necessary to grant approval.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
82
11.05.377 Application form and content
The application submittal shall include an application form as may be used by the City and a project map
prepared at an appropriate scale depicting the information listed in Appendix F.
11.05.378 Staff report content
The staff report should contain the following:
(1) preliminary findings for the decision criteria listed in this division;
(2) a preliminary recommendation to approve the application, approve the application with conditions, or
deny the application;
(3) a preliminary list of conditions for approval whether the staff recommendation is for approval or denial;
and
(4) other information deemed necessary.
11.05.379 Content of decision document
(a) Approval. If an application for a variance is approved, the decision document should include the
following:
(1) a statement that the variance is approved;
(2) a description of the variance;
(3) reasons for the decision based on the criteria listed in this division;
(4) conditions of approval, if any;
(5) if one or more conditions of approval are imposed, a statement indicating that the property owner must
sign the decision document and return it to the zoning administrator to acknowledge acceptance of
the same;
(6) a statement that the approval will automatically expire 12 months after the date of approval unless
substantial work as authorized by the approval has commenced and continues in good faith to
completion and that the Zoning Board of Appeals may, with cause, grant a one-time extension not to
exceed 6 months;
(7) a statement that the applicant may appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction;
(8) a statement that an aggrieved person, other than the applicant, may appeal the decision and that
any work done by the applicant as authorized by the approval is done at the applicant’s risk;
(9) other information the Zoning Board of Appeals or zoning administrator deems appropriate;
(10) the signature of the chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals; and
(11) the date of the decision.
(b) Denial. If the application for a variance is denied, the decision should include the following:
(1) a statement that the variance request is denied,
(2) a description of the proposed variance,
(3) reasons for the decision based on the criteria listed in this division,
(4) a statement indicating that the denial does not limit the applicant's ability to resubmit a revised
application for consideration provided there is a substantial change in the circumstances relating to the
application,
(5) a statement that the decision may be appealed as provided for in this division,
(6) other information the Zoning Board of Appeals or zoning administrator deems appropriate,
(7) the signature of the chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals, and
(8) the date of the decision.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
83
11.05.380 Effect of approval
(a) Generally. An approved variance merely sets aside the rule or regulation from which relief is sought. All
other rules and regulations not part of the variance decision must be followed. The variance runs with the land.
(b) Creation of nonconformity. If a variance is granted and creates a nonconforming situation, the premises
is subject to all applicable provisions relating to nonconformities set forth in Article 19.
11.05.381 Effect of denial
If the Zoning Board of Appeals denies a variance application, the board may not rehear the same, or essentially
the same, application unless there has been substantial change in the circumstances relating to the
application.13
11.05.382 Expiration of an approval
A variance approval shall automatically expire 12 months after the date of issuance unless substantial work has
commenced under the permit and continues in good faith to completion. Upon petition and with cause, the
zoning administrator may grant a one-time extension not to exceed 12 months provided (i) the permit holder
requests the extension prior to the expiration of the permit, (ii) the permit holder clearly demonstrates that
circumstances beyond his or her control prevented the start of construction and the continuation of the same,
and (iii) the project complies with this chapter in effect at the time the extension is granted.
11.05.383 Appeal
An aggrieved person may appeal a final decision made pursuant to this division by filing an appeal with a court
of competent jurisdiction within 30 calendar days of the final decision.
The remainder of this page intentionally left blank.
13 Commentary: See Tateoka v City of Waukesha Bd. of Zoning Appeals, 220 Wis.2d 656, 583 N.W. 2d 871 (Ct. App. 1998).
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
84
Divisions
ARTICLE 6
ZONING DISTRICTS AND LAND USE
Sections
DIVISION 1
ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
11.06.01 Generally
11.06.02 Establishment and purpose of zoning
districts
11.06.03 Relationship between base and overlay
zoning districts
11.06.04 Necessity of zoning district designation
11.06.05 Effect of boundary line relocation on zoning
designation
11.06.06 Consistency with comprehensive plan
11.06.07 Zoning map
11.06.01 Generally
The City is divided into a number of base zoning districts so that each parcel of land is located in at least one
district and potentially more than one district. For each of these districts, appropriate types of land uses are
identified along with development standards when applicable.
11.06.02 Establishment and purpose of zoning districts
(a) Base zoning districts. Recognizing that different areas of the City serve unique functions, the City is
divided into a number of zoning districts. Even though some of the districts may share similar characteristics, they
possess one or more unique qualities that set them apart from the other districts. Although these districts may not
now possess each of the attributes in these descriptions, it is intended that as land uses change over time they
more closely reflect the intended uses. Uses are allowed in the various districts consistent with the development
standards in this article and any development limitations as described in s. 11.06.141. The zoning districts are as
follows:
Residential
(1) Rural residential (RR) district. This district is intended to accommodate single-family dwellings on larger
lots, limited agricultural uses, and other compatible land uses.
(2) Single-family residential (R-1) district. This district is intended to accommodate single-family dwellings
along with compatible community and civic uses.
(3) Mixed residential (R-2) district. This district is intended to accommodate single-family dwellings and
duplex units along with compatible community and civic uses.
(4) Multi-family medium density residential (R-3) district. This district is intended to accommodate medium
density housing consisting of multi-family buildings and townhomes with 3 to 15 dwelling units in any
given project. Compatible community and civic uses may also be located in the district.
(5) Multi-family high density residential (R-4) district. This district is intended to accommodate high density
housing consisting of multi-family buildings and townhomes with more than 15 dwelling units in any given
project. Compatible community and civic uses may also be located in the district.
1. Zoning districts and zoning map
2. Allowable land uses
3. General standards
4. Dimensional and related standards
5. Environmental and engineering
6. Site design
7. General architectural standards
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
85
(6) Manufactured home park (R-8) district. This district is intended to accommodate mobile homes and/or
manufactured homes as part of a unified project, which may also include compatible community and
civic uses.
Commercial
(7) Downtown commercial (B-1) district. This district is primarily intended to accommodate and create a
high level of employment and business activity consisting of large- and small-scale uses. Smaller retail
stores and specialty shops are common along with indoor attractions. Although professional services are
allowed, they are less common. Sidewalk cafes are common during the warmer months of the year. The
wide range of permissible uses and development standards are intended to provide significant
incentives for infill development, redevelopment, and the continued economic viability of existing
development. Residential uses can occur in this district primarily on the upper levels of buildings. Parking
is available on the street and in nearby public parking lots and garages. There is a balanced mix of oneand
multi-story buildings.
(8) General commercial (B-2) district. This district is primarily intended to accommodate a wide range of
large- and small-scale commercial development generally on or near a major arterial along with
compatible community and civic uses.
(9) Neighborhood commercial (B-3) district. This district is intended to accommodate low-intensity
commercial uses in a residential setting.
(10) Mixed use commercial (B-5) district. This district is intended to be applied exclusively to those areas
depicted on the city's adopted land use plan map as "general mixed use." These areas have been
determined, via the city's comprehensive master planning process, to potentially be appropriated for a
variety of land uses given the character of the existing development pattern in the area, the proximity
of the area to major transportation facilities, and the availability of blocks of land which are sufficiently
large to allow for integrated, coordinated, comprehensive site planning and mixing of compatible, wellplanned
land uses.
Industrial
(11) General industrial (M-1) district. This district is intended to accommodate industrial, manufacturing, and
storage where most of the activities are conducted within an enclosed building. Compatible
community and civic uses are also allowed.
(12) Heavy industrial (M-2) district. This district is intended to accommodate industrial, manufacturing, and
storage uses where some or all the activities are conducted outside of an enclosed building.
Compatible community and civic uses are also allowed.
Special Purpose
(13) Conservancy (C-1) district. This district includes those lands that are predominantly environmentally
sensitive. Given the various development constraints associated with these lands, development is
restricted to land uses compatible with these constraints.
(14) Institutional (I-1) district. This district is intended to accommodate institutional uses, whether maintained
by the City, another governmental body, or a private business, that are deemed to be a permanent
use. This district is located in and adjoining residential areas of the City where such uses are consistent
with existing and planned residential uses.
(15) Park and Recreation (P-1) district. This district is intended to accommodate outdoor recreation, whether
maintained by the City, another governmental body, or a private business, that are deemed to be a
permanent use. This district is located in and adjoining residential areas of the City where such uses are
consistent with existing and planned residential uses.
(b) Overlay zoning district. In addition to the base zoning districts enumerated in subsection (a) above, the
following overlay zoning districts are established to account for unique conditions or requirements:
(1) Floodplain overlay district. This district includes those lands within the 100-year floodplain as described
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in Flood Insurance Study 55007CV000A. Additional
details are set forth in Article 9.
(2) Shoreland-wetland overlay district. This district includes specified wetlands within the shoreland areas.
Additional details are set forth in Article 11.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
86
(3) Shoreland overlay district. This district includes land within the shoreland areas. Additional details are set
forth in Article 12.
(4) Wellhead protection overlay district. This district includes those lands surrounding a public wellhead.
Provisions are intended to further control what land uses may occur so that the City’s municipal water
supplies are reasonably protect from contamination. Additional details are set forth in Article 13.
(5) Downtown design overlay district. This district is generally located in the downtown area and is intended
to protect and perpetuate the predominant architectural character of the district. Additional details
are set forth in Article 14.
(c) Planned development district (PDD). Planned development districts are a special type of zoning district
and are established consistent with the procedures and requirements in Article 5. Each district is unique and
therefore has its own set of development standards that are documented in the general development plan, and
associated development agreement, if any. PDD districts are to be numbered sequentially (i.e., PDD-01, PDD-02,
etc.).
11.06.03 Relationship between base and overlay zoning districts
If a parcel is located in one or more overlay districts, the regulations that apply to the underlying base zoning
district remain in effect, except as modified by the overlay district(s), and if there is any conflict between the
overlay districts, the most restrictive shall control.
11.06.04 Necessity of zoning district designation
It is the intent of this article that no land shall be without a zoning district designation, unless specifically noted on
the zoning map. In the event a parcel of land is for any reason deemed to be without a designation, no land
development shall occur until such time as the Common Council has assigned the parcel an appropriate zoning
classification.
11.06.05 Effect of a boundary line relocation on zoning designation
Pursuant to ch. 236, Wis. Stats., a lot line between adjoining parcels of land may be relocated in certain
circumstances, potentially making one parcel larger and the other smaller. In those situations where the affected
parcels are in different zoning districts, a lot line relocation shall not alter the location of the zoning district
boundary until such time as the zoning map has been amended to reflect the new lot line.
11.06.06 Consistency with comprehensive plan
The City of Wisconsin Rapids has adopted a comprehensive plan consistent with s. 66.1001 Wis. Stats., for the
purpose of guiding growth and development. The future land use map is especially important in terms of these
zoning regulations. All changes to the zoning map must be consistent with the future land use map in effect at the
time of the change. Exhibit 6-1 shows which zoning districts are consistent with the adopted future land use map.
When one or more zoning districts are listed for a particular future land use classification, the Planning Commission
shall recommend, and Common Council shall determine the appropriate zoning classification(s).
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
87
Exhibit 6-1. Future Land Use Map to Zoning Map Conversion Matrix
Base Zoning District
Future Land Use PDD RR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-8 B-1 B-2 B-3 B-5 I-1 P-1 M-1 M-2 C-1
Residential X - X X - - - - - - - - - - - X
Mixed Residential X - X X X - - - - - - - - - - X
High Density
Residential
X - - - X X - - - - - - - - - X
Mobile Home - - - - - - X - - - - - - - - X
Mixed Use X - - - - X - X X X X - - - - X
Commercial X - - - - - - X X X X - - - - X
Institutional X - - - - - - - - - - X - - - X
Public and Civic - - - - - - - - - - - X - - - X
Industrial X - - - - - - - - - - - - X X X
Zoning Districts
PDD Planned Development District; RR Rural Residential; R-1 Single-Family Residential; R-2 Mixed Residential; R-3 Multi-family Medium Density
Residential; R-4 Multi-family High Density Residential; R-8 Manufactured Home Park; B-1 Downtown Commercial; B-2 General Commercial; B-3
Neighborhood Commercial; B-5 Mixed Use Commercial; I-1 Institutional; P-1 Park and Recreation; M-1 General Industrial; M-2 Heavy Industrial; C-1
Conservancy
11.06.07 Zoning map
(a) Title. The map that depicts the location of the various zoning districts shall be titled "City of Wisconsin
Rapids Zoning Map."
(b) Map series. The zoning map may consist of two or more maps when needed to clearly depict the
various zoning districts and other features typically found on a zoning map. If a map series is used, each map in
the series shall include a map number and name and a listing of all maps in the series (i.e., map index).
(c) Official zoning map. The City Clerk shall maintain one paper copy of the zoning map as the official map
which shall be signed by Mayor and countersigned by the City Clerk. If there is a discrepancy between this zoning
map and other maps as may be made available, the map maintained by the City Clerk shall control in all
instances.
(d) Availability. The zoning map maintained by the City Clerk shall be available for public inspection upon
request. The City Clerk and zoning administrator may post the zoning map on the city’s website and otherwise
make and distribute copies in a manner deemed appropriate.
(e) Preparation of a new official map. In the event the zoning map maintained by the City Clerk is
damaged, lost, or destroyed the zoning administrator shall notify the Common Council and shall prepare a new
zoning map and submit it to the Mayor and the City Clerk for signature.
(f) History of amendment. The zoning map maintained by the City Clerk may contain a descriptive history
of recent amendments that have been made, indicating the ordinance number and date of action.
(g) Archive of superseded maps. The City Clerk shall maintain a permanent archive of superseded zoning
maps that are created after January 1, 2018.
(h) Amendment. The procedure and requirements to amend the zoning map are set forth in Article 5.
11.06.08 to 11.06.30 Reserved
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
88
Sections
DIVISION 2
ALLOWABLE LAND USES
11.06.31 Land uses within zoning districts
11.06.32 Land uses not listed in land-use matrix
11.06.33 Project classified in more than one land-use
category
11.06.34 Wind energy
11.06.35 Special standards for accessory land uses
11.06.36 Special provisions for community living
arrangements
11.06.37 Special provisions for foster homes
11.06.38 Map of conditional uses
11.06.31 Land uses within zoning districts
(a) General purpose zoning districts. Land uses, as described in Appendix B, that are permitted in one or
more of the base zoning districts are classified as principal, accessory, or temporary. Appendix A lists principal
land uses (Series 1 to 16), accessory uses (Series 17), and temporary uses (Series 18). Each of the land uses are
designated as one of the following in each of the base zoning districts:
(1) The letter “P” indicates that the use is permitted in the zoning district by right provided that all other
requirements of this chapter are met. Any commercial or industrial land use that is shown as permitted
that emits air contaminants, fugitive dust, or potentially offensive odors outside of the building;
incinerates any substance; or handles radioactive materials, hazardous substances, hazardous waste, or
regulated substances is considered a conditional use
(2) The letter “C” indicates that the use is allowed in the zoning district as a conditional use provided that all
other requirements of this chapter are met,
(3) The letters "WT" indicates that the use is subject to special standards and procedures for Wireless
Telecommunication Facilities, or
(4) A hyphen “-“ indicates that the use is not permitted in the zoning district.
(b) Planned development districts. Land uses that are permitted in a planned development district are
enumerated in the general development plan for the district, along with development standards, if any.
(c) Floodplain overlay district. The floodplain overlay district prohibits or restricts those land uses that could
be impacted by flood events. See Article 9 for all of the land-use regulations.
(d) Shoreland-wetland overlay district. The shoreland-wetland overlay district prohibits various activities that
would impact specified wetlands in the shoreland areas of the city. See Article 11 for all of the land-use
regulations.
(e) Shoreland overlay district. The shoreland overlay district regulates the removal of vegetation and the
placement of buildings along navigable water bodies. See Article 12 for all of the land-use regulations.
(f) Wellhead protection overlay district. The wellhead protection overlay district prohibits or restricts those
land uses that could contaminate the public water supply. See Article 13 for all of the land-use regulations.
(g) Downtown design overlay district. The downtown design overlay district is not intended to regulate land
uses. See Article 14 for all of the related architectural controls.
11.06.32 Land uses not listed in land-use matrix
Any land use that is not listed in Appendix A is prohibited unless the zoning administrator determines that such use
is substantially similar to another use that is listed using the procedures and requirements set forth in Article 5 for a
code interpretation.
11.06.33 Project classified in more than one land-use category
If a proposed project includes both an allowable land use and a prohibited land use, the prohibited portion of
the project shall not occur in the zoning district.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
89
11.06.34 Wind energy
This chapter does not include any regulations relating to wind energy systems. The City of Wisconsin Rapids may
however, enact an ordinance to regulate wind energy systems pursuant to the procedures and requirements set
forth in s. 66.0401, Wis. Stats.
11.06.35 Special standards for accessory land uses
(a) Generally. An accessory building may only be established on a parcel when the property has a
principal building or one is being constructed.
(b) Exception for a utility cabinet. For the purpose of this chapter, a utility cabinet may be established on a
vacant lot prior to the establishment of a principal use.
(c) Exception for removal of a principal building while retaining an accessory building. Pursuant to the
procedures and requirements in Article 5, the Planning Commission may approve a special exception to allow the
removal of a principal building, while retaining the accessory building, when the Planning Commission determines
that the principal building is dilapidated and the accessory building meets current building codes and serves a
useful purpose. If the Planning Commission approves the special exception, the property owner shall record a
deed restriction, as approved by the Planning Commission, in the Wood County register of deeds office that
controls the use of the accessory building and incorporates any requirement imposed by the Planning
Commission as a condition of approval.
11.06.36 Special provisions for community living arrangements
(a) Limitations. Under state law, the City of Wisconsin Rapids may not limit the number of community living
arrangements so long as the total capacity of such facilities does not exceed 25 or one percent of the city’s
population, whichever is greater. When that threshold is exceeded, the Common Council may prohibit additional
community living arrangements from being located in the City. Additionally, when the capacity of community
living arrangements in a ward reaches 25 or one percent of the population, whichever is greater, the Common
Council may prohibit additional community living arrangements from being located in the ward. A foster home or
a foster treatment home that is the primary domicile of a foster parent or foster treatment parent and that is
licensed under s. 48.62, Wis. Stats., and an adult family home certified under s. 50.032(lm)(b), Wis. Stats., are
exempt from this provision.1
(b) Periodic review of existing facilities. Not less than 11 months but not more than 13 months after the first
licensure of an adult family home under s. 50.033, Wis. Stats., or of a community living arrangement and every
year thereafter, the Common Council may make a determination pursuant to s. 62.23(7)(i)(9),Wis. Stats., as to the
effect of such facility on the health, safety, or welfare of residents of the municipality. If the Common Council
determines such facility poses a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the municipality, the
Common Council may order such facility to cease operation or obtain a conditional use permit to continue
operation. Such facility shall cease operation within 90 days after date of the order, or the date of final judicial
review of the order, or the date of the denial of a conditional use permit, whichever is later. The fact that an
individual with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome or a positive test for the presences of HIV, as defined in s.
252.01(1M), Wis. Stats., antigen or nonantigenic products of HIV or an antibody to HIV resides in a community living
arrangement with a capacity of 8 or fewer persons may not be used under this subsection to assert or prove that
the existence of the community living arrangement in the community poses a threat to the health, safety, or
welfare of the residents of the city.2
11.06.37 Special provisions for foster homes
A foster home that is owned, operated, or contracted for by the state of Wisconsin or a county department, is not
subject to this chapter pursuant to 63 Atty. Gen. 34. All other foster homes and treatment foster homes must
comply with this chapter.
11.06.38 Map of conditional uses
The zoning administrator is authorized to prepare a map showing those properties that have an active conditional
use permit and to amend the same from time to time.
1 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(i), Wis. Stats.
2 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(i), Wis. Stats.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
90
11.06.39 to 11.06.60 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 3
GENERAL STANDARDS
11.06.61 Licensing with City
11.06.62 Licensing with state agencies
11.06.63 Special provisions for residential land uses
11.06.64 Driveways
11.06.65 Compliance with building codes
11.06.66 Negative use restrictions
11.06.61 Licensing with City
In addition to meeting the requirements contained in this article, land uses shall also meet any licensing
requirements as may be established by the City.
11.06.62 Licensing with state agencies
If a land use or any related activity requires a license from the state, or its agent, to operate, such license shall be
obtained prior to the establishment of such use and maintained for the life of the use or until the state, or its agent,
no longer requires such license.
11.06.63 Special provisions for residential land uses
(a) Use of a recreational vehicle for occupancy. No recreational vehicle shall be used for habitation for
more than 14 days per calendar year with no more than 5 consecutive days, except that a recreational vehicle
may be occupied for up to 6 months when the city has issued a building permit for the construction of a singlefamily
residence.
(b) Occupancy. A dwelling unit shall not be occupied by more than one household unit.
11.06.64 Street access
(a) Highway access and setback requirements. No direct private access shall be permitted to the existing
or proposed rights-of-way of expressways, nor to any controlled access arterial street without permission of the
highway agency that has access control jurisdiction.
(b) No direct public or private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed rights-of-way of the
following:
(1) A primary, standard, or minor arterial highway intersecting another principal, primary, standard, or minor
arterial highway at grade within 100 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines along the street.
(2) Streets intersecting an arterial highway within 50 feet of at the grade intersection of the right-of-way
lines along the street.
(c) Access barriers such as curbing, fencing, ditching, landscaping, or other topographic barriers, shall be
erected by property owners to prevent unauthorized vehicular ingress and egress to the above specified streets
or highways.
(d) Temporary access to the above rights-of-way may be granted by the zoning administrator after review
and recommendation by the highway agencies having jurisdiction. Such access permit shall be temporary,
revocable, and subject to any condition required and shall be issued for a period not to exceed 12 months.
11.06.65 Driveways
(a) Applicability. All driveways installed, altered, changed, replaced, or extended after the effective date
of this chapter shall comply with this section.
(b) General requirement. A principal building on a lot must be served by a driveway connected to a public
street.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
91
(c) Design. The driveway must be suitable for automobile use, and provide adequate slope, width, and
overhead clearance to allow uninhibited access by emergency vehicles and equipment.
(d) Separation on the same parcel. Islands between driveway openings shall be provided with a minimum
of 12 feet between all driveways on the same lot.
(e) Width.Openings for vehicular ingress and egress shall not exceed 30 feet for all residential uses. For
duplexes, multi-family, and commercial uses, openings for vehicular ingress and egress shall not exceed 36 feet.
Duplex openings in which both driveways into the duplex are adjacent to each other on the same street shall not
exceed 40 feet.
(f) Special provisions for West Grand Avenue, between 25th Avenue and West Riverview Expressway. On
West Grand Avenue, between 25th Avenue and West Riverview Expressway, islands between driveway openings
shall be provided with a minimum of 200 feet between all driveways on the same lot. No access onto West Grand
Avenue on corner lots except driveways that presently exist that would be 70 feet from the curb radii after the
2005 reconstruction of the street and onto dedicated turn lanes. After July 1, 2001, no new access points will be
granted where one does not now exist. Joint driveways will be allowed between adjacent lots constructed on the
property line.
(g) Slope.
The maximum driveway slope shall not exceed 11% while accommodating for a typical sidewalk cross
section as defined in Chapter 6 of the Municipal Code.
11.06.66 Driveway standards for residential properties
(a) Surfacing. Driveways and any related parking area shall be hard-surfaced with asphaltic pavement,
concrete pavement, or pavers that provide the same structural support as the aforementioned.
(b) Drainage. Driveways and any related parking area shall be graded and drained to not cause a
nuisance to adjoining properties.
(c) Setback. Driveways and any related parking area must be setback at least 3 feet from side lot lines,
except as allowed in this subsection. A shared driveway may be located along a common lot line. A driveway
accessing the bulb of a cul-de-sac street may be closer than 3 feet to a side lot line within 20 feet of the front lot
line.
(1) Where an existing driveway is located closer than 3 feet to the side property line, the driveway may
be reconstructed in the same location and dimensions when compliance with the 3 feet setback would
result in a driveway that is less than 12 feet wide or when meeting the 3 feet setback would result in the
driveway being immediately adjacent to the home.
(d) Minimum width. The minimum width of a driveway is 10 feet.
(e) Maximum width.
(1) Where the garage doors are more than 40 feet from the right-of-way line, the maximum width of a
driveway at the right-of-way line is 12 feet. Where the garage doors are less than 40 feet from the rightof-
way line, the maximum width of a driveway at the right-of-way line is 30 feet.
(2) The width of a driveway directly in front of the garage door(s) must not exceed the width of the garage
on that side, except that the driveway in front of a single-car garage can be 24 feet wide provided the
portion of the driveway that is not in front of the garage must not be located in front of the dwelling.
Where the width of the driveway directly in front of the garage doors exceeds the width of the driveway
at the right-of-way line, there must be a taper starting at least 8 feet from the right-of-way line.
(3) The width of a driveway for a single-family residence without a garage (if existing or otherwise allowed)
must not exceed 12 feet. The width of a driveway for a duplex without a garage (if existing or otherwise
allowed) must not exceed 30 feet.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
92
(a) Auxiliary parking bay. An auxiliary parking bay
may be located along the side of an attached garage or
detached garage, but not both, as follows:
(1) The parking bay must not be located in the front
yard.
(2) The parking bay must taper into the driveway.
(3) The parking bay must be screened along the
adjoining lot line.
(4) The parking bay shall be uncovered.
(5) The maximum width of the parking bay is 10 feet
(6) The maximum length of the parking bay is 20 feet,
not including the taper.
Exhibit 6-3. General Parking Requirements
© Civic Webware | Not to scale
11.06.67 Storage of motor vehicles and trailers
(a) Motor vehicles. All motor vehicles, including recreational vehicles, on a residential lot must be placed
within an enclosed building or on a driveway or auxiliary parking bay as permitted by this chapter. A motor
vehicle that is not stored within an enclosed building must be licensed by the state of Wisconsin or any other state.
(b) On-site storage of a recreational vehicle. No more than one recreational vehicle may be kept out of
doors.
Exhibit 6-2. Example of an auxiliary parking bay
© Civic Webware
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
93
(c) Parking of a commercial vehicle as an ancillary residential use. One panel truck or one pickup truck
that is used for business purposes and/or personal use may be parked on a driveway or an auxiliary parking bay
on a residential property. Larger trucks may be allowed as a conditional use (See Appendix A).
(d) Trailers. One trailer on a residential lot may be parked on a driveway or auxiliary parking bay as
permitted by this chapter or on an unsurfaced area of the lot as follows:
(1) The trailer shall not be located in the front yard.
(2) The trailer and any cargo must be at least 6 feet from a principal building and at least 3 feet from any
lot line.
(3) The trailer and any cargo shall not exceed (i) 12 feet in height above the ground surface as parked, but
excluding mast; (ii) 30 feet in length, excluding trailer hitch, tongue, and bumper; or (iii) 9 feet in width,
excluding any auxiliary hardware.
(e) Ownership requirements. Motor vehicles and trailers as may be allowed in this section are strictly limited
to those actually used by the residents, or for the temporary parking of their guests.
11.06.68 Compliance with building codes
A building shall comply with all applicable building codes for the intended use.
11.06.69 Negative use restrictions
(a) Legislative findings. The Common Council finds that the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the City are compromised when private parties impose negative use restrictions upon real property in the City
which prohibit or have the economic or practical effect of prohibiting the use of such real property for grocery
store or drug store purposes after a grocery store or drug store owner or operator has terminated grocery store or
drug store operations upon such real property. Such negative use restrictions are separate and distinct from
commercially reasonable non-compete clauses included in shopping center development agreements whereby
a landlord may agree with a tenant that is a grocery store or drug store not to lease another space in the same
shopping center to a second grocery store or drug store, respectively, in order to induce the first tenant to sign a
long-term lease as an anchor tenant at such shopping center development.
(b) Prohibition on negative use restrictions. A private agreement that purports to impose negative use
restrictions upon real property in the City so as to prohibit or have the economic or practical effect of prohibiting
the use of such real property for grocery store or drug store purposes after a grocery store or drug store owner or
operator has terminated grocery store or drug store operations on such real property, when such use would
otherwise be permitted (including as a conditional use) under this chapter, is against public policy, void, and
unenforceable. This prohibition applies whether the private agreement is incorporated in a deed restriction, a
restrictive covenant, a lease or memorandum of lease, or any other instrument. This prohibition applies to all such
private agreements, including those created prior to the effective date of this section.
(c) Penalties. The penalty provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any such private agreements entered
into prior to August 1,2018, which is the effective date of this section.
11.06.70 to 11.06.100 Reserved
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
94
Sections
DIVISION 4
DIMENSIONAL AND RELATED STANDARDS
11.06.101 Generally
11.06.102 Lot area
11.06.103 Lot width
11.06.104 Street frontage
11.06.105 Water frontage
11.06.106 Building setbacks
11.06.107 Build-to-line
11.06.108 Building and structure height
11.06.109 Building coverage
11.06.110 Impervious coverage
11.06.111 Residential floor area
11.06.112 Floor area of attached garage
11.06.113 Floor area of detached accessory
buildings
11.06.114 Number of principal buildings on a lot
11.06.115 Number of accessory buildings on a lot
11.06.116 Separation requirements for buildings
11.06.117 Placement of accessory buildings on a lot
11.06.118 Placement of parking on a lot
11.06.119 Vision triangle
11.06.101 Generally
Lots, buildings, and other structures not located within a planned development district shall conform to the
dimensional standards set forth in Appendix C, except as may be otherwise allowed in this chapter. The standards
for lots, buildings, and other structures in a planned development district are enumerated in the general
development plan for the zoning district.
11.06.102 Lot area
(a) Generally. The minimum size of lots shall comply with the requirements set forth in Appendix C, except
when such lots are otherwise authorized herein.
(b) Exemptions. A parcel created by a land division that is authorized by the City is exempt from the
minimum lot area requirements if such parcel is to be dedicated to the public or used for stormwater facilities or
other types of development-related infrastructure or common open space, including walking and recreation
trails.
(c) Measurement of lot area. Lot area is measured on the horizontal plane. For lots created after August 1,
2018, the following features shall not be included when determining the minimum lot area:
(1) slopes exceeding 10 percent;
(2) stormwater basins up to the design capacity elevation;
(3) 100-year floodplains as delineated by an adopted flood insurance rate map (FIRM);
(4) lakes, streams, manmade ponds, and similar waterbodies up to the elevation of the ordinary high-water
mark;
(5) the area within the proposed right-of-way of a street so designated on a highway width map as may be
adopted by Wood County; and
(6) if the street on which the lot fronts is not located within a public street right-of-way, the area of the
easement designated for public street purposes, or the area extending 33 feet from the center of the
street if the street is not located within an easement.
(d) Use of a lot not meeting specified dimensional standards. The use of a vacant nonconforming lot is
governed by requirements set forth in Article 19.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
95
(e) Change in lot, generally. A property owner shall not modify the area of an existing lot by any means so
that the resulting lot area is less than the minimum lot area for the zoning district in which such lot is located, or if
the existing lot is nonconforming with respect to lot area to reduce the lot area to make it more nonconforming. 3
(f) Change in lot with a conditional use. The property boundary lines of a lot containing a conditional use
shall not be modified in any manner without the express authorization of the Planning Commission. If the Planning
Commission determines that the proposed reconfiguration or change in lot area is significant, the proposed
change may only occur if the Planning Commission grants a new approval with the proposed lot consistent with
the review procedures and requirements for a conditional use in effect at the time.
11.06.103 Lot width
(a) Generally. The width of a lot shall comply with the standards set forth in Appendix C.
(b) Exemptions. A parcel created by a land division that is authorized by the City is exempt from the lot
width requirements if such parcel is dedicated to the public or used for stormwater facilities and other types of
development-related infrastructure or common open space including walking and recreation trails.
(c) Measurement of lot width. Lot width is measured along an imaginary line generally parallel to the front
lot line at the front yard building setback line. Such measurement may not be interrupted by any feature, as in the
case of a lot with two areas on the same street.
11.06.104 Street frontage
(a) Generally. A lot shall have and maintain frontage on a public street or approved private street for
physical access to the lot in the location approved by the city, Wood County, or the state of Wisconsin for the
minimum distance set forth in Appendix C. Frontage on a public or private street where access is prohibited does
not constitute frontage for the purpose of this section.
(b) Exemptions. A parcel created by a land division that is authorized by the City is exempt from the street
frontage requirements if such parcel is dedicated to the public or used for stormwater facilities and other type of
development-related infrastructure or common open space including walking and recreation trails.
(c) Measurement of street frontage. Street frontage is measured along (1) the front property boundary line,
(2) the easement dedicated for public street purposes, (3) 33 feet from the centerline of the public street if not
located within an easement or right-of-way, or (4) the proposed right-of-way as depicted on a highway width
map as may be adopted by Wood County, whichever is furthest from the public street.
11.06.105 Water frontage
(a) Generally. A lot fronting on the Wisconsin River shall have at least 100 feet of frontage.
(b) Measurement of water frontage. Water frontage is measured perpendicular to one or both of the side
lot lines at the ordinary high-water mark.
11.06.106 Building setbacks
(a) Purpose. Setback standards, in conjunction with other dimensional standards, are established to define
a pattern of development in each of the zoning districts. The established setback standards provide for a varying
degree of (1) privacy between neighbors; (2) separation to mitigate noise and odor; (3) space for light and air
circulation; (4) land for landscaping, recreational use, pleasure, and stormwater management; (5) land for
maintaining the exterior of buildings and other structures; (6) room for the placement and maintenance of
underground and above-ground utilities; and (7) room for emergency vehicles between and around buildings
and other structures.
(b) Generally. Except as allowed in this section, buildings shall comply with the setback requirements set
forth in Appendix C. For the purpose of this section, a roof overhang of 24 inches or less shall not be included in
any setback measurement.
(c) Measurement of front-yard setback. The front-yard setback is measured perpendicular from (1) the front
property boundary line, (2) the easement dedicated for public street purposes, (3) 33 feet from the centerline of
3 Commentary: This provision does not apply to a governmental body that acquires land from a willing or unwilling seller when needed for a
public project, such as a street expansion.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
96
the public street if not located within an easement or right-of-way, or (4) the proposed right-of-way as depicted
on a highway width map as may be adopted by Wood County, whichever is furthest from the public street.
(d) Measurement of side-yard and rear-yard setback. The side-yard setback is measured perpendicular to
the side yard property boundary line. The rear-yard setback is measured perpendicular to the rear property
boundary line.
(e) Reduction of side yards on narrow lots. If lot of record has a lot width that is less than what is required,
the side yard setback is reduced proportionately to the ratio between the actual and required widths as more
fully described in Appendix C.
(f) Setback averaging for front-yard setback. In lieu of the minimum front-yard setback specified in
Appendix C, an alternative distance may be used in the more developed areas of the city based on the
averaging of various specified buildings in the immediate area. The resulting setback may be less than or greater
than the specified distance.
In those areas of the city where the majority of principal buildings along a street have less than the required frontyard
setback, the setback for any new building or addition to an existing building is determined by averaging the
setbacks for buildings within 300 feet that are closer than the established setback.
In those areas of the city where the majority of principal buildings along a street have significantly more than the
required front-yard setback, the setback for a new building or an addition to an existing building is determined by
averaging the setbacks for those buildings within 300 feet.
For the purpose of this subsection, the following rules shall apply when applying setback averaging:
(1) Building projections which may extend into the setback area are not to be included.
(2) Setback reductions as allowed by a variance shall not be included.
(3) The required setback shall be used for any vacant lot.
(g) Decks and porches. Decks and porches are considered to be part of the building to which they are
attached, and therefore, must comply with all applicable setback requirements or as allowed in subsection (h)
and (I) below.
(h) Wheelchair access ramps. The building inspector may, upon written petition, allow the construction of
an unenclosed wheelchair access ramp in a setback area, provided the proposed location for the ramp is the
only reasonable location based on the existing configuration of the building and the ramp encroaches into the
offset area no more than is necessary to provide access to the building. Also see Article 21 for additional
provisions relating to reasonable accommodations.
(i) Structures and uses permitted in setback areas. The following may be located in a required setback
area, provided they do not extend into, or are located within, a utility easement or a required fire lane and meet
all other requirements of this chapter:
(1) landscaping;
(2) fences as set forth in Article 15;
(3) freestanding mailboxes and newspaper boxes;
(4) play equipment, except not in a front yard;
(5) small objects easily moved by hand such as birdbaths, birdfeeders, and birdhouses;
(6) portable grills, picnic tables, and yard furniture but not when located on a patio or deck;
(7) gardens;
(8) flag poles,
(9) compost bins;
(10) clotheslines;
(11) retaining walls as set forth in s. 11.07.423;
(12) sidewalks in a development project, but not closer than 5 feet to a parcel in a residential zoning district
or a planned development district that allows residential uses;
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
97
(13) driveways, but not closer than 3 feet
to a side lot line;
(14) boat docks when allowed, but not
closer than 5 feet to a side lot line;
(15) specified building projections and
other features as provided for in
Exhibit 6-4;
(16) wellheads not located in a building
or other structure, provided
separation requirements in state law
are met;
(17) geothermal systems as may be
otherwise allowed by the city; and
(18) other structures and land uses when
exempted by the zoning
administrator, provided such
exemption is in keeping with the
intent of this chapter.
11.06.107 Build-to-line
(a) Generally. Build-to-lines are established in various zoning districts to ensure that buildings are placed
near the street. All such distances are specified in Appendix C.
(b) Measurement of build-to-lines. The build-to-lines are measured perpendicular from (1) the property
boundary line abutting a street right-of-way, (2) the easement dedicated for public street purposes, (3) 33 feet
from the centerline of the public street if not located within an easement or right-of-way, or (4) the proposed rightof-
way as depicted on a highway width map as may be adopted by Wood County, whichever is furthest from
the public street.
11.06.108 Building and structure height
(a) Generally. Except as allowed in this section, the height of a structure shall comply with the standards set
forth in Appendix C.
(b) Measurement of building height. The height of a building is measured from the mean elevation of the
finished grade along the front of the building to the highest point of any of the following roof types: flat, gable,
gambrel, hip, shed, or mansard (Exhibit 6-5).
Exhibit 6-5. Measuring building height
© Civic Webware
(c) Modifications. The height standards in Appendix C are modified as follows:
Exhibit 6-4. Allowable building projections into a required setback area
Feature
Maximum projection
Sills, belt courses, buttresses, cornices,
ornamental features, and the like
8 inches into a required front, side, or
rear yard
Eaves 24 inches into a required front, side, or
rear yard
Chimney 36 inches into a required front, side, or
rear yard
Open or lattice enclosed fire escape,
fireproof outside stairway and
balcony opening upon fire tower
5 feet into a required side or rear yard
Balconies 3 feet into a required front or side yard;
5 feet into a required rear yard
Sunshades and awnings 3 feet into a required front or side yard;
5 feet into a required rear yard
Areaways 4 feet into a required side yard; 5 feet
into a required rear yard
Steps, stoops, decks and porches,
provided they are not higher than
the ground floor elevation of the
building to which they are attached
6 feet into a required front yard; 3 feet
into a required side or rear yard
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
98
(1) Essential services, such as utilities, water towers, and transmission towers and lines, are exempt from the
height limitation for the zoning district in which they are located.
(2) The height of telecommunication towers are governed by the standards established in Appendix B and
the airport height regulations as may be adopted.
(3) Pursuant to the procedures and requirements in Article 5, the Planning Commission may approve a
special exception for spires, steeples, copulas, and chimneys on institutional, commercial, and industrial
buildings.
(4) Pursuant to the procedures and requirements in Article 5, the Planning Commission may approve a
special exception for roof-mounted solar systems.
11.06.109 Building coverage
(a) Generally. Building coverage is a measure of how much of a lot is occupied by buildings. It is the ratio of
the footprint of all buildings on a lot to the net lot area, typically expressed as a percent. Standards for building
coverage are used in conjunction with other standards such as building height to ensure buildings fit the zoning
district in which they are located.
(b) Standards. Development on a lot shall comply with the building coverage standards set forth in
Appendix C. The following shall not be included in determining building coverage: decks, patios, swimming pools,
and any building with a footprint of 120 square feet or less.
(c) Determination of net lot area. For the purpose of this section, the net lot area is determined by
subtracting the following from the gross lot area as may be appropriate:
(1) If the public street is located within a public right-of-way, the area, if any, between the front property
line and the proposed right-of-way as depicted on a highway width map as may be adopted by Wood
County.
(2) If the public street is located within an easement, the area within such easement, and the area, if any,
between such easement line and the proposed right-of-way as depicted on a highway width map as
may be adopted by Wood County.
(3) If the public street is not located within a public right-of-way or an easement, the area extending 33
feet from the centerline of the public street, and the area, if any, between the previously defined area,
and the proposed right-of-way as depicted on a highway width map as may be adopted by Wood
County.
(d) Change in lot, generally. A property owner shall not modify the area of an existing lot by any means so
that the resulting lot does not comply with the building coverage standards set forth in Appendix C.
11.06.110 Impervious coverage
(a) Generally. Impervious coverage is a measure of how much of the lot is not able to absorb stormwater. It
is the ratio of the total of all impervious surfaces to the net lot area, typically expressed as a percent. Standards
are used to control the amount of impervious surface so that stormwater does not cause damage to
infrastructure, buildings, and the natural environment, or endanger public safety.
(b) Standards. Development on a lot shall comply with the maximum impervious surface ratios set forth in
Appendix C. For the purposes of this section, the following features are classified as impervious: concrete, asphalt,
gravel, compacted soil, buildings, decks, and swimming pools.
(c) Determination of net lot area. For the purpose of this section, the net lot area is determined by
subtracting the following from the gross lot area as may be appropriate:
(1) If the public street is located within a public right-of-way, the area, if any, between the front property
line and the proposed right-of-way as depicted on a highway width map as may be adopted by Wood
County.
(2) If the public street is located within an easement, the area within such easement, and the area, if any,
between such easement line and the proposed right-of-way as depicted on a highway width map as
may be adopted by Wood County.
(3) If the public street is not located within a public right-of-way or an easement, the area extending 33
feet from the centerline of the public street, and the area, if any, between the previously defined area,
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
99
and the proposed right-of-way as depicted on a highway width map as may be adopted by Wood
County.
(d) Change in lot, generally. A property owner shall not modify the area of an existing lot by any means so
that the resulting lot does not comply with the impervious surface standards set forth in Appendix C.
11.06.111 Residential floor area
A building intended in whole or part for residential purposes shall provide a minimum floor area as set forth in
Appendix C. The following areas are not counted as floor area for the purpose of this section: basements, attics
not used for living purposes, attached garages, decks, porches, stoops, any space where the floor-to-ceiling
height is less than 6 feet, and similar features.
11.06.112 Floor area of attached garages
The floor area of attached garages shall comply with the standards set forth in Appendix C.
11.06.113 Floor area of detached accessory buildings
The total floor area of detached accessory buildings, whether temporary or permanent, shall comply with the
standards for building coverage set forth in Appendix C.
11.06.114 Number of principal buildings on a lot
(a) Generally. Except as allowed in this section, only one principal building is allowed on a lot. In the
administration of this subsection, a person may not claim that two or more buildings should be counted as one
building by virtue of any of the following:
(1) connection by a breezeway of any length;
(2) connection by a deck;
(3) connection by a porch;
(4) any underground connection of any type;
(5) any connection that is not heated, ventilated, or air conditioned in the same manner of the main
building;
(6) any connection that serves no significant purpose other than a walkway;
(7) any connection that is significantly smaller in dimension than the connected parts; or
(8) any connection that allows motor vehicles to drive through the connection.
The above distinction is intended to require each building to have a single, integrated configuration of enclosed
space and to prohibit the appearance of multiple buildings in excess of established limitations.
(b) Exception for single-family dwelling unit during construction. The Planning Commission may approve the
issuance of a building permit for a single-family dwelling unit on a lot with an existing single-family dwelling unit,
and allow the property owner to occupy the existing unit for a period of time not to exceed 18 months during the
construction of the new dwelling unit.
If approval is granted, the property owner shall provide a financial guarantee to the City pursuant to the
requirements in Article 5 in such amount as approved by the building inspector and the Planning Commission,
and a signed agreement, approved by the city attorney and the zoning administrator. The financial guarantee
shall equal 110 percent of the cost of removing the existing dwelling unit and restoring the site to an acceptable
condition as determined by the building inspector. In setting the amount of the financial guarantee, the property
owner may submit, and the building inspector may require the property owner to submit bids from qualified
contractors for all work related to the removal of the building and restoration of the site. The signed agreement
shall, at a minimum, include the following provisions:
(1) The property owner and his/her family and no other may occupy the existing dwelling unit.
(2) The property owner will remove the existing dwelling unit within 60 days from the issuance of the
occupancy permit for the new dwelling unit.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
100
(3) The City is authorized to access the property to remove the existing dwelling unit if the property owner
fails to do so within 60 days of issuance of an occupancy permit for the new dwelling unit.
(4) The City may assess a special charge against the subject property to the extent the financial guarantee
is insufficient to cover the actual cost of removing the existing dwelling unit and restoring the site to an
acceptable condition as determined by the building inspector.
(c) Exception for duplexes and multi-family dwelling units. The Planning Commission may allow more than
one duplex or multi-family dwelling on a single lot, provided the overall density of such units does not exceed the
density otherwise allowed on individual lots.
(d) Exception for commercial and manufacturing buildings. The Planning Commission may allow more than
one commercial or manufacturing building, when such building is needed for the operation of an existing use that
is allowed by right or has been approved as a conditional use.
(e) Additional standards. When more than one permanent building is allowed on a lot, the Planning
Commission may (1) require a greater setback than what is normally required for the zoning district in which it is
located, (2) require additional landscaping or screening, (3) establish a minimum separation between principal
buildings, and (4) impose any other condition necessary to account for concerns related to the purposes of this
chapter set forth in s. 11.01.05 or in any other section of this chapter.
11.06.115 Number of accessory buildings on a lot
The number of accessory buildings on a lot shall comply with the requirements set forth in Appendix C. In the
administration of this section, a person may not claim that two or more buildings should be counted as one
building by virtue of any of the following:
(1) connection by a breezeway of any length;
(2) connection by a deck;
(3) connection by a porch;
(4) any underground connection of any type;
(5) any connection that is not heated, ventilated, or air conditioned in the same manner of the main
building;
(6) any connection that serves no significant purpose other than a walkway;
(7) any connection that is significantly smaller in dimension than the connected parts; or
(8) any connection that allows motor vehicles to drive through the connection.
The above distinction is intended to require each building to have a single, integrated configuration of enclosed
space and to prohibit the appearance of multiple buildings in excess of established limitations.
11.06.116 Separation requirements for buildings
An accessory building shall be erected or otherwise placed on a lot so that it is at least 10 feet from the principal
building on the lot, without a firewall.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
101
11.06.117 Placement of accessory buildings on a lot
Except as permitted in this section, a detached accessory building must be located at least 5 feet behind the
front face (i.e., face of the building
closest to the street) of the principal
building (Exhibit 6-6). In the case of a
corner lot, the accessory building shall
meet the minimum setback requirements
from all streets. Pursuant to the
procedures and requirements in Article 5,
the Planning Commission may approve a
special exception to allow an accessory
building in front of the principal building.
In making such decision, the Planning
Commission shall consider (1) the size of
the subject property, (2) the character of
the area, (3) the size of the accessory
building, (4) the extent to which the
proposed accessory building is visible
from public and private streets and other
properties in the area, and (5) other
factors related to relevant circumstances.
11.06.118 Placement of parking on a lot
(a) Purpose. The amount of parking
that can be placed in front of the
building (i.e., between the street and the
building) in some commercial zoning
districts is controlled so that buildings
become more prominent along public streets.
(b) Standard. The number of parking spaces placed in front of a building in the B-2 and B-5 zoning districts
shall comply with the requirements set forth in Appendix C. Pursuant to the procedures and requirements in Article
5, the Planning Commission may approve a special exception to allow a greater amount as set forth in Appendix
C. In making such decision, the Planning Commission shall consider (1) the size and configuration of the subject
property, (2) the character of the area, (3) environmental constraints, and (4) other factors related to relevant
circumstances.
Exhibit 6-6. Placement of an accessory building
© Civic Webware | Not to scale
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
102
11.06.119 Vision triangle
(a) Purposes. Vision triangles are
established at the intersection of existing and
proposed streets and alleys to help ensure
that motorists are able to see pedestrians
and cross traffic.
(b) Establishment. A vision triangle is
formed by two lines along the right-of-way
for the distances listed below and a chord
connecting the end of those two lines
(Exhibit 6-7).
(1) 10 feet along an alley
(2) 20 feet along a local street
(3) 40 feet along all other streets (i.e.,
a street not classified as a local
street)
(c) Applicability. This section applies to
all new development, except in the B-1
zoning district. Furthermore, the zoning
administrator may, on a case-by-case basis,
allow a lesser standard in those zoning
districts where reduced or no building
setbacks are encouraged or required.
(d) Requirements of other jurisdictions.
When one or both of the streets at an
intersection are under the control of the
county, state, or federal government,
development shall comply with the
requirements imposed by the jurisdiction with authority. In all cases, the requirement imposing the largest vision
triangle shall control.
(e) Permissible use. The area in a vision triangle shall be kept unobstructed from 2½ feet to 10 feet above
the elevation of the centerline of the intersection, except for traffic signs, public utility poles, single-stem tree trunks
without branches, and similar features as determined by the zoning administrator.
11.06.120 to 11.06.140 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 5
ENVIRONMENTAL AND ENGINEERING
11.06.141 Site restrictions
11.06.142 Building grade
11.06.143 Development within a public right-of-way
11.06.144 Sanitation and water supply
11.06.145 Erosion control
11.06.146 Stormwater management
11.06.147 Noise
11.06.148 Noxious fumes and smoke
11.06.149 Vibrations
11.06.150 Fire and explosions
11.06.151 Traffic impact report
11.06.141 Site restrictions
If the zoning administrator determines that a parcel of land, whether vacant, partially developed, or fully
developed, contains one or more development constraints that would preclude the normal use of the parcel for
Exhibit 6-7. Vision triangle
© Civic Webware | Not to scale
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
103
a use that is otherwise permitted in the zoning district in which it is located, he or she shall render a written
determination that states the best available facts related to the development constraint and other information as
may be appropriate. Examples of development constraints include unfavorable topography, rock formations,
shallow depth to bedrock, unstable or otherwise unsuitable soils, stormwater runoff, inadequate drainage, erosion
susceptibility, high groundwater, or any other constraint that is harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare.
Once such a determination has been made, the zoning administrator, building inspector, or other governmental
official or body shall not issue a development order or other approval authorizing the development in the area
subject to the development constraint. The property owner has the right to appeal such administrative decision
consistent with the procedures and requirements in Article 5. The zoning administrator may reconsider his or her
determination at any time and render a new determination if new or additional facts become known or if the
facts upon which the determination was made are not accurate.
11.06.142 Building grade
The first floor of a building that is erected or otherwise placed on a lot shall be set at a grade approved by the city
building inspector. In establishing the building’s grade, the building inspector should consider the grade of other
buildings in the immediate area, effects on drainage, and safe vehicular access. If the building, in whole or in
part, is located within the 100-year floodplain, the first floor elevation shall comply with requirements set forth in
Article 9.
11.06.143 Development within a public right-of-way
(a) Generally. When a property owner intends to install, reconstruct, or enlarge an awning, canopy,
marquee, or similar feature that extends into a public right-of-way, the property owner must obtain written
authorization of the public entity having jurisdiction over the right-of-way. If such authorization is for a defined
period of time, the city’s approval, if granted, incorporates such time period whether specifically included in the
city’s authorization or not.
(b) Sample encroachment easement. The zoning administrator, in consultation with the city attorney and
others, is authorized to prepare a sample encroachment easement for city rights-of-way and make it available
and post it on the city’s website.
11.06.144 Sanitation and water supply
A land use involving human use or occupancy shall be served by safe and adequate facilities for water supply
and sewage disposal consistent with applicable regulations as may be adopted by the City. (Chapter 5 of the
municipal code)
11.06.145 Erosion control
Any land-disturbing activity authorized by this chapter shall comply with applicable erosion control regulations as
may be adopted by the City. (Chapter 32 of the municipal code)
11.06.146 Stormwater management
Any land-disturbing activity authorized by this chapter shall comply with applicable stormwater management
regulations as may be adopted by the City. (Chapter 35 of the municipal code)
11.06.147 Noise
In addition to any regulations relating to noise in this chapter, all land uses shall comply with the standards for
noise in s. 25.18 of the municipal code.
11.06.148 Noxious fumes and smoke
In addition to any regulations relating to fumes and smoke in this chapter, all land uses shall comply with the
standards in s. 25.10 of the municipal code.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
104
11.06.149 Vibrations
No industrial operation or activity shall cause at any time ground transmitted vibrations in excess of the limits set
forth below. Vibration (the periodic displacement, measured in inches of earth) shall be measured at any point
along the exterior boundary of the industrial park district with a three component measuring instrument approved
by the common council and shall be expressed as displacement in inches.
Frequency
Cycles/Second
Maximum Permitted
Displacement Along Subdivision
Boundaries (in inches)
0 to 10
10 to 20
20 to 30
30 to 40
40 and over
0.0008
0.0005
0.0002
0.0002
11.06.150 Fire and explosions
Any land use involving materials which could decompose by detonation shall be located at least 400 feet from a
property in a residential or commercial zoning district or a planned development district, except that this standard
shall not apply to the storage or usage for normal residential or business purposes. All activities and storage of
flammable and explosive materials at any point shall be provided with adequate safety and fire fighting devices
consistent with all fire prevention codes of the state of Wisconsin.
11.06.151 Traffic impact report
(c) When required. A traffic impact report shall be prepared for a proposed project when the anticipated
number of trips per day of the proposed development at build-out is 500 or more. When the number of trips is 300
or more but less than 500, the city may in its sole discretion require a traffic impact report when circumstances
warrant such review.
(d) Preparation. When a traffic impact report is required, the applicant shall hire an engineer as approved
by the city to prepare the report. The approved engineer shall have expertise in transportation planning.
(e) Trip generation rates. Trip generation rates for various land uses shall be based on the manual entitled
"Trip Generation" (latest edition) published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. Trip generation rates from
other sources may be used if it can be shown that the alternative source better reflects local conditions.
(f) Form and content. The traffic impact report shall be in written form along with supporting maps and
other information as appropriate. At a minimum, the report shall include the following elements:
(1) existing traffic circulation conditions and patterns;
(2) anticipated traffic circulation conditions and patterns, including truck movements;
(3) effects of the project on traffic safety and efficiency;
(4) recommendations/alternatives to alleviate any potential negative effects; and
(5) an executive summary.
11.06.152 to 11.06.180 Reserved
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
105
Sections
DIVISION 6
SITE DESIGN
11.06.181 Legislative findings
11.06.182 Applicability
11.06.183 General site design principles
11.06.184 Specific design principles
11.06.181 Legislative findings
The Common Council makes the following legislative findings regarding the site design requirements in this
chapter:
(1) The design and layout of a site, including principal and accessory buildings, pedestrian routes, parking
areas, access drives, building service areas, docking and loading areas, outdoor lighting, signage,
stormwater management facilities, and other site features, can have a substantial and long-lasting
effect on the utility of the subject property and on surrounding properties and the overall character of a
community.
(2) The requirements in this section are intended to provide meaningful guidance to applicants, design
professionals, and public officials.
(3) The requirements in this section are intended to promote the public health, safety, and welfare and are
reasonably related to the public purpose of achieving an attractive, functional, and prosperous
community.
11.06.182 Applicability
Those land uses designated as requiring site plan review in the land-use matrix (Appendix A) must comply with the
requirements in this division.
11.06.183 General site design principles
Development subject to review under this division shall adhere to the following design principles along with other
requirements that may apply:
(1) A building shall be arranged on the site so as to not impede traffic accessibility and circulation to or
from adjacent streets and adjoining sites developed with similar nonresidential uses.
(2) The front of the building shall be generally parallel to the street or a public area, such as a courtyard,
plaza, or the like.
(3) Cross accesses shall be provided between adjoining commercial parcels whenever it is feasible to do
so.
(4) A docking or loading area for a commercial, institutional, or industrial building shall be easily accessible
to service vehicles, separated from the on-site parking area, and designed to serve multiple
establishments and tenants, when possible. Such docking or loading area shall not be readily visible
from a public street, an on-site customer parking area, or an abutting property in a commercial or
residential district or a planned development district that allows residential uses. Screening from view
may be accomplished by (a) integrating such area into the overall design of the building (e.g., inside of
the building or use of architectural extension of a building wall), (b) using a fence; a berm; landscaping,
above what is otherwise required in this chapter; other suitable feature; or (c) any combination thereof.
(5) Existing natural resources and topographic features on the site shall be preserved to the greatest extent
possible while affording a reasonable use of the property.
(6) The project shall not create any hazard.
(7) The project shall be designed to avoid existing hazards, whether manmade or natural, and if avoidance
is not possible, to mitigate the effects of the hazard to a satisfactory level necessary to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare.
(8) Parking areas and pedestrian routes located on the site shall be designed to promote safety and
efficient traffic flow.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
106
11.06.184 Specific design requirements
In addition to the principles enumerated in this division, projects shall be designed to comply with all other
development standards in this chapter that may apply.
11.06.185 to 11.06.200 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 7
GENERAL ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS
11.06.201 Legislative findings
11.06.202 Applicability
11.06.203 Architectural standards
11.06.204 Additional standards in the Downtown
Design Overlay district
11.06.201 Legislative findings
The Common Council makes the following legislative findings regarding the architectural requirements in this
article:
(1) The outward design appearance of a building can have a substantial and long-lasting effect on
surrounding properties and the overall character of a community.
(2) Buildings and especially those within a largely developed area should fit into the context in which they
occur.
(3) Architectural design standards should allow for a variety architectural styles and be flexible to the
greatest extent possible.
(4) The standards in this section are intended to provide meaningful guidance to applicants, design
professionals, and public officials.
(5) This section is not intended to limit or infringe upon reasonable accommodations to afford a person with
disabilities equal opportunity to use and enjoy a building.
(6) The standards in this section are intended to promote the public health, safety, and welfare and are
reasonably related to the public purpose of achieving an attractive, functional, and prosperous
community.
11.06.202 Applicability
Those land uses designated as requiring architectural review in the land-use matrix (Appendix A) must comply
with the requirements in this division.
11.06.203 Architectural standards
Buildings subject to review under this division shall comply with the following architectural standards:
(1) The scale of the building shall be compatible with the overall massing and the individual parts of
adjacent buildings, especially existing and anticipated residential buildings in a residential zoning district
or a planned development district that allows residential uses.
(2) Windows, doors, and other openings must form a unified composition in proportion to the building
elevation.
(3) On any new building constructed for business or manufacturing use, all building exteriors facing a street
or approved way shall have 50 percent of the street face constructed with brick, decorative masonry,
glass panel, or other appropriate similar finished façade as may be approved by the Planning
Commission. Such brick, masonry, glass, or other decorative facing shall extend for a distance of at least
25 feet along the sides of the structure or at least 25 percent of the that side wall distance, whichever is
greater.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
107
(4) Principal buildings with a front elevation of more than 750 square feet in area shall be divided into
distinct planes of 500 square feet or less. The following design features can be used to meet this
provision (1) canopies or awnings; (2) arcades; (3) porches; (4) vertical wall offsets having a minimum
depth of 8 inches and a minimum width of 10 feet; (5) horizontal offsets having a minimum depth of 2
feet; (6) pilasters having a minimum depth of 8 inches, a minimum width of 12 inches, and a minimum
height of 80 percent of the wall height; (7) recessed areas for entryways and the like having a minimum
depth of 8 inches; and (8) other suitable multidimensional design features.
(5) Oversized fenestration elements which tend to create a monumental scale shall not be used unless
specifically required by the type of building or relationship to its surroundings.
(6) Building entrances must be clearly recognizable from parking lots and pedestrian circulation routes.
(7) The appearance of a side or rear of a commercial or institutional building shall be the same as or similar
to the front of such building when it is readily visible from a public street or an abutting property in a
commercial or residential zoning district or a planned development district that allows commercial
and/or residential uses.
(8) Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be positioned so it is not readily visible from a public street or an
abutting property in a residential zoning district or in a planned development district that allows
residential uses. Rooftop mechanical equipment may be placed in an enclosure or screened from view
provided such enclosure or screening is used as an element of the building’s architecture.
(9) Fencing shall complement the appearance of buildings onsite.
(10) The exterior building materials of an accessory building shall be the same as or similar to those used on
the principal building.
(11) Overhead doors shall not face a public street. The Planning Commission may permit overhead doors to
face a public street, but only when it has made a finding that there is no feasible alternative location for
such doors. Consistent with the requirements in Article 5, the Planning Commission may approve a
special exception to allow an overhead door to face a public street when there is no feasible
alternative.
(12) HVAC (heating, ventilating, air conditioning) equipment shall be screened from view. No HVAC shall
create a noise level of more than 50 decibels as measured on a dB(A) scale at the nearest existing
adjacent residence.
(13) When trash, garbage and recyclable materials are stored out-of-doors, such materials shall be
concealed or suitably screened from public view. When located in a commercial zoning district, the
enclosure must be made of brick, textured concrete masonry units, and/or wood. When located in an
industrial zoning district, the enclosure must be made of brick, textured concrete masonry units, wood,
and/or chain-link with slats.
11.06.204 Additional standards in the downtown design overlay district
Buildings located in the downtown design overlay district must comply with the requirements in Article 14.
The remainder of this page intentionally left blank.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
108
Sections
ARTICLE 7
BUILDING TYPES
11.07.01 Purpose
11.07.02 Applicability
11.07.03 Conflicts with district standards
11.07.04 Standards
11.07.01 Purpose
This article is established to promote the public health, safety, and welfare and is intended to accomplish the
following purposes:
(1) establish minimum requirements necessary to foster a suitable built environment;
(2) ensure compatibility between different land uses and building forms;
(3) encourage building forms that respect their context; and
(4) encourage pedestrian movement by encouraging building forms that present an active face to the
street.
A variety of building forms are defined to identify and establish basic design parameters for those buildings that
may be appropriate in one or more zoning districts. Buildings types that are not included may be allowed if they
meet the intent and other design standards of the zoning district where they would be located.
11.07.02 Applicability
The standards in this article apply to new buildings and to building additions that exceed 50 percent of the
existing gross floor area. Such additions must comply with the design standards to the extent feasible, given the
placement and design of the existing building.
11.07.03 Conflicts with district standards
Where there is a conflict between the standards in this article and any general or specific standards, the latter
standards shall prevail.
11.07.04 Standards
A variety of building forms are defined in this section to establish basic design parameters for those buildings that
may be appropriate in one or more zoning districts. Illustrations are included in Appendix D for the following
building types (which may also correspond to a use type).
? Single-family dwelling
? Two-family dwelling
? Twin home
? Townhouse
? Multi-family
? Institutional
? Commercial
? Work/live
? Industrial
? Parking structure
Buildings types that are not included may be allowed if they meet the intent and other design standards of the
zoning district where they would be located.
The illustrations are general in nature and may not be to scale or depict every applicable requirement.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
109
This page intentionally left blank.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
110
Divisions
ARTICLE 8
ALTERNATIVE DEVELOPMENT OPTIONS
Sections
DIVISION 1
COTTAGE HOUSING
11.08.01 Generally
11.08.02 Legislative findings
11.08.03 Type
11.08.04 Application and review procedures
11.08.05 General design principles
11.08.06 Project parameters Building standards
11.08.07 Open space
11.08.08 Building standards
11.08.09 Architectural standards
11.08.10 Parking and garages
11.08.11 Community buildings
11.08.12 Lot coverage
11.08.13 Screening
11.08.01 Generally
A cottage housing project is a residential development characterized by housing units that front on a common
area and the housing units are comparatively small when compared to typical single-family units. A cottage
housing project must reflect a coherent and high-quality design concept. Exhibit 8-1 depicts an example of a
cottage housing project to show some of the major features.
11.08.02 Legislative findings
The Common Council makes the following legislative findings:
(1) Cottage housing is a new type of housing in Wisconsin Rapids that can fill an unmet housing need.
(2) Cottage housing can provide opportunities for homeownership that may not otherwise exist.
(3) Cottage housing responds to demographic trends occurring locally, in the region, and nationally. These
include a declining household size and more people living alone and longer.
(4) It is not possible to define specific areas in the city where cottage housing should be developed. Rather,
cottage housing is a development option that developers can explore.
(5) Cottage housing will likely have the same, or fewer people than the single-family homes that could be
built on the site.
(6) Given the size restrictions on the housing unit, the bulk of a cottage housing project is similar to the
single-family homes that could be built on the site.
(7) Cottage housing is consistent with the City's comprehensive plan and supports the findings in the
Housing Study completed in 2016.
(8) Rather than codifying all parameters of cottage development, the standards in this article are intended
to provide sufficient guidance without becoming overly prescriptive, with the understanding that the
city and the developer will work together to craft a detailed development plan that meets community
needs and works well with the site and the target market.
1. Cottage housing
2. Traditional neighborhood development
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
111
Exhibit 8-1. Example of a Cottage Housing Project
© Civic Webware | Not to scale
11.08.03 Type
A developer can propose a cottage housing project as a traditional subdivision plat or as a condominium
project.
11.08.04 Application and review procedure
A cottage housing project is reviewed as a planned development district as set forth in Article 6, except as may
be specifically modified in this article.
11.08.05 General design principles
In the design of a cottage housing project the following design principles must be satisfied:
(1) A majority of the dwelling units must abut a common area.
(2) Dwelling units must be oriented in a pattern that is compatible with the development pattern in the
surrounding area.
(3) The project must accommodate emergency vehicles to the satisfaction of the Wisconsin Rapids fire
chief.
(4) The project must include an internal network of pedestrian paths and sidewalks for residents and their
guests. Connections to the surrounding neighborhood should be made where appropriate or required.
(5) Low-impact stormwater techniques should be incorporated into the project to the extent feasible.
11.08.06 Project parameters
(a) Clusters. A cottage housing project may consist of one or two clusters.
(b) Number of units. A cluster of cottage housing must contain at least 4 dwelling units but no more than 12.
(c) Separation between clusters. A cluster of cottage housing must be at least 400 feet from any other
existing or approved cottage housing cluster in the city.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
112
(d) Density. The base density of dwelling units in a cottage housing project is based on the density and/or
minimum lot size of the underlying zoning district and the size of the dwelling units to be constructed as set forth in
Table 8-1. The City Council, upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, may allow a greater density
when the project exemplifies exceptional design characteristics and
integration with the character of the area.
(e) Minimum lot size. Beyond the density restrictions listed in this
section, there is no minimum lot size for lots created through the land
division process.
11.08.07 Open space
(a) Intent. Open space is an integral feature of a cottage housing
project and is intended to be the focal point throughout the design
process. In other words, adding open space here and there as an
afterthought is not acceptable.
(b) Requirements. A minimum of 450 square feet of open space must
be provided for each dwelling unit in the project, but not less than 2,800
square feet regardless of the number of dwelling units. Such open space
must be useable for active or passive recreational activities and therefore
shall not include stormwater basins, wetlands, steep slopes, or other similar
areas.
(c) Placement. Open space should be centrally located to the benefit of the units in the project. As a
general rule, each dwelling unit must face the open space on one side, but preferably two sides.
(d) Improvements. Common open space shall be improved for passive and/or active recreational use and
may include patios, lawns, gardens, landscaping, outdoor gathering areas, pedestrian paths, common barbeque
facilities, and similar features.
11.08.08 Building standards
(a) Floor area. The floor area of dwelling units is controlled by the density calculations established in s.
11.08.06. The minimum floor area of a dwelling unit is 650 square feet and the maximum floor area is 1,500 square
feet. As a requirement of project approval, the developer shall record a deed restriction against each dwelling
unit indicating that the size of the dwelling unit may not be increased after initial construction and that any
vaulted space within a dwelling unit may not be converted into habitable space.
(b) Entries and porches. Each dwelling unit must include a covered porch fronting on the common area.
The porch must have a minimum floor area of 80 square feet and not be less than 6 feet in width.
(c) No-step entry. To the extent possible, at least one entrance to a dwelling unit should be at grade (e.g.,
a no-step entry).
(d) Exterior storage area. Each dwelling unit must include a storage area, with a floor area of at least 10
square feet that is accessible from the exterior.
(e) Maximum building height. The maximum height of buildings is 18 feet if the roof pitch is less than 6:12
and 25 feet if the roof pitch is 6:12 or greater.
(f) Minimum building separation. Dwelling units shall maintain a minimum separation of 10 feet.
11.08.09 Architectural standards
(a) Adoption of standards. The developer must prepare a set of detailed architectural standards for all
buildings within the project, including dwelling units, community buildings, and garages. Such standards must
address exterior building materials, roof pitch, window style, articulation, and any other feature required by the
Planning Commission. The standards must include a series of renderings depicting the architectural character of
the buildings in the project.
(b) Enforcement of standards. The developer shall establish a mechanism, as approved by the Planning
Commission, to ensure all buildings in the cottage housing project comply with the approved architectural
standards adopted by the developer.
Exhibit 8-1. Housing Density
Size of Dwelling Unit
(square feet)
Housing Units
Allowed in Place
of Each Single-
Family Home
Allowed by Zone
650 to 1,000 1.75
1,001 to 1,200 1.5
1,201 to 1,500 1.25
Note: The total number of housing units allowed is
calculated and rounded up to the next whole
number if the calculated number is 0.5 or higher
and rounded down if it is less than 0.5. For example,
if the calculated number of housing units is 5.75, the
maximum number of units is 6.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
113
11.08.10 Parking and garages
(a) Parking requirements. Parking requirements are based on the size
of the housing units in the project as set forth in Table 8-2.
(b) Garages. Attached garages should front on an alley or on a
public street where possible; fronting a public street may be considered if
alleys are deemed inappropriate. Each dwelling shall have no more than
one detached garage with a maximum floor area of 250 square feet.
Garages may be combined into a shared garage structure, consisting of no
more than 4 garages and no more than 1,000 square feet. Storage of items
which preclude the parking of a vehicle in a garage is prohibited. Carports
are not permitted in a cottage housing project.
(c) Surface parking. Surface parking must be provided for residents
and guests in clusters of not more than 5 adjoining spaces. Clusters must be separated by at least 20 feet.
Individual parking spaces may be located behind the principal structure when served by an alley. If the city
allows on-street parking on streets abutting the project, such parking may satisfy surface parking requirements as
determined by the Planning Commission.
11.08.11 Community buildings
(a) Generally. A cottage housing project may contain one or more community buildings that are for the
exclusive use of the residents and their guests. Such buildings must not be habitated in any manner and must be
clearly incidental in use or size and related to the dwelling units in the project.
(b) Maximum area. The maximum area of any community buildings within a project shall not exceed an
aggregate total of 2,500 square feet.
(c) Ownership. Any community building in a cottage housing project shall be commonly owned and
maintained by the residents.
(d) Design. The roof pitch, architectural themes, exterior materials, and colors of any community building
shall be consistent with the architectural standards established by the developer.
(e) Obligation to construct. If the developer is proposing to construct one or more community buildings as
part of the project, the developer shall provide assurances to the satisfaction of the municipal attorney
guaranteeing satisfactory completion of such buildings within the timeframe established in the approval.
11.08.12 Lot coverage
Impervious surfaces within the project site shall not exceed 60 percent. Patios, pedestrian walks, and other similar
surfaces that are an integral part of the open space areas shall not be counted in lot coverage calculations.
11.08.13 Screening
Screening must be provided around the perimeter of a cottage housing project to the extent deemed
appropriate by the Planning Commission to ensure the project fits in with the character of the area.
11.08.14 to 11.08.30 Reserved
Exhibit 8-2. Parking Requirements
Size of Dwelling Unit
(square feet)
Parking Spaces
1,000 or less 1.5
More than 1,000 2.0
Notes: When the calculated number of total
required parking spaces results in a fraction, the
number is rounded up to the next whole number.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
114
Sections
DIVISION 2
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT
11.08.31 Generally
A traditional neighborhood development is a compact, mixed-use neighborhood where residential, commercial
and civic buildings are within close proximity to each other.
11.08.32 Legislative findings
The Common Council makes the following legislative findings:
(1) The state legislature required cities and villages with a population of at least 12,500 to adopt zoning
regulations for traditional neighborhood development that are similar to the model ordinance
developed by the University of Wisconsin System.
(2) The City of Wisconsin Rapids adopted such regulations in March of 2011 in compliance with state law.
11.08.33 Application and review procedure
A traditional neighborhood development project is reviewed as a planned development district as set forth in
Article 5.
11.08.34 Standards
The model ordinance for traditional neighborhood development published by the University of Wisconsin
Extension pursuant to s. 66.1027(2), Wis. Stats., will serve as a nonexclusive guide to assist in defining various
aspects of this form of urban design along with such other sources of guidance that the Planning Commission and
Common Council may choose to consult.
Generally
Legislative findings
Application and review procedures
Standards
11.08.31
11.08.32
11.08.33
11.08.34
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
115
This page intentionally left blank.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
116
Divisions
ARTICLE 9
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
Sections
DIVISION 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
11.09.01 Authorization
11.09.02 Legislative findings
11.09.03 Purpose
11.09.04 Areas to be regulated
11.09.05 Municipalities and state agencies
regulated
11.09.01 Authorization
This article is adopted under authority granted by s. 62.23, Wis. Stats., and the requirements in s. 87.30, Wis. Stats.
11.09.02 Legislative findings
The Common Council makes the following legislative findings:
(1) Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers in the city would impair the public
health, safety, convenience, general welfare, and tax base.
(2) The requirements in this chapter relating to floodplain use and development are intended to comply
with the minimum regulatory standards required in ch. NR 116, Wis. Admin. Code and s. 44 CFR 59-72
which relates to the National Flood Insurance Program.
11.09.03 Purpose
This article promotes the public health, safety, and welfare and is intended to regulate floodplain development
to:
(1) protect life, health and property;
(2) minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects;
(3) minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the taxpayers;
(4) minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
(5) minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
(6) minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain;
(7) discourage the victimization of unwary land and homebuyers;
(8) prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in conflicts between
property owners; and
1. General provisions
2. Maps and districts
3. General provisions applicable to all floodplain districts
4. Floodway district
5. Reserved
6. Floodfringe district
7. General floodplain district
8. Administration
9. Nonconformities
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
117
(9) discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate the activity, use
or structure outside of the floodplain.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
118
11.09.04 Areas to be regulated
(a) Generally. This article regulates all areas within Wisconsin Rapids that would be covered by the regional
flood or base flood as shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or other maps approved by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources. Base flood elevations (BFEs) are derived from the flood profiles in the flood
insurance study (FIS) and are shown as AE, A1-30, and AH Zones on the flood insurance rate maps. Other
regulatory zones are displayed as A and AO zones. Regional flood elevations (RFEs) may be derived from other
studies. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply.
(b) Annexed areas. The Wood County floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall
remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all annexed areas until the City adopts and
enforces an ordinance which meets the requirements of ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code and 44 CFR 59-72, National
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed lands are described on the municipality's official zoning map.
County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this section
and are on file in the office of the municipal zoning administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall show the
regional flood elevation and the floodway location.
11.09.05 Municipalities and state agencies regulated
Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this article
and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if s. 13.48(13), Wis. Stats., applies. The
construction, reconstruction, maintenance, and repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation are exempt when s. 30.2022, Wis. Stats., applies.
11.09.06 to 11.09.20 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 2
MAPS AND DISTRICTS
11.09.21 Official floodplain maps
11.09.22 Establishment of floodplain zoning
districts
11.09.23 Locating floodplain boundaries
11.09.24 Removal of lands from floodplain
11.09.21 Official floodplain maps
(a) Generally. The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30 on the
maps based on the flood insurance study listed below. Any change to the base flood elevations or any change
to the boundaries of the floodplain or floodway in the flood insurance study or on the flood insurance rate map
must be reviewed and approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency through the letter of map change process (see s. 11.09.142) before it is effective. No
changes to regional flood elevations on non-FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources. These maps and revisions are on file in the office of the zoning administrator. If
more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply.
(b) Official floodplain maps. The following are adopted for the purpose of this article:
(1) Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) panel numbers: 55141C0386G, 55141C0387G, 55141C0388G,
55141C0389G, 55141C0391G, 55141C0392G, 55141C0395G, 55141C0526G, 55141C0527G, and
55141C0531G dated February 17, 2010; with corresponding profiles that are based on the flood
insurance study (FIS) dated February 17, 2010, Volume number 55141CV000A
(2) If land is annexed and is not included in any of the above-mentioned flood insurance rate map panels,
such panel is included in this chapter upon the date of annexation.
11.09.22 Establishment of floodplain zoning districts
The floodplain overlay district is divided into three districts as follows:
(1) The Floodway District includes the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain
adjoining the channel required to carry the regional floodwaters and are contained within AE Zones as
shown on the flood insurance rate maps.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
119
(2) The Floodfringe District includes that portion between the regional flood limits and the floodway and
displayed as AE Zones on the flood insurance rate maps.
(3) The General Floodplain District includes those areas that may be covered by floodwater during the
regional flood and does not have a base flood elevation or floodway boundary determined, including
A, AH, and AO zones on the flood insurance rate maps.
11.09.23 Locating floodplain boundaries
(a) Generally. Discrepancies between boundaries on the official floodplain zoning map and actual field
conditions shall be resolved using the criteria in this section. If a significant difference exists, the map shall be
amended according to s. 11.09.142. The zoning administrator can rely on a boundary derived from a profile
elevation to grant or deny a land use permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The zoning
administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual pre-development field conditions and the basis upon
which the district boundary was determined and for initiating any map amendments required under this section.
(b) Criteria. If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall determine the district
boundary. Regional flood elevations or base flood elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies. If flood
profiles do not exist, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the map scale.
(c) Disputes. If an applicant does not agree with the boundary determination made by the zoning
administrator, he or she shall file an administrative appeal as provided for in Article 5. If the Zoning Board of
Appeals determines, based on the criteria in this section, that the boundary location is incorrectly mapped, the
board should inform the Planning Commission or the person contesting the boundary location to submit an
application for a map amendment pursuant to the requirements and procedures in s. 11.09.142.
11.09.24 Removal of lands from floodplain
Compliance with the provisions of this division shall not be grounds for removing land from the floodplain unless (1)
it is filled at least 2 feet above the regional flood elevation or base flood elevation, (2) the fill is contiguous to land
outside of the floodplain, and (3) the map is amended pursuant to s. 11.09.142.
11.09.25 to 11.09.40 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS
11.09.41 General standards
11.09.42 Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses
11.09.43 Watercourse alterations
11.09.44 Docks, piers, wharves, bridges, and similar
structures
11.09.45 Floodproofing standards
11.09.46 Public or private campgrounds
11.09.41 General standards
The zoning administrator shall review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be
reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of
the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with flood-resistant materials; be
constructed to minimize flood damages and to ensure that utility and mechanical equipment is designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the equipment during conditions of flooding.
Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above standards. All subdivision proposals (including
manufactured home parks) shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data for any development that
meets the subdivision definition of this chapter and all other requirements in s. 11.09.143. Adequate drainage shall
be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
120
11.09.42 Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses
No floodplain development shall obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance of
floodwaters by itself or with other development, causing any increase in the regional flood height; or cause any
increase in the regional flood height due to floodplain storage area lost. The zoning administrator shall deny
permits if it is determined the proposed development will obstruct flow or cause any increase in the regional flood
height, based on the officially adopted flood insurance rate map or other adopted map.
11.09.43 Watercourse alterations
No floodplain permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain shall be issued until the zoning
administrator has notified in writing all adjacent municipalities, the regional office of the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources and the regional office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and required the
applicant to secure all necessary state and federal permits. The standards in s. 11.09.42 must be met and the
flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
As soon as is practicable, but not later than 6 months after the date of the watercourse alteration or relocation
and pursuant to s. 11.09.142, the city shall apply for a letter of map revision (LOMR) from the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources through the letter of map correction
(LOMC) process.
11.09.44 Docks, piers, wharves, bridges, and similar structures
Any development that requires a permit from the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under chs. 30 and
31, Wis. Stats., such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams, and navigational aids, may be allowed if the
necessary permits are obtained and amendments to the floodplain zoning regulations are made according to s.
11.09.142.
11.09.45 Floodproofing standards
(a) No permit or variance shall be issued for a nonresidential structure designed to be watertight below the
regional flood elevation until the applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure or development to the flood protection
elevation and submits a FEMA floodproofing certificate.
(b) For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no permit or variance shall be issued until the
applicant submits a plan prepared by a certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or that meets
or exceeds the following standards:
(1) a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
(2) the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and
(3) openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that
they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(c) Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to (1) withstand flood pressures, depths,
velocities, uplift and impact forces, and other regional flood factors; (2) protect structures to the flood protection
elevation; (3) anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral movement; (4) minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters; and (5) minimize or eliminate discharges into flood waters.
11.09.46 Public or private campgrounds
Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the following provisions:
(1) The campground is approved by the Wisconsin Department of Health Services;
(2) A land use permit for the campground is issued by the zoning administrator;
(3) The character of the river system and the campground elevation are such that a 72-hour warning of an
impending flood can be given to all campground occupants;
(4) There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that offers the minimum notice
required under this section to all persons in the campground. This procedure shall include a written
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
121
agreement between the campground owner, the municipal emergency government coordinator and
the chief law enforcement official which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur,
personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems to be used and the
procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for conducting the
evacuation;
(5) This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which time the agreement shall be
reviewed and updated - by the officials identified in subsection (4) above - to remain in compliance
with all applicable regulations, including those of the Wisconsin Department of Health Services and all
other applicable regulations;
(6) Only camping units that are fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway use are allowed;
(7) The camping units shall not occupy any site in the campground for more than 180 consecutive days, at
which time the camping unit must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours;
(8) All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be issued a limited authorization by the
campground operator, a written copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such authorization
shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period not to exceed 180 days and shall ensure
compliance with all the provisions of this section;
(9) The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the campground operator to assure
compliance with the terms of this section;
(10) All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive days must meet the applicable
requirements in either Division 4, 6, or 7 for the floodplain district in which the structure is located;
(11) The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances warning of the flood hazard and the
procedures for evacuation when a flood warning is issued; and
(12) All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse collection, electrical service, gas lines, propane
tanks, sewage systems and wells shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to the
flood protection elevation.
11.09.47 to 11.09.60 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 4
FLOODWAY DISTRICT
11.09.61 Applicability
11.09.62 Permitted uses
11.09.63 Development standards
11.09.64 Prohibited uses
11.09.61 Applicability
This division applies to all floodway areas on the floodplain zoning maps and those delineated pursuant to s.
11.09.124.
11.09.62 Permitted uses
The following open space uses are allowed in the floodway district and the floodway areas of the general
floodplain district if they are not prohibited in the underlying zoning district, meet the development standards in
this division; and the zoning administrator has issued a floodplain permit:
(1) Agricultural uses, such as farming, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, and wild crop
harvesting.
(2) Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking areas, and airport landing
strips.
(3) Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat
ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting, trap
and skeet activities, hunting and fishing areas, and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill
limitations of s. 11.09.63(d).
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
122
(4) Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as historic structures that comply with ss.
11.09.63 and 11.09.64.
(5) Extraction of sand, gravel, or other materials that comply with s. 11.09.63(d).
(6) Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts,
navigational aids and river crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with chs. 30 and 31,
Wis. Stats.
(7) Public utilities, streets, and bridges that comply with s. 11.09.63(c).
11.09.63 Development standards
(a) General standards. Development shall have a low flood damage potential and shall not cause an
obstruction or raise the flood elevations upstream and downstream as more fully described in s. 11.09.41. An
applicant shall provide the following data to determine the effects of the proposal according to s. 11.09.42:
(1) A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular to the watercourse, showing if the
proposed development will obstruct flow; or
(2) An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional flood height.
(b) Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or functionally dependent on a
waterfront location may be allowed by permit if the structures comply with the following criteria:
(1) Not designed for human habitation, does not have a high flood damage potential and is constructed
to minimize flood damage;
(2) Shall have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total net area not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area, and the bottom of all such openings being no
higher than one foot above grade. The openings shall be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(3) Must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement;
(4) Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or flood proofed to or above the flood protection
elevation; and
(5) It must not obstruct flow of flood waters or cause any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of
the regional flood.
(c) Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and bridges may be allowed by permit, if
adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood protection elevation, and construction meets the
development standards of s. 11.09.42.
(d) Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may be allowed by permit, if (1) the
requirements of s. 11.09.42 are met; (2) no material is deposited in navigable waters unless a permit is issued by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources pursuant to ch. 30, Wis. Stats., and a permit pursuant to s. 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344 has been issued, if applicable, and all
other requirements have been met; (3) the fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap,
vegetative cover, sheet piling, or bulkheading; and (4) the fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
11.09.64 Prohibited uses
Any use that is not listed in s. 11.09.62 is prohibited, including the following uses:
(1) Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those not associated with
permanent open space uses;
(2) Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to property, water quality, or human,
animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life;
(3) Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining districts;
(4) Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are removed prior to flooding and
systems associated with recreational areas and Department-approved campgrounds that meet the
applicable provisions of local ordinances and ch. SPS 383, Wis. Admin. Code;
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
123
(5) Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water, except those for recreational areas
that meet the requirements of local ordinances and chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Admin. Code;
(6) Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
(7) Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under s. NR 110.15(3)(b), Wis.
Admin. Code; and
(8) Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or proposed development
located outside the floodway which complies with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied.
11.09.65 to 11.09.80 Reserved
11.09.81 to 11.09.100
DIVISION 5
RESERVED
Sections
DIVISION 6
FLOODFRINGE DISTRICT
11.09.101 Applicability
11.09.102 Permitted uses
11.09.103 Development standards
11.09.104 Solid waste disposal
11.09.101 Applicability
This division applies to all floodfringe areas shown on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to
s. 11.09.124.
11.09.102 Permitted uses
Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in the floodfringe district if the standards in s. 11.09.103 are met,
the use is not prohibited by the underlying zoning regulations, and the zoning administrator has issued a floodplain
permit.
11.09.103 Development standards
(a) General standards. Development shall not cause an obstruction or raise the flood elevations upstream
or downstream as more fully described in s. 11.09.42.
(b) Residential structures. Any structure, including a manufactured home, which is to be newly constructed
or moved into the floodfringe, shall meet or exceed the following standards.
(1) The elevation of the lowest floor shall be at or above the flood protection elevation on fill unless the
requirements of s. 11.09.103(b)(2) can be met. The fill shall be one foot or more above the regional flood
elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure.
(2) The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood elevation if it is dry floodproofed
to the flood protection elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood
elevation.
(3) Contiguous dryland access shall be provided from a structure to land outside of the floodplain, except
that in developments where existing street or sewer line elevations make compliance impractical, the
zoning administrator may permit new development and substantial improvements where streets are
below the regional flood elevation, if the municipality has written assurance from police, fire and
emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided to the structure(s) by wheeled vehicles
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
124
during a regional flood event; or the municipality has an emergency evacuation plan as approved by
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(c) Accessory structures or uses. Accessory structures shall be constructed on fill with the lowest floor at or
above the regional flood elevation.
(d) Commercial structures. Any commercial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the
floodfringe shall meet the requirements of s. 11.09.103(b). Subject to the requirements of s. 11.09.103(f), storage
yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system
exists to protect life and property.
(e) Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or industrial structure which is erected, altered or
moved into the floodfringe shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the flood protection elevation or
meet the floodproofing standards in s. 11.09.45. Subject to the requirements of s. 11.09.103(f), storage yards,
surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists
to protect life and property.
(f) Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to property, water
quality or human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood protection elevation or
floodproofed in compliance with s. 11.09.45. Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials will
not enter the water body during flooding.
(g) Public utilities, streets and bridges. Utilities, streets, and bridges shall be designed to be compatible with
comprehensive floodplain development plans. When failure of public utilities, streets, and bridges would
endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed essential, construction or repair of such
facilities shall only be permitted if they are designed to comply with s. 11.09.45. Minor streets or non-essential
utilities may be constructed at lower elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the regional flood
elevation.
(h) Sewage systems. Sewage disposal systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
water into the system, pursuant to s. 11.09.45(c), to the flood protection elevation and meet the provisions of all
local ordinances and ch. SPS 383, Wis. Admin. Code.
(i) Wells. Wells shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system,
pursuant to s. 11.09.45(c), to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of chs. NR 811 and NR
812, Wis. Admin. Code.
(j) Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the provisions of this article.
(k) Manufactured homes. Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
provide adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage, and prepare, secure approval and file an
evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and escape routes, with local emergency management authorities.
In an existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement homes on existing pads, and substantially
improved homes shall have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation and be anchored so they
do not float, collapse or move laterally during a flood. Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including
new manufactured home parks and all single units outside of existing parks, all new, replacement and
substantially improved manufactured homes shall meet the residential development standards for the floodfringe
in s. 11.09.103(b).
(l) Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that are on site for 180 consecutive days
or more or are not fully licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and anchoring requirements
in s. 11.09.103(k). A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
11.09.104 Solid waste disposal
Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in floodfringe areas.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
125
11.09.105 to 11.09.120 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 7
GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
11.09.121 Applicability
11.09.122 Permitted uses
11.09.123 Development standards
11.09.124 Determining the extent of the floodway
and floodfringe
11.09.121 Applicability
This division applies to those floodplains mapped as A, AO, or AH zones.
11.09.122 Permitted uses
Pursuant to s. 11.09.124, it shall be determined whether the proposed use is located within the floodway or
floodfringe. Those uses listed in s. 11.09.62 are permitted in the floodway and those uses listed in s. 11.09.102 are
allowed in the floodfringe within the general floodplain district, according to the standards of s. 11.09.123,
provided the zoning administrator has issued a floodplain permit consistent with this division.
11.09.123 Development standards
(a) The development standards in Division 4 apply to floodway areas and the standards in Division 6 apply
to floodfringe areas. The rest of this article applies to either district.
(b) In AO and AH zones the structure’s lowest floor must meet one of the conditions listed below whichever
is higher:
(1) at or above the flood protection elevation; or
(2) 2 feet above the highest adjacent grade around the structure; or
(3) the depth as shown on the flood insurance rate map.
(c) In AO and AH zones, provide plans showing adequate drainage paths to guide floodwaters around
structures.
11.09.124 Determining the extent of the floodway and floodfringe
(a) Request for determination. Upon receiving an application for development within the general floodplain
district, the zoning administrator shall require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a plan
which shows the proposed development with respect to the general floodplain district limits, stream channel, and
existing floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the property, fill limits and elevations, building
floor elevations and flood proofing measures; and the flood zone as shown on the flood insurance rate map and
require the applicant to furnish any of the following information deemed necessary by the Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood
elevation and to determine floodway boundaries:
(1) A hydrologic and hydraulic study as specified in s. 11.09.143.
(2) Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage
elevations; size, location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and
elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information; and
(3) Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel
improvement, storage, water supply and sanitary facilities.
(b) Determination. The extent of the floodway and floodfringe shall be as determined by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
126
11.09.125 to 11.09.140 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 8
ADMINISTRATION
11.09.141 Certificate of compliance
11.09.142 Amendments
11.09.143 Hydraulic and hydrologic studies
11.09.144 Record of nonconforming uses and
structures
11.09.145 Public information
11.09.141 Certificate of compliance
No land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified,
repaired, rebuilt, or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning
administrator, except where no permit is required, subject to the following:
(1) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof, and the proposed
use, conform to the provisions of this ordinance;
(2) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a permit;
(3) If all ordinance provisions are met, the certificate of compliance shall be issued within 10 days after
written notification that the permitted work is completed;
(4) The applicant shall submit a certificate signed by a registered professional engineer, architect, or land
surveyor that the fill, lowest floor, and floodproofing elevations are in compliance with the permit issued.
(5) If the project involves floodproofing measures, the applicant shall submit a certificate signed by a
registered professional engineer or architect stating that the requirements of s. 11.09.45 are met.
11.09.142 Amendments
(a) Obstructions or increases. Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments are made to
this chapter, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines, and water surface profiles consistent with this
section.
In AE Zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases shall be permitted unless the applicant
receives a conditional letter of map revision from the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
amendments are made to this chapter, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines, and water surface
profiles, consistent with this section. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
In A Zones increases equal to or greater than 1.0 foot may only be permitted if the applicant receives a
conditional letter of map revision from the Federal Emergency Management Agency and amendments are
made to this chapter, the official floodplain maps, floodway lines, and water surface profiles, consistent with this
section.
(b) Generally. The Common Council may change the floodplain overlay district boundaries and the text of
this article pursuant to the requirements and procedures in Article 5. Actions requiring an amendment include, but
are not limited to, the following:
(1) Any fill or floodway encroachment that obstructs flow causing any increase in the regional flood height;
(2) Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse alterations on the flood insurance rate
map;
(3) Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain maps listed in s. 11.09.22;
(4) Any floodplain fill which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height at or above the flood
protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain;
(5) Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and floodplain maps;
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
127
(6) Any upgrade to floodplain zoning regulations required by s. NR 116.05, Wis. Admin. Code, or otherwise
required by law, or for changes by the municipality; and
(7) All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines or to remove an area from the
floodway or the floodfringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a flood insurance rate map
requires prior approval by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(c) Flood easements. A person petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow causing any increase
in the regional flood height, shall obtain flooding easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from all
adversely affected property owners and notify local units of government before the amendment can be
approved by the governing body.
11.09.143 Hydraulic and hydrologic studies
(a) Generally. All hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be completed under the direct supervision of a
professional engineer registered in the state of Wisconsin. The study contractor shall be responsible for the
technical adequacy of the study. All studies shall be reviewed and approved by the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources.
(b) Zone A floodplains. For projects located in a Zone A floodplain, the following provisions apply:
(1) Hydrology. The appropriate method shall be based on the standards in s. NR 116.07(3), Wis. Admin.
Code, entitled Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Discharge.
(2) Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall be based on the standards in s. NR 116.07(4), Wis.
Admin. Code, entitled Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Elevation and the following:
(i) Determination of the required limits of the hydraulic model shall be based on detailed study
information for downstream structures (dam, bridge, culvert) to determine adequate starting WSEL
for the study.
(ii) Chanel sections must be surveyed.
(iii) Minimum 4-foot contour data in the overbanks shall be used for the development of cross section
overbank and floodplain mapping.
(iv) A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross sections is allowed in developed areas with
additional intermediate cross sections required at transitions in channel bottom slope including a
survey of the channel at each location.
(v) The most current version of HEC-RAS shall be used.
(vi) A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the top of street is required at each structure.
(vii) Additional cross sections are required at the downstream and upstream limits of the proposed
development and any necessary intermediate locations based on the length of the reach if
greater than 500 feet.
(viii) Standard accepted engineering practices shall be used when assigning parameters for the base
model such as flow, Manning’s N values, expansion and contraction coefficients or effective flow
limits. The base model shall be calibrated to past flooding data such as high water marks to
determine the reasonableness of the model results. If no historical data is available, adequate
justification shall be provided for any parameters outside standard accepted engineering
practices.
(ix) The model must extend past the upstream limit of the difference in the existing and proposed flood
profiles in order to provide a tie-in to existing studies. The height difference between the proposed
flood profile and the existing study profiles shall be no more than 0.00 feet.
(3) Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be provided, showing all cross section locations,
floodway/floodplain limits based on best available topographic data, geographic limits of the
proposed development and whether the proposed development is located in the floodway.
(i) If the proposed development is located outside of the floodway, then it is determined to have no
impact on the regional flood elevation.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
128
(ii) If any part of the proposed development is in the floodway, it must be added to the base model to
show the difference between existing and proposed conditions. The study must ensure that all
coefficients remain the same as in the existing model, unless adequate justification based on
standard accepted engineering practices is provided.
(c) Zone AE Floodplains. For projects located in a Zone AE floodplain, the following provisions apply:
(1) Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the existing study, the appropriate method to be used
shall be based on s. NR 116.07(3), Wis. Admin. Code, entitled Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of
Regional Flood Discharge.
(2) Hydraulic model. The regional flood elevation shall be based on the standards in s. NR 116.07(4), Wis.
Admin. Code, entitled Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Elevation and the following:
(i) Duplicate Effective Model. The effective model shall be reproduced to ensure correct transference
of the model data and to allow integration of the revised data to provide a continuous flood
insurance study model upstream and downstream of the revised reach. If data from the effective
model is available, models shall be generated that duplicate the flood insurance study profiles and
the elevations shown in the floodway data table in the flood insurance study report to within 0.1
foot.
(ii) Corrected Effective Model. The Corrected Effective Model shall not include any man-made
physical changes since the effective model date, but shall import the model into the most current
version of HEC-RAS for Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources review.
(iii) Existing (Pre-Project Conditions) Model. The Existing Model shall be required to support conclusions
about the actual impacts of the project associated with the Revised (Post-Project) Model or to
establish more up-to-date models on which to base the Revised (Post-Project) Model.
(iv) Revised (Post-Project Conditions) Model. The Revised (Post-Project Conditions) Model shall
incorporate the Existing Model and any proposed changes to the topography caused by the
proposed development. This model shall reflect proposed conditions.
(v) All changes to the Duplicate Effective Model and subsequent models must be supported by
certified topographic information, bridge plans, construction plans, and survey notes.
(vi) Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited to the stream reach for which the revision is being
requested. Cross sections upstream and downstream of the revised reach shall be identical to
those in the effective model and result in water surface elevations and topwidths computed by the
revised models matching those in the effective models upstream and downstream of the revised
reach as required. The Effective Model shall not be truncated.
(3) Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall be submitted to the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources for review which meet the following conditions:
(i) Consistency between the revised hydraulic models, the revised floodplain and floodway
delineations, the revised flood profiles, topographic work map, annotated FIRMs and/or flood
boundary floodway maps, construction plans, bridge plans.
(ii) Certified topographic map of suitable scale, contour interval, and a planimetric map showing the
applicable items. If a digital version of the map is available, it may be submitted in order that the
flood insurance rate map may be more easily revised.
(iii) Annotated flood insurance rate map panel showing the revised 1 percent and 0.2 percent annual
chance floodplains and floodway boundaries.
(iv) If an annotated flood insurance rate map and/or flood boundary floodway maps and digital
mapping data (GIS or CADD) are used then all supporting documentation or metadata must be
included with the data submission along with the Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) projection
and State Plane Coordinate System consistent with mapping specifications established by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(v) The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into the effective floodplain boundaries.
(vi) All cross sections from the effective model shall be labeled in accordance with the effective map
and a cross section lookup table shall be included to relate to the model input numbering scheme.
(vii) Both the current and proposed floodways shall be shown on the map.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
129
(viii) The stream centerline, or profile baseline used to measure stream distances in the model shall be
visible on the map.
11.09.144 Record of nonconforming uses and structures
(a) Nonconforming uses. The zoning administrator shall maintain a list of those properties that contain a
nonconforming use.
(b) Nonconforming structures. The zoning administrator shall maintain a list of those properties that have a
nonconforming structure. For every such structure, the following information shall be recorded:
(1) present assessed value,
(2) cost of all modifications or additions which have been permitted, and
(3) percentage of the structure's total current value those modifications represent.
11.09.145 Public information
(a) The zoning administrator shall place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the
regional flood.
(b) All maps, engineering data, and regulations shall be available and widely distributed.
(c) Real estate transfers should show what floodplain district any real property is in.
11.09.146 to 11.09.150 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 9
NONCONFORMITIES
11.09.151 General
(a) Generally. As used in this division, the words "modification" and "addition" include, but are not limited to,
any alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding, or replacement of any such existing use,
structure or accessory structure or use. Maintenance is not considered a modification; this includes painting,
decorating, paneling, and other nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of
existing private sewage or water supply systems or connections to public utilities. Any costs associated with the
repair of a damaged structure are not considered maintenance.
The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a
principal structure is not an extension, modification, or addition. The roof of the structure may extend over a
portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and egress to the principal structure.
(b) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive
months, it is no longer permitted and any future use of the property, and any structure or building thereon, shall
conform to the applicable requirements of this chapter.
(c) The municipality shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures,
their present assessed value, the cost of all modifications or additions which have been permitted, and the
percentage of the structure's total current value those modifications represent.
(d) No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use,
which over the life of the structure would equal or exceed 50 percent of its present assessed value, shall be
allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in
compliance with the applicable requirements in Article 19. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for
residential and commercial uses in compliance with s. 11.09.103(b)(3). The costs of elevating the lowest floor of a
General
Nonconformities in floodway district
Nonconformities in floodfringe district
11.09.151
11.09.152
11.09.153
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
130
nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are excluded
from the 50 percent provisions of this section.
(e) No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, the cost of
which would equal or exceed 50 percent of its present assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure
is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable
requirements of this ordinance. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses
in compliance with s. 11.09.103(b)(3).
(f) If on a per event basis the total value of the work being done under (d) and (e) equals or exceeds 50
percent of the present assessed value the work shall not be permitted unless the entire structure is permanently
changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this
ordinance. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with
s. 11.09.103(b)(3).
(g) Except as provided in subsection (h), if any nonconforming structure or any structure with a
nonconforming use is destroyed or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed, or rebuilt
unless the use and the structure meet the current ordinance requirements. A structure is considered substantially
damaged if the total cost to restore the structure to its pre-damaged condition equals or exceeds 50 percent of
the structure’s present assessed value.
(h) For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or destroyed by a non-flood disaster, the
repair or reconstruction of any such nonconforming building shall be permitted in order to restore it to the size and
use in effect prior to the damage event, provided that the minimum federal code requirements below are met
and all required permits have been granted prior to the start of construction.
(1) Residential.
a. The lowest floor, including basement, is elevated to or above the base flood elevation using fill,
pilings, columns, posts or perimeter walls. Perimeter walls must meet the requirements of s.
11.09.45(b).
b. The structure is anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy and shall be
constructed with methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
c. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities
that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
d. In A Zones, obtain, review, and utilize any flood data available from a federal, state, or other
source.
e. In AO Zones with no elevations specified, the lowest floor, including basement, meets the standards
in s. 11.09.123(b).
f. In AO Zones, adequate drainage paths around structures are provided on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from the structure.
(2) Nonresidential structures.
a. Shall meet the requirements of subsection (h)(1)a-f.
b. Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the regional flood
elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall meet the standards in s.
11.09.45(a) or (b).
c. In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, meet the
standards in s. 11.09.123(b).
(3) Historic structures. A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will not preclude
the structures continued designation as a historic structure, the alteration will comply with s. 11.09.63(a),
flood resistant materials are used, and construction practices and floodproofing methods that comply
with s. 11.09.45 are used. Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures shall be exempt from the
development standards of s. 11.09.145(h) if it is determined that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
131
11.09.152 Nonconformities in the floodway district
(a) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a
nonconforming use in the floodway district, unless such modification or addition:
(1) has been granted a permit or variance which meets all ordinance requirements;
(2) meets the requirements of s. 11.09.151;
(3) shall not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood height;
(4) any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed, pursuant to s. 11.09.45, by means other than
the use of fill, to the flood protection elevation; and
(5) If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is enclosed, the following standards
shall apply:
a. The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect or engineer to allow for the efficient
entry and exit of flood waters without human intervention. A minimum of two openings must be
provided with a minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one square foot of the
enclosed area. The lowest part of the opening can be no more than 12 inches above the adjacent
grade;
b. The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection elevation must be constructed of
flood-resistant materials;
c. Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood
protection elevation; and
d. The use must be limited to parking, building access, or limited storage.
(b) No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on-site sewage disposal system,
except where an addition has been ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall
be allowed in the floodway district. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage
disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances, s.
11.09.45(c) and ch. SPS 383, Wis. Admin. Code.
(c) No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable water shall be allowed in the
floodway district. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in the floodway district shall meet
the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances, s. 11.09.45(c) and chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Admin.
Code.
11.09.153 Nonconformities in the floodfringe district
(a) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a
nonconforming use unless such modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the
municipality, and meets the requirements of s. 11.09.103 except where subsection (b) is applicable.
(b) Where compliance with the provisions of subsection (a) would result in unnecessary hardship and only
where the structure will not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential,
the Zoning Board of Appeals, using the procedures established in Article 5, may grant a variance from those
provisions of subsection (a) for modifications or additions using the criteria listed below. Modifications or additions
which are protected to elevations lower than the flood protection elevation may be permitted if (i) no floor is
allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential or commercial structures; (ii) human lives are not
endangered; (iii) public facilities, such as water or sewer, shall not be installed; (iv) flood depths shall not exceed 2
feet; (v) flood velocities shall not exceed 2 feet per second; and (vi) the structure shall not be used for storage of
materials as described in s. 11.09.103(g).
(c) All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a
private sewage disposal system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local ordinances, 11.09.45(c) and ch.
SPS 383, Wis. Admin. Code.
(d) All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a well shall meet the applicable
provisions of this ordinance, s. 11.09.45(c), and ch. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Admin. Code.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
132
This page intentionally left blank.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
133
ARTICLE 10
RESERVED
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
134
This page intentionally left blank.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
135
Sections
ARTICLE 11
SHORELAND-WETLAND OVERLAY DISTRICT
11.11.01 Legislative findings
11.11.02 Purpose
11.11.03 Wetland functions
11.11.04 Boundary of district
11.11.05 Discrepancies between delineated
wetlands and field conditions
11.11.06 Permitted activities
11.11.07 Prohibited activities
11.11.08 Nonconformities
11.11.01 Legislative findings
The Common Council makes the following legislative findings relating to the shoreland-wetland overlay district:
(1) Cities are required by s. 62.231, Wis. Stats., to adopt shoreland-wetland zoning regulations within 6
months after receipt of final wetland inventory maps prepared by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources.
(2) The City of Wisconsin Rapids received such wetland inventory maps with a date of November 14, 1985.
(3) The City of Wisconsin Rapids thereafter adopted shoreland-wetland regulations as required.
(4) Uncontrolled use of the shoreland-wetlands and pollution of the navigable waters of the municipality
would adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare and impair the tax base.
11.11.02 Purpose
This article promotes the public health, safety, and welfare and is intended to:
(1) maintain the storm and flood water storage capacity of wetlands;
(2) prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which filter or store sediments, nutrients,
heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters;
(3) protect fish, their spawning grounds, other aquatic life and wildlife by preserving wetlands and other
aquatic habitat;
(4) prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area; and
(5) preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal of natural shoreland cover and
controlling shoreland-wetland excavation, filling and other earth moving activities.
11.11.03 Wetland functions
In the context of this article, wetlands serve the following important functions:
(1) storm and flood water storage capacity;
(2) maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of
groundwater from a wetland to another area or the flow of groundwater through a wetland;
(3) filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals, or organic compounds that would otherwise
drain into navigable waters;
(4) shoreline protection against erosion;
(5) fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds;
(6) wildlife habitat; or
(7) areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including scarce wetland types and habitat of
endangered species.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
136
11.11.04 Boundary of district
The shoreland-wetland overlay district includes those areas designated as a wetland on the wetland inventory
map with a date of November 14, 1985 that (1) are 5 acres or more; (2) are located within 1,000 feet of the
ordinary high-water mark of a navigable lake, pond, or flowage, or are located within 300 feet of the ordinary
high-water mark of a navigable river or stream, or to the landward side of the 100-year floodplain, whichever
distance is greater; (3) were not legally filled before November 14, 1985 and cannot be classified as a wetland; (4)
are not located between the original ordinary high-water mark and a bulkhead line established prior to May 7,
1982 under s. 30.11, Wis. Stats.
Any feature designated as a lake or as a stream on the zoning map has been determined to be navigable for the
purpose of this section. The flood insurance rate maps adopted under Article 9 of this chapter are used in
determining the extent of the 100-year floodplain.
11.11.05 Discrepancies between delineated wetlands and field conditions
If the zoning administrator believes there is a discrepancy between the wetland inventory map and actual field
conditions at the time the map was adopted, he or she shall contact the district office of the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources and request a determination. If the Department determines that the area in
question was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, this article shall not apply to such area. As soon as is practical
after such determination, the zoning administrator shall submit an application to amend the zoning map
consistent with the procedures and requirements in Article 5 of this chapter.
11.11.06 Permitted activities
(a) No zoning permit required. The following uses are allowed without issuance of a zoning permit, provided
there is no wetland alteration:
(1) hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling, and boating;
(2) the harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries, tree fruits, and tree seeds,
in a manner that is not injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops;
(3) the practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning, and harvesting of timber;
(4) the pasturing of livestock;
(5) the cultivation of agricultural crops; and
(6) the construction and maintenance of duck blinds.
The following uses, which may involve wetland alterations, are allowed without issuance of a zoning permit,
provided any wetland alterations comply with the specified terms:
(1) the practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water level stabilization measures which are
necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the
conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected;
(2) the cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland alterations necessary for the purpose of growing
and harvesting cranberries;
(3) the maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems to restore pre-existing levels of drainage,
including the minimum amount of filling necessary to dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the filling is
otherwise permissible and that dredged spoil is placed on existing spoil banks where possible;
(4) the construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of livestock, including limited excavating
and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance;
(5) the construction and maintenance of piers, docks, walkways, observation decks, and trail bridges built
on pilings, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance;
(6) the installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of draining lands outside the shorelandwetland
zoning district provided that such installation or maintenance is done in a manner designed to
minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the shoreland-wetland listed in s. 11.09.03; and
(7) the maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of existing highways and bridges, including
limited excavating and filling necessary for such maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
137
(b) Permit required. Upon issuance of a zoning permit, the following uses are allowed, which may involve
wetland alterations but only to the extent specifically provided below:
(1) The construction and maintenance of streets which are necessary for the continuity of the municipal
street system, the provision of essential utility and emergency services, or to provide access to uses
permitted in this section provided (i) the street cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the
wetland; (ii) the street is designed and constructed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural
functions of the wetland listed in s. 11.09.03; (iii) the street is designed and constructed with the minimum
cross sectional area practical to serve the intended use; (iv) street construction activities are carried out
in the immediate area of the streetbed only; and (v) any wetland alteration must be necessary for the
construction or maintenance of the street.
(2) The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings provided (i) the building is used solely in
conjunction with a use permitted in the shoreland-wetland district or for the raising of waterfowl,
minnows, or other wetland or aquatic animals; (ii) the building cannot, as a practical matter, be
located outside the wetland; (iii) the building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area; and (iv)
only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide structural support for the building is allowed.
(3) The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation areas, outdoor
education areas, historic, natural and scientific areas, game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife
habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms, wildlife preserves and public boat
launching ramps, provided (i) any private development allowed under this paragraph shall be used
exclusively for the permitted purpose; (ii) only limited filling and excavating necessary for the
development of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches or the construction of park shelters or
similar structures is allowed; (iii) the construction and maintenance of streets necessary for the uses
permitted under this paragraph are allowed only where such construction and maintenance meets the
criteria in subsection b(1) above; and (iv) wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish
and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms and wildlife preserves shall be
for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland values.
(4) The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone transmission lines, water and gas
distribution lines and sewage collection lines and related facilities and the construction and
maintenance of railroad lines provided (i) the utility transmission and distribution facilities and railroad
lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; (ii) only limited filling or excavating
necessary for such construction or maintenance is allowed; and (iii) such construction or maintenance is
done in a manner designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland
listed in s. 11.11.03.
11.11.07 Prohibited uses
Any use not listed in this article as being permitted, is prohibited. The use of a boathouse for human habitation
and the construction or placement of a boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary high-water mark of any
navigable waters are strictly prohibited.
11.11.08 Nonconformities
Nonconforming structures and uses shall comply with the requirements in Article 19.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
138
This page intentionally left blank.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
139
Sections
ARTICLE 12
SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT
11.12.01 Legislative findings
11.12.02 Purpose
11.12.03 Boundary of district
11.12.04 Vegetation management within shoreline
buffer zone
11.12.05 Shoreline setback
11.12.06 Boathouses
11.12.01 Legislative findings
The Common Council makes the following legislative findings relating to the shoreland overlay district:
(1) Cities are required by s. 62.233, Wis. Stats., to adopt shoreland zoning regulations meeting the minimum
standards set forth in that section.
(2) Uncontrolled use of the shorelands and pollution of the navigable waters of the municipality would
adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare and impair the tax base.
11.12.02 Purpose
This article promotes the public health, safety, and welfare and is intended to:
(1) further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions and prevent and control water pollution;
(2) protect spawning grounds, fish, and aquatic life by controlling the removal of shoreline vegetation;
(3) control the placement of principal buildings by establishing setbacks from waterways; and
(4) preserve shore cover and natural beauty by (i) restricting the removal of natural shoreland cover; (ii)
preventing shoreline encroachment by structures; (iii) controlling shoreland excavation and other earth
moving activities; and (iv) regulating the use and placement of boathouses and other structures.
11.12.03 Boundary of district
The shoreland overlay district includes land that was annexed by the city after May 7, 1982, and that is located
within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of a navigable lake, pond, or flowage, or within 300 feet of the
ordinary high-water mark of a navigable river or stream, or to the landward side of the 100-year floodplain,
whichever distance is greater.
Any feature designated as a lake or as a stream on the zoning map has been determined to be navigable for the
purpose of this section. The flood insurance rate maps adopted under Article 7 of this chapter are used in
determining the extent of the 100-year floodplain.
11.12.04 Vegetation management within shoreline buffer zone
(a) Generally. Woody vegetation not located in a wetland and woody and non-woody vegetation in a
wetland located in the shoreline buffer zone (i.e., 35 feet landward from the ordinary high-water mark) shall not
be removed, except as described in this section.
(b) Removal of invasive species. Vegetation in the shoreline buffer zone that is listed by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources as an invasive species under ch. NR 40, Wis. Admin. Code may be removed
provided the property owner reestablishes vegetation within the shoreline buffer zone consistent with a
management plan approved by the Planning Commission.
(c) Viewing/access corridor. The property owner may remove vegetation in the shoreline buffer zone to
create and maintain a viewing/access corridor no more than 30 feet wide for every 100 feet of shoreline
frontage.
11.12.05 Shoreline setback
(a) Principal buildings. Principal buildings shall be no closer than 50 feet to the ordinary high-water mark,
except that a lesser setback is allowed if all of the following apply:
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
140
(1) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel of land that is immediately adjacent
on each side to a lot or parcel of land containing a principal building.
(2) The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance equal to the average setback of the
principal building on the adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary high-water mark, whichever distance
is greater.
(b) Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall comply with the setback standards for principal buildings
described in this subsection, except that a boathouse may be constructed within 35 feet of the ordinary highwater
mark as set forth in s. 11.12.06.
Exhibit 12-1. Shoreline setback requirements
Key
Lot 1 The principal building is existing and is more than 50 feet from the ordinary high-water mark (OHWM)
Lot 2 The lot is vacant. Because the lots on both sides have a principal building, setback averaging may be used, but the setback may not be
less than 35 feet. In the instance depicted above, the setback would be calculated as follows: (50 feet plus the actual distance of the
building on Lot 3) divided by 2.
Lot 3 The principal building is existing and is less than 50 feet from the ordinary high-water mark.
Lot 4 The lot is vacant. A principal building on this lot must comply with the 50-foot setback requirement because setback averaging does
not apply (i.e., a principal building is only on one side).
Lot 5 The lot is vacant.
© Civic Webware | Not to scale
11.12.06 Boathouses
A boathouse if otherwise allowed may be constructed in the viewing/access corridor as allowed in s. 11.12.05.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
141
Sections
ARTICLE 13
WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
11.13.01 Legislative findings
11.13.02 Boundary of district
11.13.03 Permitted land uses and activities
11.13.04 Nonconforming uses
11.13.05 Responsibility for contamination cleanup
11.13.01 Legislative findings
The Common Council makes the following legislative findings relating to the wellhead protection overlay district:
(1) The residents of the City of Wisconsin Rapids depend exclusively on groundwater for a safe drinking
water supply.
(2) Certain land use practices and activities can seriously threaten or degrade groundwater quality.
(3) The City has the authority to adopt regulations relating to wellhead protection under s. 62.23(7)(a) and
(c), Wis. Stats.
(4) Regulations in this chapter relating to wellhead protection are adopted to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare of city residents.
11.13.02 Boundary of district
The boundary of the wellhead protection overlay district extends from the center of a public wellhead for a
distance of 1,200 feet in all directions. Such boundary is based on the wellhead protection plan dated October
10, 1996, and as amended January 3, 2008.
11.13.03 Permitted land uses and activities
(a) Generally. The land uses/activities listed in Exhibit 13-1 are permitted provided the various restrictions are
maintained and the use/activity is otherwise allowed in the base zoning district under this code. All other uses are
prohibited.
(b) Amendment of this section. Land uses that are prohibited pose a high risk of polluting the groundwater
based upon the combined pollution experience of many individual uses, and the technology generally
employed. As the technology of these prohibited uses change to low or non-risk materials or methods, the above
list of permitted uses may be amended consistent with the procedures and requirements in Article 5. It is the
intention to continue a prohibition on such uses until the technology of the use removes reliance upon the
pollutant materials or processes deemed to be a groundwater hazard.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
142
Exhibit 13-1. Permitted land uses and activities
Minimum separation
between well and
land use /activity [1]
Permitted land use/activity
none Biking, hiking, skiing, nature, equestrian, and fitness trails
none Public and private parks, playgrounds, beaches, provided such use is connected to a municipal sanitary sewer service if
sanitary service is provided (holding tanks and on-site systems are not permitted)
none Wildlife management, open space, and similar uses
none Routine tillage, planting, and field management operations related to crop production provided (1) herbicides and
pesticides are not applied to the ground surface, (2) animal waste is not applied to the ground surface, and (3) the
combination of all other nutrient sources applied or available do not exceed those thresholds established or
recommended by the Wood County Land & Water Conservation Department, or alternatively the Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS).
none Multi-family dwelling units provided such use is connected to a municipal sanitary sewer service
none Single-family dwelling on a lot consisting of 20,000 square feet or more and is connected to a private on-site sewage
treatment system
none Single-family dwelling on municipal sewer.
none Above-ground liquid propane gas tanks for heating with a maximum capacity of 1,000 gallons
200 feet Single-family residential fuel oil tank
50 feet Storm sewer main
200 feet Sanitary sewer main, sanitary sewer manhole, and sanitary lift station. A lesser separation distance may be allowed for
sanitary sewer mains if the sanitary sewer main is constructed of water main materials and joints and pressure tested in
place to meet current American Waterworks Association (AWWA) C600 specifications. In no case may the separation
distance between a well and sanitary sewer main be less than 50 feet.
400 feet Septic tank or soil adsorption unit receiving less than 8,000 gallons per day provides such system complies with all local
and state requirements for on-site sewage treatment systems
1,000 feet Septic tank or soil adsorption unit receiving more than 8,000 gallons per day provides such system complies with all local
and state requirements for on-site sewage treatment systems
400 feet Storm water drainage pond or conveyance facility
600 feet Gasoline or fuel oil storage tank installation that has received written approval from the Wisconsin Department of Safety
and Professional Services or its designated agent under s. Comm 10.10, Wis. Admin. Code.
none Institutional, commercial, and industrial land uses provided such use is connected to a municipal sanitary sewer service,
except that the following are strictly prohibited: motor vehicle fuel stations, vehicle repair establishments, auto body
repair, printing and duplicating businesses, facilities involving manufacturing or industrial processes, bus or truck terminals,
repair shops of all types, solid waste disposal or handing facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, spray wastewater
facilities, junk yards or auto salvage yards, bulk fertilizer and/or pesticide facilities, asphalt products manufacturing, dry
cleaning businesses, salt storage, electroplating facilities, exterminating businesses, paint and coating manufacturing,
hazardous and/or toxic materials storage, hazardous and/or toxic waste facilities, radioactive waste facilities, recycling
facilities, cemeteries, underground storage tanks of any size, and any other use determined by the zoning administrator
to pose a high-risk of polluting the groundwater.
Notes:
1. See s. NR 811.12, Wis. Admin. Code
11.13.04 Nonconforming uses
Land uses that were legally established, but do not comply with the regulations in this article are nonconforming
and are subject to the requirements set forth in Article 19. In addition, the operator of a nonconforming use shall
(1) provide copies of all current, revised or new federal, state and local facility operation approvals, permits or
certificates; operational safety plans; and on-going environmental monitoring results to the City; (2) provide
additional environmental or safety structures/monitoring as deemed necessary by the Common Council, which
may include but is not limited to stormwater runoff management and monitoring; (3) replace equipment or
expand in a manner that improves the existing environmental and safety technologies already in existence; and
(4) prepare and submit a contingency plan satisfactory to the zoning administrator for the immediate notification
of city officials in the event of an emergency.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
143
11.13.05 Responsibility for contamination cleanup
An individual and/or facility that releases a contaminant in the wellhead protection overlay district that has the
potential of endangering the municipal water supply shall immediately stop the release and clean up the
contaminant to the satisfaction of the Common Council and other state and federal regulatory agencies. The
individual/facility shall be responsible for all costs of cleanup, including those incurred by the City, which may
include:
(1) consultant fees at the invoice amount plus administrative costs for oversight, review, and
documentation;
(2) the cost of city employees’ time associated in any way with cleanup based on the hourly rate paid to
the employee multiplied by a factor determined by the city administrator representing the city’s cost for
expenses, benefits, insurance, sick leave, holidays, overtime, vacation, and similar benefits;
(3) the cost of city equipment used in the response and cleanup; and
(4) the cost of mileage reimbursed to city employees attributed to the cleanup.
The Common Council may require the responsible party to establish a monitoring program based on the nature of
the contamination and the risk posed to the municipal water supply. In addition, the Common Council may
require the responsible party to provide a financial security in such amount and type it deems necessary to
safeguard the municipal water supply.
The remainder of this page intentionally left blank.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
144
This page intentionally left blank.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
145
Sections
ARTICLE 14
DOWNTOWN DESIGN OVERLAY DISTRICT
11.14.01 Legislative findings
11.14.02 Purpose
11.14.03 District boundaries
11.14.04 General compliance
11.14.05 Design guidance
11.14.06 Project review procedures
11.14.07 Building setbacks
11.14.08 Building design
11.14.09 Building elements extending into a public
right-of-way
11.14.10 Off-street parking and access
11.14.11 Landscaping
11.14.12 Service areas and similar
11.14.13 Signs
11.14.14 Utilities
11.14.01 Legislative findings
The Common Council makes the following legislative findings:
(1) Wisconsin Rapid's downtown area contains a variety of building types, many of which represent an
architectural style characterized by attached storefronts.
(2) Given the close proximity of buildings in the downtown, special rules and regulations are needed to
protect and perpetuate the existing character of the area.
(3) The standards in this article are not intended to discourage development but to encourage
development that is functional, attractive, and context sensitive.
11.14.02 Purpose
This article is established to promote the public health, safety, and welfare and is intended to protect and
perpetuate the general architectural style within the overlay district.
11.14.03 District boundaries
The location of the downtown design overlay district is depicted on the zoning map.
11.14.04 General compliance
Given the pattern of existing development in this overlay district and the size and configuration of the existing
parcels, it may not be feasible for all new development or redevelopment in the district to be consistent with all of
the design standards specified in this article. Therefore, prior to any major work (herein described) the appropriate
reviewing authority shall ensure that the proposed work is consistent with the intent of the design standards when
considered as a whole.
11.14.05 Design guidance
In addition to the standards in this article, the architectural design guidelines in the "Downtown Waterfront Plan"
may be used to the extent applicable.
11.14.06 Project review procedures
(a) Minor work without prior approval. The following work may proceed without prior approval, provided a
building permit is issued if required:
(1) residing with appropriate materials;
(2) repair or replacement of windows, trim, and doors if new materials match existing;
(3) installation or removal of door and window openings not visible from the primary street;
(4) chimney reconstruction if completed with similar materials;
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
146
(5) exterior cleaning, refinishing, and tuck-pointing; and
(6) any other similar work as determined by the zoning administrator.
Prior to the commencement of any work, a property owner may ask the zoning administrator to review the
proposed work to determine if it is classified as minor work and/or otherwise complies with the standards in this
article.
(b) Major work. Any work not classified as minor work in this section shall be reviewed using the procedures
specified below.
(1) buildings - architectural review as described in Article 5
(2) site work - site plan review as described in Article 5
(3) demolition - site plan review as described in Article 5
Examples of major work includes relocation of an existing building, construction of a new building, addition to an
existing building, alteration of a building elevation, alterations to windows, siding, entries, and trim, erection of
new signs or modification of existing signs, changes to the site including parking, pedestrian circulation, and the
like.
11.14.07 Building setbacks
The setback of buildings from street-yard and side-yard lot lines shall be compatible with existing buildings in the
immediate area.
11.14.08 Building design
In addition to meeting the standards in Article 6, buildings shall comply with each of the following:
(1) Building height. The height of a building shall not be more than two stories taller or more than one story
shorter than the height of the adjoining building. In no event, shall the height of a building exceed the
maximum building height established for the base zoning district in which the building is located.
(2) Building mass. The mass of a building (i.e., relationship between façade height and width) shall be
compatible with existing buildings in the immediate area.
(3) Special requirements for large buildings. A building façade fronting on a public street with a frontage of
150 feet or more shall be designed to look like two or more individual building fronts. This may be
achieved by using different building materials, facade articulations, or other design approach that
gives the appearance of separate, but attached buildings.
(4) Horizontal rhythms. The horizontal pattern of exterior building elements formed by patterns of building
openings for windows and doors, and related elements such as piers and columns shall be spaced at
regular intervals across all visible façades of the building.
(5) Vertical rhythms. The floor heights on main façades shall complement those of adjoining buildings. The
rhythm of the ground floor shall harmonize with the rhythm of upper floors. The vertical pattern of
exterior building elements formed by patterns of building openings for windows and doors, and related
elements such as sills, headers, transoms, cornices, and sign bands shall be compatible in design and
elevation with adjoining buildings in immediate area.
(6) Roof forms. Flat or gently sloping roofs which are not visible from the street grade shall generally be
used. Mansards or other exotic roof shapes are not characteristic of the district's character and are
prohibited.
(7) Awnings. The size, color, placement, and design of an awning should be complement the architectural
character of the building on which it is located. Soft, weather-treated canvas or vinyl materials which
allow for flexible or fixed installation shall be used. Awnings covered with shingles, metal roofing, or the
like are prohibited. Backlit awnings are prohibited.
(8) Building materials. Selected building materials shall be compatible with those of existing buildings in the
immediate area which generally consist of natural materials such as stone, brick, and wood. Concrete
masonry units (CMUs), corrugated metal, half-log siding, and vinyl siding are prohibited.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
147
(9) Four-sided architecture. All new construction must have four-sided architecture (i.e., having the same
level of detail and materials used on all four sides of the buildings). If the proposed building has
common walls with adjacent buildings, only the exposed building are required to provide four-sided
architecture. In unique circumstances, the Planning Commission may waive the requirement if the site
allows for less detail on one or more sides of the building.
(10) Entrances. Entries must be clearly defined, accessible, and located to express visual interest along a
street front. Primary entrances must be oriented to the primary street frontage.
(11) Street edge. Unique building elements and architectural details used at the street level are encouraged
so as to create a direct impact on the quality of the pedestrian experience resulting in an active and
interesting street front.
(12) Transparency requirements. Windows and exterior doors must occupy at least 50 percent of the ground
floor façade. Dark, frosted, or tinted glass in ground floor windows facing a street is prohibited
11.14.09 Building elements extending into a public right-of-way
Any part of a building (e.g., awnings, canopies, marquees) that extends into a public right-of-way must comply
with the requirements in s. 11.06.143.
11.14.10 Off-street parking and access
(a) Placement. Off-street parking should be located to the rear of the principal building, or on the side as a
less preferable alternative.
(b) New curb-cuts. New curb-cuts shall occur on the side streets rather than on a primary street.
(c) Screening. Parking lots that are located on the side of a building should incorporate a screen to block
the view of parked cars as generally depicted in Exhibit 14-1.
Exhibit 14-1. An example of a parking lot screen
11.14.11 Landscaping
Landscaping as described in Article 16 is not required. If provided,
landscaping should complement street trees and other streetscape
elements in the public right-of-way.
11.14.12 Service areas and similar
Service areas, refuse collection areas, storage areas, and loading
areas shall be located away from or screened from public view,
especially from the primary street.
11.14.13 Signs
(a) Generally. Signs should enhance the visual appeal of the district and its ability to attract the traveling
public.
(b) Wall signs. Wall signs should be designed to fit within the architectural space intended for signage.
(c) Compatibility. Signs should be compatible with signs on adjoining buildings with respect to location,
shape, style, graphics, size, material, illumination, and color, while allowing individual expression and identification.
11.14.14 Utilities
Utility lines, such as telephone, electric, and cable, shall be installed underground, where feasible. Groundmounted
utility components, such as switch boxes and transformers, shall be screened by landscaping or a
decorative wall and/or be located away from public view, especially from the primary street.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
148
This page intentionally left blank.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
149
Sections
ARTICLE 15
FENCING
11.15.01 Applicability
11.15.02 General requirements
11.15.03 Prohibitions
11.15.04 Measurement of height
11.15.05 Obstruction of ingress/egress area of a
dwelling
11.15.06 Fences in commercial and industrial
zoning districts
11.15.07 Fences in residential zoning districts
11.15.08 Minimum setbacks
11.15.09 Fence materials
11.15.10 Barbed wire
11.15.11 Storage of materials prohibited
11.15.12 Fences permitted without a permit
11.15.13 Nonboundary fences
11.15.14 Dog enclosures
11.15.15 Maintenance
11.15.01 Applicability
The requirements in this article apply to existing fences and new fences.
11.15.02 General Requirements
All fences shall be installed in strict compliance with this article, site specific permit conditions, and the following
requirements:
(1) The owner or applicant shall be responsible for properly locating all property lines before construction of
any fence. This requirement can be waived if it is clear that the fence will not encroach or overlap any
property line.
(2) Lot pins/markers shall not be tampered with when installing a fence. Any violations of this requirement
shall be subject to the penalty provisions outlined in this code, and/or within state statutes.
(3) No fence may be constructed or maintained which is detrimental to human life or safety, or causes a
traffic hazard.
(4) Structural and support components of a fence shall face away from adjacent properties.
(5) Fences shall be installed with the finished side facing the adjacent property or public right-of-way, and
the fence posts must be located on the inside of the fence facing -the property on which the fence is
located, except when the style of fence commonly described as a "Good Neighbor Fence" is installed.
(6) Fences shall be installed plumb and the top finish of the fence shall be uniform. Fences shall follow the
contour of the ground to the extent practical. Adjustments for grade shall occur at the bottom of the
fence.
(7) The height of the fence shall be controlled by the applicable provisions of this article for the zoning
district in which the fence will be located.
11.15.03 Prohibitions
The following are specifically prohibited:
(1) A razor wire fence.
(2) Any wire or chain link-type fence with the cut or salvage end of the fence exposed at the top.
(3) A fence made of chicken wire or similar woven material, except when used for gardening type
purposes.
(4) Electric fences, except when used for gardening type purposes.
(5) A fence which creates a hazard to users of the street, sidewalk, or to nearby property.
(6) A fence composed solely of fence posts.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
150
(7) An incomplete fence, consisting only of posts and supporting members.
11.15.04 Measurement of height
Fence height is measured from the surface of the ground immediately below the fence. In the case of grade
separation, such as the separation of properties by a retaining wall, the fence height is based on the
measurement from the average point between highest and lowest grade. If the fence is set back from the
retaining wall by a distance of at least 2 feet, the fence height is measured from the base of the fence.
For fences that have a uniform deviation (i.e., where the fence post height is higher than the fence wall, or where
the fence wall is higher than the fence posts) the highest portion of the fence shall be used to measure the height
of the fence.
11.15.05 Obstruction of ingress/egress area of a dwelling
No fence shall be installed in any yard that will shield any window or opening in a habitable space of a dwelling.
A minimum distance of 3 feet shall be maintained between any solid fence and any such window or opening in a
dwelling.
11.15.06 Fences in commercial and industrial zoning districts
(a) Front yard. In commercially or industrially zoned areas on interior lots with one frontage, fences, not
exceeding 4 feet in height, shall be allowed within the front yard setback area. The front yard setback consists of
any side lot line between the front property line and the front setback line or building line, whichever is closest to
the front property line.
Exception: When establishments are required to provide screening, screening standards shall
supersede this standard.
Exception: Front yard or corner side yard fences may be increased to a maximum height of 6 feet if
open, decorative, ornamental fencing materials that are less than or equal to 20 percent opaque
are used. Chain link or similar type fences are not considered decorative, ornamental fences.
Exception: Where adjacent properties are allowed to have a fence of 6 feet in height along a
property line, because the property line is the side or rear property line for their lot, the owner of the
other lot may erect a fence not to exceed 6 feet in height along the same area that the adjacent
owner may erect a 6-foot high fence. However, the fence must meet all other requirements outlined
in this chapter, including not interfering with vision triangles.
(b) Side and rear yards. No solid fence or wall shall exceed 8 feet in height in any side or rear yard. Fences
not greater than 8 feet in height are permitted in side or rear yards and shall not extend beyond the front of the
principal structure.
Exception: When establishments are required to provide screening, screening standards shall
supersede this standard.
(c) Corner lots In commercially or industrially zoned areas the maximum height of a solid fence or wall
within a required front or corner side yard setback shall not exceed 6 feet, except that a fence or wall of up to 8
feet may be located within a corner side yard setback behind the rear plane of the principal building.
Exception: When establishments are required to provide screening, screening standards shall
supersede this standard.
(d) Double frontage lots In commercially or industrially zoned areas, fences may not exceed a height of 8
feet within the required rear setback.
Exception: When establishments are required to provide screening, screening standards shall
supersede this standard.
11.15.07 Fences in residential zoning districts
(a) Front yard In residentially zoned areas on interior lots with one frontage, fences, not exceeding 4 feet in
height, shall be allowed within a residentially required front yard setback area. The front yard setback consists of
any side lot line between the front property line and the front setback line or building line, whichever is closest to
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
151
the front property line. If the fence is setback at or beyond the minimum required setback, fences may exceed
the 4-foot height requirement, but shall not be higher than 6 feet.
Exception: Front yard or corner side yard fences may be increased to a maximum height of 6 feet if
open, decorative, ornamental fencing materials that are less than or equal to 20 percent opaque
are used. Chain link or similar type fences are not considered decorative, ornamental fences.
Exception: Where adjacent properties are allowed to have a fence of 6 feet in height along a
property line, because the property line is the side or rear property line for their lot, the owner of the
other lot may erect a fence not to exceed 6 feet in height along the same area that the adjacent
owner may erect a 6-foot high fence. However, the fence must meet all other requirements outlined
in this article, including not interfering with vision triangles.
(b) Side and rear yards. In residentially zoned areas on interior lots with one frontage, no solid fence or wall
shall exceed 6 feet in height in any side or rear yard.
Exception: A fence of up to 8 feet in height may be constructed between a residential district and a
commercial or industrial district.
A wall or solid fence not more than 6 feet in height, as measured from the highest adjacent grade, may be
maintained along the interior side or rear lot lines provided such a wall or solid fence does not extend into a
required front yard.
(c) Corner lots. In residentially zoned areas, the maximum height of a solid fence or wall within a required
front or corner side yard setback shall not exceed 4 feet, except that a fence or wall of up to 6 feet may be
located within a corner side yard setback behind the rear plane of the principal building. If the fence is setback
at or beyond the minimum required setback, fences may exceed the 4-foot height requirement, but shall not be
higher than 6 feet.
(d) Double frontage lots. In residentially zoned areas, fences may not exceed a height of 6 feet within the
required rear setback.
11.15.08 Minimum setbacks
(a) From public right-of-ways. Fences must be a minimum of 2 feet from the public right-of-way property
line.
(b) From adjacent property lines. Fences may be installed up to, but not across adjacent property lines.
Exception: If an existing building is located on an adjacent lot, 2 feet is the minimum distance in
which the fence must be set back from the existing building.
Note: Property owners must maintain their fence(s) as noted in s. 11.15.16. Erecting a fence too close
to a property line can make it hard to maintain both sides of the fence.
(c) From alleys. Fences must be a minimum of 5 feet from the alley property line. If the alley does not
support traffic, the fence may be located up to, but not over the property line.
(d) Vision clearance areas. No fence or wall greater than 2 1/2 feet above the street grade shall be placed
within the vision clearance area.
11.15.09 Fence materials
(a) Generally. A fence located in a side and/or rear yard shall be constructed of materials suitable for
residential-style fencing, including brick, fieldstone, wrought iron, vinyl, chain link (with a minimum thickness of nine
(9) gauge and a required top rail support), stockade, or board-on-board wood. No fence shall be constructed of
used or discarded materials in disrepair, including pallets, tree trunks, trash, junk, or other similar items. Materials
not specifically manufactured for fencing, such as railroad ties, wooden doors, landscape timbers or utility poles
shall not be used for, or in the construction of a fence.
(b) Agricultural/farm fences Agricultural/farm fences shall only be permitted in agriculturally zoned or used
districts and shall not exceed 6 feet in height.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
152
11.15.10 Barbed wire
No person shall construct, use or maintain any barbed wire fence on residential, business, or institutionally zoned
property. Barbed wire fences may be installed in manufacturing zoning districts under circumstances whereby no
more than 3 strands of barbed wire are horizontally situated above a fence of boards or woven wire not less than
72 inches in height, excluding the barbed wire. Barbed wire may be used on top of a 6-foot fence surrounding a
public utility, public use, or on a site storage area as approved under a Conditional Use Permit or Site Plan Review.
Notwithstanding the above, barbed wire shall not be used along a property line abutting a residentially zoned
area.
11.15.11 Storage of materials prohibited
No materials shall be stored on or between a fence located adjacent to a property line.
11.15.12 Fences permitted without a permit
The following types of fences are permitted, as specified, without a permit, subject to the following restrictions and
providing that said fence does not in any way interfere with traffic visibility, or block, redirect or cause a drainage
problem for the adjacent or downstream properties:
(1) Snow fencing shall be permitted in all districts not exceeding 4 feet in height provided it is removed
between May 1 and November 1 of each year. No snow fence shall extend into the street right-of-way
line unless installed by the City or a contractor having a permit from the City.
(2) Fences used for the protection of excavation and construction sites and the protection of plants during
grading and construction is permitted for a time period consistent with an approved building permit.
(3) Agricultural/farm fences are limited to agriculturally zoned or used districts.
(4) Decorative fences not exceeding 2 feet in height shall be permitted in all districts. Such fences shall not
be placed in any manner that presents a hazard to pedestrians on any public or private sidewalk.
(5) Underground electrical fences are permitted in all districts.
(6) Garden fencing shall be allowed without a permit, but it shall not exceed a height of 6 feet, shall not be
located closer than 3 feet to any property line, and shall not be more than 10 percent opaque. Fencing
shall be limited to the gardening area.
11.15.13 Nonboundary fences
Fences and/or enclosures for swimming pools shall be permitted as required in s. 303.2 of the municipal code.
Fences surrounding tennis courts, and baseball and/or softball field backstops, or similar type facilities may be
erected in conformance with accepted industry standards. A fence permit shall be required for such installation.
11.15.14 Dog enclosures
Dog enclosures are permitted in residential zoning districts subject to the following requirements:
(1) A dog enclosure shall be obscured from view from neighboring properties at grade and adjacent
streets with a solid fence. Existing structures (e.g., sheds, garages) may be used to obscure view.
(2) A dog enclosure must be located in the buildable area directly behind and adjacent to the principal
building. In no event shall a dog enclosure encroach into a required setback or be located closer to a
corner or interior side -property line than the principal building.
(3) No dog enclosure shall be more than 250 square feet in area, nor more than 6 feet in height above the
surface of the ground, as measured from the ground level at the lowest grade level within 5 feet of
either side thereof.
(4) A dog enclosure shall be constructed on a hard surface.
(5) A dog enclosure may be constructed of any material permitted for a residential fence.
(6) A dog enclosure shall comply with all vision clearance area requirements.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
153
11.15.15 Maintenance
The property owner is responsible for maintaining fences on their property in good repair and in a structurally
sound condition. Fences shall be maintained in a manner as to prevent rust, corrosion and deterioration, so as not
to become a public or private nuisance, and so as not to be dilapidated or a danger to adjoining property
owners or the public. Fences shall not create an appearance of patchwork, which is indicative of a state of
disrepair. Every fence installed shall be maintained by the owner in such a way that it will remain plumb and in
good repair. All fences shall be constructed and maintained in a good aesthetic condition and in such a manner
and of such materials and colors so as not to adversely affect the value of adjoining property or property in the
immediate neighborhood. Fences shall also comply with the property maintenance regulations adopted by the
city (Chapter 36 of the municipal code).
The remainder of this page intentionally left blank.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
154
This page intentionally left blank.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
155
Divisions
ARTICLE 16
LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARDS
Sections
DIVISION 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
11.16.01 Legislative findings
11.16.02 Purpose
11.16.03 Applicability
11.16.04 Landscape plan
11.16.05 Description of landscape points and
classification of plants
11.16.06 Specifications for landscape materials
11.16.07 Credit for preserving existing trees and
shrubs
11.16.08 General design and placement guidelines
11.16.09 Plant diversity
11.16.10 Maintenance
11.16.11 Use of low-water-adaptive vegetation
11.16.12 Berms
11.16.01 Legislative findings
The Common Council makes the following legislative findings:
(1) A healthy environment is an indication of a healthy community.
(2) Landscaping helps to maintain and increase property values, which helps to protect public and private
investment in a community.
(3) Landscaping provides lasting social, economic, environmental, and aesthetic benefits to the
community.
(4) Landscaping helps to reduce the “heat-island” effect by shading parking lots, streets, and other hardsurfaced
areas.
(5) Flexible standards allow alternative design options that may better fit the needs of the landowner and
that may be needed to address unique site characteristics.
(6) Landscaped buffers are needed between parcels of incompatible land uses, and as the degree of
incompatibility increases, the amount of buffering (width and landscaping) should increase.
(7) Xeriscape planting techniques help promote water and energy conservation.
(8) A variety of landscape plants is needed to ensure that the effect of a single disease (e.g., Dutch elm
disease) or pest (e.g., emerald ash borer) on landscape plants is minimized.
11.16.02 Purpose
This article is established to promote the public health, safety, and welfare and is intended to accomplish the
following purposes:
(1) make Wisconsin Rapids more attractive and aesthetically pleasing;
(2) provide flexible standards where possible, rather than overly prescriptive requirements;
(3) promote and improve public health and safety through the abatement of noise, the glare of lights, dust,
and air pollution;
(4) Improve the aesthetic appearance of the built environment;
(5) ensure that land uses of different intensity have sufficient buffering between them to minimize negative
effects;
1. General provisions
2. Bufferyards
3. Landscaping
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
156
(6) create aesthetically pleasing tree-lined streetscapes;
(7) promote economic development by providing a high quality of life;
(8) enhance ambient environmental conditions by providing shade, air purification, oxygen regeneration,
groundwater recharge, storm water runoff retardation, and noise, glare, and heat abatement; and
(9) encourage the preservation, expansion, protection, and proper maintenance of the community forest.
11.16.03 Applicability
The provisions of this article apply to different areas as generally depicted in Exhibit 16-1.
Exhibit 16-1. General applicability of landscape and bufferyard requirements
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
157
11.16.04 Landscape plan
A landscape plan shall consist of a completed worksheet as may be used by the zoning administrator and a plan
view drawing that shows where the required plants will generally be planted. Such drawing shall be drawn at the
same scale as the site plan drawing.
11.16.05 Description of landscape points and classification of plant species
(a) Generally. The required level of landscape plants is stated in terms of landscape points. As shown in
Exhibit 16-2, a different number of points are assigned to each of the plant categories depending upon its typical
growth rate, its mature height, and whether it is a deciduous or evergreen species. Species generally suitable for
use in northern Wisconsin are listed and those native to the state are denoted.
(b) Plants not listed. The species list in Exhibit 16-2 is not meant to be exhaustive. Therefore, the zoning
administrator shall review proposals for, and the applicability of, species not contained in this list, and is authorized
to approve appropriate similar species using "A guide to selecting landscape plants for Wisconsin" as a guide.
(c) Prohibited plants. Plants specifically designated as invasive by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources or other state agency shall not be planted and shall not be used to meet the requirements of this
article.
(d) Plant hardiness. Selected plants should be hardy in the area where they are planted (Zone 4a or 4b).
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
158
Exhibit 16-2. Classification of plants
Type and point value
Botanical name
Common name
Tall deciduous trees
(30 points)
(40-100 feet)
Acer spp. maple: red [1], silver [1], sugar [1]
Celtis occidentalis Hackberry [1]
Fraxinus spp. ash [2]
Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo (female only)
Gleditsia triancanthos honey locust [1]
Gymnocladus dioicus espresso Kentucky coffeetree
Quercus spp. oak: red [1], white [1], pin, bur [1]
Tilia spp. linden: basswood [1], redmond, silverleaf
Ulmus spp. American, accolade, cathedral, new horizon (hybrids only)
Medium deciduous trees
(15 points)
(30-40 feet)
Aesculus glabra Ohio buckeye
Betula spp. birch: river [1], paper [1]
Phellodendron amurense "Macho' Macho amur corktree
Prunus spp. cherry: choke [1], pin [1]
Prunus Mackii amur chokecherry
Low deciduous trees
(10 points)
(15-30 feet)
Amelanchier spp.
serviceberry
Crataegus spp. hawthorn: cockspur [1], dotted [1], downy [1], Washington
Malus spp. crabapple spp.
Sorbus spp. mountain ash: European, showy [1]
Prunus americana American plum
Ostrya virginiana Ironwood
Tall evergreen trees
(40 points)
Abies concolor white fir
Picea spp Spruce: Norway, white
Pinus spp. pine: red [1], white [1], Scots
Tsuga canadensis Canada hemlock
Medium evergreen trees
(20 points)
Thuja occidentalis American arborvitae
Low evergreen trees
(12 points)
Juniperus spp. juniper: mountbatten, redcedar [1]
Thuja spp. arborvitae: pyramidal, techny
Tall deciduous shrubs
(5 points)
Cornus spp. dogwood: gray [1], pagoda, red [1]
Rhus spp. sumac: smooth [1], staghorn [1]
Syringa spp. lilac: Chinese, hyancinth
Viburnum spp. viburnum: arrowwood, wayfaringtree, nannyberry [1]
Medium deciduous shrubs
(3 points)
Corylus americana American filbert, hazelnut
Cotoneaster spp. cotoneaster
Forsythia spp. forsythia: border, early, weeping
Rosa spp. rose: Virgina, rugosa
Low deciduous shrubs
(1 point)
Berberis thunbergii Japanese barberry
Spirea spp. spirea: froebel, snowmound
Medium evergreen shrubs
(5 points)
Juniperus chinensis juniper: Pfitzer
Taxus spp. yew: Japanese
Low evergreen shrubs
(3 points)
Juniperus spp. juniper: sargent, creeping, andorra
Notes:
1. Native to Wisconsin
2. Only those species that are not susceptible to the emerald ash borer may be used
3. See "A guide to selecting landscape plants for Wisconsin," E.R. Hasselkus, University of Wisconsin-Extension, Publication A2865 for more plants.
4. The above table may include plants that are not suitable for Zones 4a or 4b.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
159
11.16.06 Specifications for landscaping materials
(a) Generally. All plant material shall be healthy, vigorous, and free
of disease and insects.
(b) Minimum planting size. Trees and shrubs shall meet the minimum
planting size established in Exhibit 16-3. Further, trees and shrubs shall meet
the specifications contained in the most current edition of American
Standard for Nursery Stock for the corresponding planting size.1
(c) Turf. Turf areas may be sodded or seeded. In areas subject to
erosion, sod shall be used. Sod shall be commercially grown and clean
and free of weeds, noxious pests, and diseases.
(d) Mulch. Where mulch is used as a ground treatment, it shall be
applied to a maximum depth of 4 inches. A landscape fabric may be
placed between the soil and mulch to impede weed growth.
11.16.07 Credit for preserving existing trees and shrubs
(a) Generally. Landscape plantings as required by this article may
be satisfied in whole, or in part, by preserving existing trees and shrubs on
the subject property.
(b) Allocation of credits. An existing tree shall be credited based on
its size as shown in Exhibit 16-4. An existing shrub shall be credited on a
one-for-one basis regardless of size.
(c) Location of trees and shrubs. A tree eligible for credit shall be located within 10 feet of a required
bufferyard or parking lot to which the credit is to be applied or within the street terrace. A shrub eligible for credit
shall be located within the area to which the credit is to be applied.
(d) Condition of trees to be used as credit. In order to use an existing tree or shrub as credit, the following
conditions shall be satisfied:
(1) The area within the critical root radius (1.5 feet for every
diameter inch or 6 feet away from the tree trunk, whichever is
greater), shall be preserved in its natural state or covered with
pervious landscape material and shall be retained at original
grade with no trenching, cutting of any roots, or compaction of
soil.
(2) Prior to the commencement of any land-disturbing activity and
during the life of the construction project, a temporary barrier
shall be placed around the tree at the drip line or 6 feet away
from the tree trunk, whichever is greater. Such barrier may
consist of a plastic mesh or snow fence with poles not more than
15 feet apart.
(3) The existing stock shall not be damaged from skinning, barking,
and the like.
(4) The existing stock shall be healthy and free from disease,
damage, and active insect infestation potentially lethal to the
tree.
(5) The species is one of the plant species listed in Exhibit 16-2.
11.16.08 General design and placement guidelines
(a) Random placement. To the extent possible, plants shall be
1 Commentary: This publication is published by the American Nursery & Landscape Association and is an approved American national standard
(ANSI Z60.1-2004).
Exhibit 16-3. Minimum planting size
Plant category
Minimum
planting size
Tree
Tall deciduous tree 1½“ caliper
Medium deciduous tree 1½” caliper
Low deciduous tree ¾” caliper
Tall evergreen tree 5’ tall
Medium evergreen tree 4’ tall
Low evergreen tree 3’ tall
Shrub
Tall deciduous shrub 36” tall
Medium deciduous shrub 24” tall
Low deciduous shrub 18” tall
Tall evergreen shrub 24” tall
Medium evergreen shrub 18” tall
Low evergreen shrub 12” tall
Exhibit 16-4. Allowable tree credits
Caliper of existing tree
Number of trees
credited
2 inches up to 6 inches 1
6 inches up to 12 inches 2
12 inches up to 16 inches 3
16 inches and greater 4
Exhibit 16-5. Minimum separation from
specified objects
Tree Shrub
Driveway 10’ 6’
Fire hydrant 8’ 6’
Utility pole 20’ 6’
Utility cabinet and
pedestal
8’
6’
Street intersection 30' 30'
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
160
randomly placed so as to give a natural appearance.
(b) Planting beds. Where required, shrubs shall be placed in planting beds with mulch.
(c) Proximity to specified features. Trees and shrubs shall be separated from driveways, fire hydrants, utility
poles, and utility pedestals and cabinets as listed in Exhibit 16-5.
(d) Proximity to overhead utility lines and the like. Trees and shrubs shall not be placed where they will
require frequent pruning in order to avoid interference with overhead utility lines, buildings, or other structures.
(e) Placement within vision triangle. Landscaping within a vision triangle shall be consistent with the
standards in s. 11.06.118.
(f) Integration with natural amenities. When a site abuts a natural amenity such as a stream, park, or other
open space, the landscape plan shall integrate with, and respect the natural integrity of the amenity.
(g) Integration with stormwater facilities. Detention and retention ponds shall be designed to be physically,
functionally, and visually integrated into adjacent landscape areas.
(h) Snow storage. Landscape plants should not be located in areas reserved for snow storage, except
when such plants are salt-tolerant and will not be otherwise damaged.
11.16.09 Plant diversity
(a) Tree species. The maximum number of required
trees in the same genus shall comply with the proportions
established in Exhibit 16-6. For example, if three tree species
are required, a species in three different genuses must be
used (e.g., Quercus - oaks, Acer - maples, Pinus - pines).
(b) Shrub species. It is recommended that the
proportion of required shrubs and ground cover follow the
standards established in Exhibit 16-6, except that different
species within the same genus may be used.
11.16.10 Maintenance
(a) Generally. All landscaping shall be maintained in
good condition so as to present a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance, free from refuse, weeds, and debris.
(b) Responsibilities. The current landowner shall be responsible for maintaining the vegetation, irrigation
system, screening devices, and other landscape components as may be required by this article.
(c) Maintenance practices. Maintenance shall consist of regular and normal maintenance practices of
landscaping including weeding, irrigation, fertilizing, pruning, and mowing. Plant materials that exhibit significant
levels of insects, pests, diseases, or damage shall be treated as appropriate.
(d) Replacement, generally. Plant materials which were planted as required by this article or which were
used as a credit and which die or are irreparably damaged shall be removed and replaced with living plant
materials consistent with the approved landscape plan or as required by this article.
(e) Replacement following a natural disaster. Plant materials that were planted as required by this article or
which were used as a credit and which die or are irreparably damaged due to a natural disaster, such as areawide
flooding or high wind, shall, within 2 years of such event, be removed and replaced with plant materials
consistent with the approved landscape plan or as required by this article. With just cause, the Common Council
may on a case-by-case basis grant an extension of 2 additional years upon written request, or pass a resolution
granting a blanket extension to all affected properties in the city.
(f) Staking. It is recommended that stakes and cables used to support a tree be removed within 24 months
of planting.
11.16.11 Use of low-water-adaptive vegetation
The use of low-water-adaptive vegetation should be incorporated into landscape designs to the extent possible.
When the total amount of landscaping in a project, excluding terrace areas, exceeds 5,000 square feet, at least
Exhibit 16-6. Plant diversity requirements and recommendations
Required number
of plants
Maximum
proportion of tree
species in same
genus
Recommended
proportion of same
species for shrubs
11 to 20 30% 25%
21 to 30 25% 20%
31 to 40 20% 15%
41 to 50 15% 10%
51 and more 10% 10%
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
161
30 percent of the required vegetation shall be low-water-adaptive vegetation and planted in one or more
groupings.
11.16.12 Berms
(a) Maximum slope and form. In order to facilitate maintenance and efficient irrigation water usage, a
berm shall not exceed a slope of 3:1 (i.e., for every 3 feet of horizontal run the vertical height is one foot). A berm
shall be graded to appear as a curvilinear, naturalistic form.
(b) Construction. A berm shall be compacted during the construction process so as to minimize settling.
(c) Stabilization. A berm shall be covered with turf or mulch along with required plant materials.
(d) Effect on stormwater flow. A berm may not be designed or placed so as to divert the normal flow of
stormwater to the detriment of surrounding properties.
(e) Placement with respect to existing trees and shrubs. No portion of a berm shall be placed within the
critical root zone (1.5 feet for every diameter inch) of a tree.
(f) Placement within vision triangle. A berm located within a vision triangle must comply with the standards
in s. 11.06.118.
11.16.13 to 11.16.20 Reserved
Sections
DIVISION 2
BUFFERYARDS
11.16.21 General description
11.16.22 Applicability
11.16.23 General provisions
11.16.24 Determination of required bufferyard
11.16.21 General description
A bufferyard consists of a strip of undeveloped land with landscaping or other visual screening and is intended to
provide a physical and visual separation between two incompatible land uses.
11.16.22 Applicability
(a) Generally. A buffer yard shall be required at the time of development along the side and rear lot lines of
the lot being developed when it abuts another lot in a different zoning district and when the lot being developed
was:
(1) created by a land division of any type approved after , 2018,
(2) rezoned to another zoning classification after , 2018.
(b) Conditional use. As a condition of approving a conditional use, the Planning Commission may require
that a bufferyard be incorporated into the project’s overall design. The standard imposed shall be based on the
degree of incompatibility between the adjoining use and the conditional use.
(c) Dual responsibility. When two adjoining parcels are vacant and they are located in different zoning
districts, one half of the required bufferyard shall be located on each parcel (i.e., one half of the required width
and one half of the required plants).
(d) Single responsibility. When a vacant parcel adjoins a developed parcel and each are located in
different zoning districts, the bufferyard shall be located on the vacant parcel.
11.16.23 General provisions
(a) Relationship of fencing and plantings. When a fence or berm is used in conjunction with plantings, onehalf
of the required number of landscape points shall be planted between the fence or berm and the property
line.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
162
(b) Use of bufferyard. A bufferyard shall be undeveloped, except that the zoning administrator may allow
the following in a bufferyard:
(1) an unpaved fire lane,2
(2) utility boxes and cabinets when necessary,
(3) a paved bicycle/pedestrian path or a paved sidewalk when necessary to allow for proper on-site and
off-site pedestrian circulation,
(4) a paved vehicular access between the adjoining parcels provided it is located in the least intrusive
location and is located generally perpendicular to the property boundary line,
(5) stormwater management facilities, and
(6) other structures and features deemed compatible by the administrator.
If a utility easement is located along the property boundary line where a bufferyard is also required, the width of
the easement may be used to satisfy the width requirement of the bufferyard, in whole or in part, provided none
of the required landscaping and/or fencing is located within the utility easement.
(c) Multi-use developments and mixed use. For multi-use developments on a single lot, the use nearest the
property line shall determine the bufferyard requirement for that area. For mixed uses (two or more uses in the
same structure), the higher intensity use shall be used to determine the bufferyard requirement.
(d) Recording of easement. The bufferyard shall be shown on the face of the final plat or certified survey
map (CSM) with the following narrative:
“The bufferyard(s) shown on the face of this [plat /certified survey map] was established to
comply with Section 11.16.## of Wisconsin Rapids' zoning code in effect at the time of approval.
A bufferyard shall not be developed or used, except in conformance with Article 16 of the zoning
code, and the property owner shall be responsible for maintaining a level of landscaping that
meets the bufferyard requirements in effect at the time of filing of this [plat /certified survey map].
This bufferyard may only be removed by the Wisconsin Rapids Planning Commission consistent
with Article 16.”
(e) Longevity. Bufferyards shall be maintained in perpetuity. However, the Planning Commission may
terminate a bufferyard when (1) the parcel containing the bufferyard is rezoned to the same zoning classification
as the adjoining parcel or (2) when the adjoining parcel is rezoned to the same zoning classification as the parcel
with the bufferyard. Such termination shall reference the original document depicting the bufferyard and be
recorded with the register of deeds for Wood County.
(f) Ownership. When a bufferyard is required in a subdivision, it shall be held in common by a homeowners
association or shall be incorporated into the adjoining lots.
2 Commentary: A number of products have been introduced in recent years that allow grass to grow in a plastic-type mesh that is capable of
supporting a fire truck.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
163
Exhibit 16-7. Standards for a bufferyard between different zoning districts
Zoning district allowing the greatest intensity or density
Other zoning
district C-1 RR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-8 B-1 B-2 B-3 B-5 M-1 M-2
C-1 - - - - - - - - - - - -
RR - - A A A B B B B C D
R-1 - A A A B B B B C D
R-2 A A A B B B B C D
R-3 - - B A A A C D
R-4 - B B B B C D
R-8 B B B B C D
B-1 - - - B D
B-2 - - B D
B-3 - B D
B-5 B D
M-1 -
M-2
Zoning Districts
C-1 Conservancy; RR Rural Residential; R-1 Single-Family Residential; R-2 Mixed Residential; R-3 Multi-Family Medium
Density Residential ; R-4 Multi-Family High Density Residential; R-8 Manufactured Home Park; B-1 Downtown
Commercial; B-2 Highway Commercial; B-3 Neighborhood Commercial; B-5 Mixed Use Commercial; M-1 General
Industrial; M-2 Heavy Industrial
Notes:
1. A dash “-” means that a bufferyard is not required.
2. For A, B, C, and D see Exhibit 16-8 for the width of the bufferyard and related landscaping requirements.
11.16.24 Determination of required bufferyard
The determination of a bufferyard requirement is a two-step process as follows:
Step One – Identification of required bufferyard standard. The required bufferyard standard is determined using
Exhibit 16-7. First determine which of the two zoning districts allows the most intense development. Next, find that
zoning designation at the top of the table and then move down the column to the cell where the zoning
designation of the other district intersects. If a bufferyard is required, a letter will be shown in that cell. If the parcel
being developed adjoins land in the town, that municipality’s zoning classification that most closely corresponds
to the city’s zoning classification is used to determine bufferyard requirements.
Step Two – Identification of detailed bufferyard requirements. In the next step, the developer chooses how the
required standard will be met. For each standard, a variety of width, landscaping point, berm, and fence
combinations are possible as listed in Exhibit 16-8. The requirements shall be provided for each 100 feet or fraction
thereof. Different landscaping point options may be used along the length of a bufferyard, provided no such
segment is less than 100 feet.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
164
Exhibit 16-8. Detailed bufferyard requirements
A
Width
Points per
100 feet
Required
fence or
berm [1]
Example schematic [2]
A-1 8’ 150 Fence [3,4,5]
A-2 10' 200 -
A-3 15' 150 -
A-4
A-4 20’ 125 -
B
B-1 15’ 100 Fence [3,4,5]
B-2 15’ 300 -
B-3 20' 200 -
B-4 25' 150 - B-3
B-5 30' 125 -
C
C-1 15’ 100 Fence [3,4,5]
C-2 15’ 350 -
C-3 20' 250 -
C-4 25' 200 - C-3
C-5 30' 175 -
C-6 30’ 125 4’ berm
D
D-1 20' 200 Fence [3,4,5]
D-2 25' 325 -
D-3 30' 275 -
D-4 35' 250 - D-1
D-5 40' 200 -
D-6 40' 150 4' berm
Notes:
1. A dash “-” means not applicable
2. All schematics are intended to be illustrative.
3 Maximum height allowed controlled by Article 15.
4. When a fence is used, at least 50 percent of the required plant materials shall be located on the exterior side (the side away from the
center of the subject property) of the fence. If at the time of development, there is a fence on the adjoining property, this planting
requirement shall not apply.
5. When a fence is used to enclose an activity or storage area, a fence may not be used in the bufferyard.
11.16.25 to 11.16.40 Reserved
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
165
Sections
DIVISION 3
LANDSCAPING
11.16.41 Applicability
11.16.42 Street frontage landscape requirements
11.16.43 Building foundation landscape
requirements
11.16.44 Parking lot landscape requirements
11.16.45 Lot interior landscape requirements
11.16.41 Applicability
The provisions of this division apply to the following:
(1) construction of a principal building, except for single-family and two-family residences and agricultural
buildings;
(2) expansion of a principal building that is subject to this division by 500 square feet or more; and
(3) expansion of a parking area.
11.16.42 Street frontage landscape requirements
(a) Minimum amount required. A minimum of 60 landscape points shall be provided along a public street
right-of-way on a prorated basis for every 100 linear feet of frontage.
(b) Placement on lot. Plants required by this section shall be located within 10 feet of the public right-ofway.
In no instance shall such landscaping be located within a public right-of-way.
(c) Use of various plant types. Only tall, medium, and low trees may be used for street frontage plantings.
The following trees shall not be used as street trees because of
undesirable traits (e.g., weak wood, form, fruit/nut litter):
Exhibit 16-9. An example of a foundation planting
(1) silver maple,
(2) box elder,
(3) butternut,
(4) black walnut,
(5) any other tree so designated by the zoning
administrator.
A minimum of 50 percent of the required landscape points shall
be devoted to tall deciduous trees and a minimum of 30 percent
of the points shall be devoted to medium deciduous trees.
11.16.43 Building foundation landscape requirements
(a) Minimum amount required. A minimum of 40 landscape points shall be provided on a prorated basis for
every 100 feet of building foundation perimeter. For example, a building with a perimeter of 180 feet must provide
a minimum of 72 landscape points ((180/100)*40)=72.
(b) Placement on lot. Plants required by this section shall be placed so that, at maturity, the dripline of each
plant is generally located within 10 feet of the building foundation. As a general rule, plants shall be distributed
around the entire perimeter of the building. Such landscaping shall not be located in those areas required for
landscaping as street frontages or parking areas.
(c) Use of various plant types. Tall and medium trees shall not be used to meet building foundation
landscape requirements. The intent of this section is to require a visual break in the mass of buildings and to
require a visual screen of a minimum of 6 feet in height for all exterior perimeter appurtenances, such as groundmounted
HVAC units and utility boxes.
(d) Anticipated future development. Where an approved site plan depicts a future building extension, the
foundation landscaping requirement shall be calculated by measuring the length of the total perimeter.
However, foundation plantings need only be installed based on the landscape points calculated from the
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
166
portions of the building perimeter that will not be affected by building extension. If this results in point requirements
which are not met through the initial planting, then such requirement shall be met within 5 years of building permit
issuance, or as extended in writing by the zoning administrator.
11.16.44 Parking lot landscape requirements
(a) Minimum amount required. A minimum of 100 landscape points shall be provided on a prorated basis
for every 10,000 square feet of paved area. For example, a minimum of 303 landscape points are required within
a parking area consisting of 25,200 square feet (approximately 63 stalls) as follows: ((25,200/10,000)*100)=252.
(b) Use of various plant types. A minimum of 60 percent of all landscape points shall be devoted to tall trees
and a minimum of 20 percent of all points shall be devoted to shrubs.
(c) Placement within a landscaped area. A minimum of 325 square feet of landscaped area shall be
located within the perimeter of the paved area for the placement of every 100 landscape points, or fraction
thereof.
(d) Bioretention areas. Bioretention areas that are used to treat stormwater runoff from parking areas should
be integrated into landscape areas as may be required in this section.
11.16.45 Lot interior landscape requirements
Interior landscaping is not required. However, if it is not possible to install some of the landscaping required in this
division, such points may be installed as interior landscaping.
The remainder of this page intentionally left blank.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
167
Sections
ARTICLE 17
PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES
11.17.01 Legislative findings
11.17.02 Purpose
11.17.03 Off-street parking
11.17.04 Accessible parking and passenger
loading
11.17.05 Off-street loading berths
11.17.06 Bicycle parking
11.17.01 Legislative findings
The Common Council makes the following legislative findings:
(1) The design of parking areas is critically important to the economic viability of commercial areas,
pedestrian and driver safety, the efficient and safe operation of adjoining streets, and community
image and livability.
(2) Standards are needed to establish the minimum and maximum number of parking spaces that are
needed to serve various land uses.
(3) Excessively large parking lots reduce density, increase the cost of development, create an unhealthy
built environment, contribute to the heat island effect associated with urban areas, and decrease the
infiltration of storm water into the ground.
(4) Special standards are needed to accommodate the needs of the disabled.
(5) Shared parking can reduce parking facility costs (including aesthetic and environmental impacts),
allows greater flexibility in facility location and site design, and encourages more efficient land use.
(6) Parking lots and their access represent a vital connection between the local transportation network and
land uses.
(7) Incorrectly designed parking lots and site access can have negative impacts on the site itself, the
adjacent and nearby public roadways, and the image of the business community.
11.17.02 Purpose
This article promotes the public health, safety, and general welfare and is intended to:
(1) increase the safety and capacity of public streets by requiring off-street parking and off-street loading
facilities,
(2) minimize adverse effects of off-street parking and off-street loading facilities on adjacent properties and
surrounding neighborhoods,
(3) lessen congestion and prevent the overtaxing of public roads by regulating the location and capacity
of off-street parking and off-street loading facilities,
(4) maintain and enhance a safe and efficient transportation system,
(5) minimize the occurrences of motor vehicles backing into public roads,
(6) encourage bicycle use by providing adequate and safe facilities for the storage of bicycles, and
(7) minimize impervious surfaces.
11.17.03 Off-street parking
(a) Applicability. The off-street parking requirements in this article apply as follows:
(1) New construction. A new use shall comply with the off-street parking requirements.
(2) Change in use. When an existing use is changed to another permitted use with a higher parking
demand and the required number of parking spaces for the new use is less than 125 percent of the
number of existing spaces, additional spaces are not required.
(3) Expansion of existing use. When an existing use is enlarged and the required number of parking spaces
is more than 125 percent of the number of existing spaces, the expanded use shall comply.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
168
(4) Repaving/Reconstruction. When more than 10 percent of an existing off-street parking areas is repaved or
reconstructed only the following section shall apply.
? 11.17.03(h) Surfacing
? 11.17.03(i) Marking of parking spaces
? 11.17.03(j) Drainage
? 11.17.03(l) Landscaping: specifically, 25% of the total Parking lot landscape requirements shall be required.
? 11.17.03(q) Dimensional Standards
? 11.17.03(w) Stormwater Management
? 11.17.04 Accessible parking and passenger loading.
?
(b) General design principles. Parking areas shall be designed based on the following principles:
(1) Provide continuous flow of traffic through the parking area.
(2) Allow safe movement of pedestrians from parking to buildings.
(3) Avoid conflicts between vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic. Pedestrian circulation shall take
precedence over vehicular circulation.
(4) Allow for appropriate landscaping of parking areas without conflicting with outdoor lighting.
(5) Ensure that site facilities and amenities are accessible to people with disabilities as required by this
article and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
(6) Ensure that emergency service vehicles are able to travel through parking areas, including fire trucks
(having a curb-to-curb turning radius of 40 feet) and tow trucks (having a curb-to-curb turning radius of
47 feet with a car in tow).
(7) Minimize impervious surfaces.
(8) Allow for the logical expansion of parking areas to accommodate different land uses or an expansion
of an existing use.
(9) Ensure that the stormwater generated on the site is accommodated consistent with city requirements.
(c) Proximity of parking to principal use. Parking spaces required by this article shall be located on the
same lot with the principal use, except as provided in this subsection. When required parking spaces cannot be
located on the same lot, parking spaces may be located on a different lot provided the parking spaces are
located in the same zoning district. Parking for nonresidential uses shall not be located more than 500 feet from
the lot with the principal use. Parking for residential uses shall not be located more than 300 feet from the principal
entrance of the residential building. If required off-street parking is to be provided off-site, the use of such site shall
be secured with a permanent agreement acceptable to the city attorney and recorded in the office of the
Wood County register of deeds. The City of Wisconsin Rapids shall be named in that agreement as a party having
the right of enforcement.
(d) Location of parking on a lot. In commercial and industrial zoning districts, parking may be located in any
yard provided such spaces and aisles are located (1) at least 5 feet from another property in a commercial or
industrial zoning district, except when such lots are developed with a joint parking lot and there is a cross-access
easement in place, (2) at least 15 feet from the side lot line or rear lot line of a property in a residential zoning
district, and (3) at least 5 feet from the front lot line. In a residential zoning district, parking for a multi-family
building with three or more dwelling units may be located in the side or rear yards provided such spaces and
aisles are located at least 5 feet from any property boundary line. Parking is only allowed in the front yard for
single-family dwellings, duplex, and twinhomes when on a driveway. For off-street parking areas existing prior to
the adoption of this code, existing use of the right-of-way shall only be prermitted in conjunction with a right-of-wy
use agreement and appropriate barriers.
(e) Accessibility. Parking spaces shall be accessible at all times from a street, an alley, or a driveway
intended to serve such parking. No parking area consisting of 2 or more parking spaces shall be designed as to
require a motor vehicle to back into a public street, except for single-family dwellings, twinhomes, and 2-unit
multi-family units.
(f) Use of parking spaces. Off-street parking areas shall be for occupants, employees, visitors, and patrons.
The storage of merchandise, supplies, motor vehicles for sale, or the
repair of vehicles in a parking area is prohibited, unless otherwise
allowed in this chapter. In addition, the use of an off-street parking
area for overnight camping, including recreational vehicle camping,
is prohibited.
(g) Pedestrian routes in a
parking area. When a pedestrian
circulation route crosses a vehicular
route, a crosswalk shall be provided to
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
169
improve pedestrian safety (Exhibit 17-1)
( g) Pedestrian routes in a parking area. When a pedestrian
circulation route crosses a vehicular route, a crosswalk shall be
provided to improve pedestrian safety (Exhibit 17-1).
(h) Surfacing. An off-street parking area (i.e., spaces and
aisles) shall be hard surfaced (e.g., pervious concrete, asphaltic
concrete, pavers, or similar product), except for those land uses
listed as agriculture or resource-based in Appendix A which may be
surfaced with crushed gravel. If it is not possible to hard surface the
parking area between November 1 and April 1, the city building
Exhibit 17-1. A pedestrian crosswalk in the parking lot
of a fast food restaurant
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
170
inspector may issue an occupancy permit provided the property owner and zoning administrator enter into a
written agreement that requires completion no later than June 1.
(i) Marking of parking spaces. Parking spaces within an off-street parking area shall be clearly marked,
except for single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, twin homes, and townhouses.
(j) Drainage. An off-street parking area shall be properly graded for drainage.
(k) Snow storage. Required parking spaces and access aisles shall not be used for snow storage. Areas
used for snow storage shall be clearly depicted on the site plan if snow will be stored on site.
(l) Landscaping. Landscaping for an off-street parking area must be provided consistent with the
requirements set forth in Article 16.
(m) Electric charging station. One or more electric charging stations may be included in the parking lot
design. If charging stations are not installed at the time of construction, underground conduits to potential
charging stations should then be installed to lessen installation costs when a station is added at a later date.
(n) Signage. Signage related to off-street parking and on-site traffic circulation must comply with the
requirements set forth in Chapter 46 of the municipal code.
(o) Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting within a parking area must be provided consistent with the
requirements set forth in Article 18.
(p) Screening. When a parking area with 5 or more parking spaces adjoins a property in a residential zoning
district, a 4-foot screen (e.g., landscaping, berm, fence, or any combination) shall be installed and maintained.
(q) Dimensional standards. Parking spaces, except for handicapped parking; access aisles; and other
features in a parking area shall conform to the dimensions in Exhibit 17-2.
The remainder of this page intentionally left blank.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
171
Exhibit 17-2. Parking area dimensional standards
Parking angle - A
0° 45° 60° 75° 90°
B Stall width at parking angle 9.0 ft. 9.0 ft. 9.0 ft. 9.0 ft. 9.0 ft.
C Stall width parallel to access aisle 17.0 ft. 12.7 ft. 10.4 ft. 9.3 ft. 9.0 ft.
D Stall depth to wall 9.0 ft. 17.5 ft. 19.0 ft. 19.5 ft. 18.5 ft.
E Stall depth to interlock -- 15.3 ft. 17.5 ft. 18.8 ft. --
F Stall length 18.0 ft. 18.0 ft. 18.0 ft. 18.0 ft. 18.0 ft.
G Aisle width one-way 12.0 ft. 12.0 ft. 16.0 ft. 17.2 ft. 24.0 ft.
H Module width – wall to wall (single-loaded) 21.0 ft. 29.5 ft. 35.0 ft. 42.5 ft. 44.5 ft.
I Module width – wall to wall (double-loaded) 30.0 ft. 47.0 ft. 54.0 ft. 62.0 ft. 63.0 ft.
J Module width – wall to interlock (double-loaded) -- 44.8 ft. 52.5 ft. 61.3 ft. --
K Module width – interlock to interlock (double-loaded) -- 42.6 ft. 51.0 ft. 60.6 ft. --
Stall reduction for landscaped areas. When a parking space
abuts a landscape island or planter, the front 2 feet of the
required parking space length may overhang the planter,
provided that wheel stops or curbing are provided.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
172
(r) Minimum number of spaces. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the number specified in
Appendix B, except as follows:
(1) Land uses located in the downtown zoning (B-1) district are not required to provide off-street parking.
(2) When bicycle parking is provided consistent with this article, bicycle parking spaces may be used to
satisfy the number of required parking spaces up to a maximum of 4 percent provided the number of
required parking spaces is 25 or more. For example, if the parking standards as applied to a project call
for 100 vehicle parking spaces, no more than 4 bicycle parking spaces may be substituted (96 vehicle
parking spaces and 4 bicycle parking spaces).
(3) Pursuant to the procedures and requirements in Article 5, the Planning Commission may authorize the
use of a lesser parking standard for a particular land use as a special exception provided sufficient
evidence is provided that shows actual off-street parking demand for that use is less than the standard
set forth in Appendix B.
(s) Maximum number of spaces. For land uses located in a business, mixed-use, or industrial zoning district,
the number of parking spaces provided in a ground surface parking lot shall not exceed the number of minimum
parking spaces by more than 15 percent, except that the Planning Commission may allow more parking spaces
above that threshold as a special exception pursuant to the procedures and requirements in Article 5 provided
the commission determines that additional spaces are needed for that particular use or location. There shall be
no limitation on the number of parking spaces when located in a parking garage or similar structure.
(t) Mixed-use requirements. For mixed uses, the total requirements for off-street parking spaces shall be the
sum of the requirements for the various land uses. Off-street parking facilities for one use shall not be considered as
providing parking facilities for any other use except when considered shared parking as allowed in this article.
(u) Compact cars. Up to 10 percent of the required number of parking spaces may be sized for compact
cars. A compact vehicle parking space shall be so designated by a sign or other means approved by the city
building inspector.
(v) Shared parking. There may be instances where two or more land uses could share the same parking
facilities as shown in Exhibit 17-3. The zoning administrator may, upon written petition, authorize the joint use of
parking facilities required by such uses, provided:
(1) the applicant shows that there is no substantial conflict or overlap in the principal operating hours of the
building or use for
which the joint use of
parking facilities is
proposed;
(2) the parking facility
for which joint use is
proposed is located
within 500 feet of the
building or use
required to provide
parking;
(3) directional signage is
provided where
appropriate and allowed; and
(4) pedestrian routes are direct, clear, and safe.
The parties involved in the joint use of off-street parking facilities shall document their agreement
for such joint use by a legal instrument approved by the city attorney as to form and content.
Such instrument, when approved as conforming to the provisions of this part, shall be recorded
in the office of the Wood County register of deeds and a copy filed with the zoning
administrator.
(w) Stormwater management. A parking area with over 3,000 square feet of impervious
area shall be designed to prevent direct drainage to the street.
Exhibit 17-3. Examples of uses that could potentially share a parking area
Land uses with typical
weekday peaks
Land uses with typical evening peaks
Land uses with typical
weekend peaks
Banks Auditoriums Religious institutions
Schools Bars and dance halls Parks
Distribution facilities Meeting halls Malls (some types, but not all)
Factories Restaurants (some types, but not all)
Medical clinics Movie theaters
Offices
Professional services
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
173
11.17.04 Accessible parking and passenger loading
(a) Generally. Accessible parking spaces shall be provided subject to
this part; the Americans with Disability Act (ADA), as may be amended; and
the ADA Standards for Accessible Design 28 CFR 36, revised as of July 1, 1994
as may be amended.
(b) Number required. If parking spaces are required, then accessible
spaces shall be provided in addition to the required number of regular spaces
in the quantity as shown in Exhibit 17-4. One of 8 accessible parking spaces,
but always at least one, must be van-accessible.
(c) Location. Accessible spaces serving a particular building shall be
located on the shortest accessible route of travel between the parking and
the accessible entrance. When there are multiple entrances to a building of
similar prominence (e.g., shopping mall) with near-by parking, accessible
spaces shall be dispersed and provided at each location. In parking facilities
that do not serve a particular building, accessible parking shall be located on
the shortest accessible route of travel to an accessible pedestrian entrance of
the parking facility.
(d) Dimensions. Accessible parking spaces shall be at least 96 inches
wide.
(e) Vertical clearance. For van-accessible parking spaces, a 98-inch
high clearance shall be maintained above the space, access aisle, and on
the route to and from the van-accessible space.
(f) Maximum slope. Accessible spaces and adjoining access aisles shall have a maximum slope of 1:50 in
all directions. When accessible spaces are provided in an existing parking lot, the spaces shall be located on the
most level surface close to the accessible building entrance.
(g) Signage. Each accessible space shall be so
designated with a sign identified by the international symbol
of accessibility mounted on a vertical pole. In addition, vanaccessible
spaces shall be so designated with a sign
indicating “Van Accessible.” Such signs shall be located so
they cannot be obscured by a vehicle parked in the space
(at least 6 feet in height).
(h) Pavement striping and markings. The boundary of
the access aisle must be marked and the end of which may
be squared or a semicircle. Additional pavement markings
denoting the space are optional.
(i) Accessible route. An accessible route must be
provided from the accessible parking space to the accessible
entrance of the building. It shall be at least 36 inches wide,
without steps or curbs. It shall be paved and not contain any
feature that would restrict, inhibit, or unreasonably impeded
the movement of a physically disabled individual.
(j) Access aisle. An access aisle for an accessible
space shall be the same length as the adjacent parking
space it serves and be at least 60 inches wide for car access
Exhibit 17-5. Layout of standard and van accessible parking
and 96 inches wide for van-accessibility. Two adjoining accessible parking spaces may share a common access
isle (Exhibit 17-5). An access isle for a passenger loading zone shall be 60 inches wide and 20 feet long and
adjacent and parallel to the space.
11.17.05 Off-street loading berths
(a) Generally. Off-street loading berths are required for new buildings and building expansions with any use
that receives deliveries or makes shipments from large trucks including retail stores, manufacturing, warehousing,
processing, offices, health care centers, and schools.
Exhibit 17-4. Minimum number of
accessible parking spaces
Number of
required parking
spaces
Number of
additional
accessible spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1000 2 percent of total
1,001 and over 20; plus 1 for each
100 over 1,000
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
174
(b) Dimensional standards. A loading berth shall comply with the dimensional standards in Exhibit 17-6. The
minimum vertical clearance also applies to all areas providing access to the loading berth.
(c) Location. A loading berth shall not be located on the front of the building, except when entirely located
within the building and the access door is integrated into the
overall design of the building. A loading berth shall not be located
within a required side yard setback area. A loading berth shall not
be located within a public road right-of-way or interfere with the
intended use of a public road right-of-way. A loading berth or
access to a loading berth shall not interfere with onsite traffic or
pedestrian circulation or on-site parking.
(d) Surfacing. A loading berth shall be hard surfaced (e.g.,
pervious concrete, asphaltic concrete, pavers, or similar product). If
it is not possible to hard surface a loading berth between
November 1 and April 1, the city building inspector may issue
an occupancy permit provided the property owner and
zoning administrator enter into a written agreement that
requires completion no later than June 1.
(e) Marking. A loading berth shall be clearly marked.
(f) Use. A loading berth shall only be used for loading
and unloading of vehicles.
(g) Drainage. A loading berth shall be graded for proper
drainage.
(h) Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting for a loading berth
shall comply with the requirements set forth in Article 18.
(i) Screening. The reviewing authority may require
screening (e.g., landscaping, berm, fence, or any
combination) when the use of the loading berth has the potential of negatively impacting adjoining residential
uses.
(j) Minimum number of loading berths. Those buildings subject to this section shall provide one or more
loading berths as specified in Exhibit 17-7.
11.17.06 Bicycle parking
(a) Generally. Bicycle parking may be provided consistent with the recommended standards contained in
Exhibit 17-8.
Exhibit 17-8. Recommended number of bicycle parking spaces
Land use Number of recommended spaces
Primary or secondary school 10 percent of the number of students, plus 3 percent of the number of employees
College or university 6 percent of the number of students, plus 3 percent of the number of employees
Dorms, fraternities, sororities 1 space per 3 students
Shopping mall 5 percent of the number of required vehicle parking spaces
Office 5 percent of the number of required vehicle parking spaces
Governmental 10 percent of the number of required vehicle parking spaces
Movie theater 3 percent of the number of required vehicle parking spaces
Restaurant 3 percent of the number of required vehicle parking spaces
Manufacturing / industrial 3 percent of the number of required vehicle parking spaces
Other 3 to 7 percent of the number of required vehicle parking spaces
Exhibit 17-6. Dimensions of loading berths by type
Type
Minimum
width
Minimum
length
Minimum
overhead
clearance
Small berth 10 feet 25 feet 14 feet
Large berth 12 feet 50 feet 14 feet
Exhibit 17-7. Minimum number of loading berths
Floor area
Minimum number of loading
berths
6,000 to 12,499 square feet 1 small berth
12,500 to 24,999 square feet 2 small berths
25,000 to 39,999 square feet 1 large berth
40,000 to 99,999 square feet 2 large berths
100,000 square feet or more 2 large berths plus 1 large
berth for each additional
80,000 square feet over
100,000 square feet
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
175
(b) Location. Bicycle parking shall be located in visible and prominent locations near the building entrance
and shall be as close, or closer to the entrance than the nearest parking space. Under no circumstance should
bicycle parking be more than 100 feet from the building entrance. Where there is more than one building on a
site, or where a building has more than one main entrance, the parking shall be distributed to serve all buildings or
main entrances. If possible, racks should be protected from the elements by an awning, overhang, or similar
covering. Racks shall not be placed so they block the entrance or inhibit pedestrian flow in or out of the building.
(c) Design. Bicycle parking areas should be incorporated into the overall building design, parking lot layout,
and pedestrian circulation and coordinated with street furniture (e.g., benches, street lights, planters) when it is
part of the overall project.
(d) Accessibility. Each bicycle parking space shall be accessible without moving another bicycle. In most
circumstances, a space 2 feet by 6 feet is adequate. When needed, an aisle at least 5 feet wide shall be
provided. (Exhibit 17-9)
(e) Lighting. Bicycle parking spaces shall have adequate lighting to promote security and avoid vandalism
and theft.
(f) Rack design. Bicycle parking may be provided in floor, wall, or ceiling mounted racks. Racks should
meet the following requirements:
(1) The rack holds the bicycle frame, not just a wheel.
(2) A U-shaped shackle lock can be used to secure the bicycle to the rack.
(3) The rack is designed to accommodate a wide range of bicycle sizes, wheel sizes, and types.
(4) The rack is covered with material that will not chip the paint off of a bicycle that leans against it.
(5) The rack does not have hazards, such as sharp edges.
The rack is securely fastened to the ground, a wall, or other solid surface.
Exhibit 17-9. Layout of bicycle parking spaces
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
176
Sections
ARTICLE 18
OUTDOOR LIGHTING
11.18.01 Legislative findings
11.18.02 Compliance
11.18.03 Exemptions
11.18.04 General requirements
11.18.05 Special provisions for security lights
11.18.06 Lighting plan
11.18.01 Legislative findings
The Common Council makes the following legislative findings relating to outdoor lighting:
(1) Light pollution would detract from the character of the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
(2) Excessive lighting wastes energy.
(3) Glare from nonvehicular light sources can pose a threat to the safety of drivers and pedestrians.
(4) Light trespass can intrude on the enjoyment of private property.
(5) The regulations in this chapter relating to outdoor lighting are intended to provide nighttime safety,
utility, security, and productivity.
(6) Regulations in this chapter relating to outdoor lighting are adopted to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare of city residents.
11.18.02 Compliance
All outdoor lighting, except lighting that is specifically exempted in s. 11.18.03, must comply with this article as
applicable and all applicable building and electrical codes. If any project increases the number of existing
luminaires on a property by 25 percent or more, all existing luminaires on such property shall be made to comply
with this article or be removed.
11.18.03 Exemptions
The following types of outdoor lighting are exempt from this article:
(1) Street lights located within a public right-of-way.
(2) Emergency lighting when used by police, firefighters, medical personnel, public works, and other
responders for the duration of the emergency situation.
(3) The lighting of flags of the United States, State of Wisconsin, City of Wisconsin Rapids, and any other flag
adopted or sanctioned by an elected legislative body of competent jurisdiction, provided such lighting
does not trespass onto another property.
(4) Holiday lighting.
(5) Lighting on towers when required by a regulating authority.
(6) Airport lighting when required by a regulating authority.
(7) Underwater lighting used for the illumination of swimming pools and fountains.
11.18.04 General requirements
(a) Overhead lines prohibited. Electrical feeds for outdoor lighting must be run underground, not overhead.
(b) Parking lot lights. A lighting standard in a parking area must be placed (1) at least 5 feet outside of the
paved area, (2) within a landscape island, (3) on a concrete pedestal that is at least 24 inches but not more than
36 inches high above the pavement, or (4) protected by other means as may be approved by the Planning
Commission or zoning administrator.
(c) Canopy lights. Canopy lights for a vehicle fuel station must be recessed or shielded so that no light
source is visible from or causes glare on a public right-of-way or adjacent property.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
177
(d) Lighting in bufferyards. Light poles must not be placed within a required bufferyard, except for
pedestrian lighting along a sidewalk or other pedestrian way.
(e) Specific standards. Outdoor lighting must be designed to comply with the standards in Table 18-1.
Examples of cutoff luminaires are depicted in Exhibit 18-1 and key features of a parking lot are depicted in Exhibit
18-2.
Table 18-1. Specific lighting requirements
Single family, duplex, and
twin home
Multi-family (3 or more
dwelling units)
Commercial, industrial, and
institutional
Athletic fields and public
outdoor venues
Fixture type [1,2] 1,000 lumens or less – no
limitation
More than 1,000 lumens -
cutoff or shielded
1,000 lumens or less – no
limitation
More than 1,000 lumens -
cutoff or shielded
1,000 lumens or less – no
limitation
More than 1,000 lumens -
cutoff or shielded
No limitation
Light trespass [3,4] The intensity of illumination
projected onto another
property shall not exceed
0.1 footcandle.
The intensity of illumination
projected onto another
property shall not exceed
0.1 footcandle.
The intensity of illumination
projected onto a residential
property shall not exceed
0.1 footcandle and 0.2
footcandles onto another
commercial, industrial, or
institutional use.
The intensity of illumination
projected onto a residential
property shall not exceed
0.1 footcandle and 0.5
footcandles on a
commercial, industrial, or
institutional use
Maximum height
of freestanding
luminaire [5]
35 feet or more from the
property boundary line – 15
feet [6]
27 feet or more but less than
35 feet from the property
boundary line – 12 feet [6]
Less than 27 feet from the
property boundary line – 9
feet [6]
Parking lots – 25 feet
Pedestrian lighting – 12 feet
Parking lots – 25 feet or 16
feet if located within 50 feet
of a residential zoning
district (Exhibit 18-2)
Pedestrian lighting – 12 feet
No limitation
Maximum lighting
levels [8]
No limitation Zone 1 - 100,000 lumens per
acre
Zone 2 – 50,000 lumens per
acre
Zone 1 - 100,000 lumens per
acre
Zone 2 – 50,000 lumens per
acre
No limitation
Minimum lighting
levels
NA NA 0.2 footcandles for parking
lots, loading areas, and
similar use areas
NA
Light curfew NA None On-site lighting levels in
parking lots reduced by at
least 50 percent by 10:00
p.m. or 30 minutes after the
close of business for the day,
whichever is later
Lights to be turned off no
later than 1 hour after the
end of the event
Notes:
1. Exhibit 18-1 shows various types of lighting that are typically classified as full cutoff.
2. See s. 11.18.07 for special provisions for security lighting.
3. Stated levels are above ambient lighting conditions on a cloudless night.
4. The Planning Commission may exercise discretion in regard to light trespass onto a public right-of-way if it is determined to be beneficial to
safe lighting conditions of adjacent sidewalks or other public areas.
5. The height of a freestanding luminaire is measured from the ground directly below the center line of the luminaire to the lowest part of the
luminaire that emits light.
6. The maximum height is based on the proximity of the luminaire to the adjoining property boundary line.
7. For lamp types that vary in their output as they age (e.g., high-pressure sodium and metal halide), the initial output, as defined by the
manufacturer, is the value to be considered.
8. Pursuant to the procedures and requirements in Article 5, the Planning Commission may approve a special exception to allow an increase of
no more than 5 percent when needed to ensure public safety.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
178
Exhibit 18-1. Examples of cutoff lighting
No scale
© Civic Webware
Exhibit 18-2. Key features for lighting in a parking lot
No scale
© Civic Webware
11.18.05 Special provisions for security lights
Security lights are permitted provided the following conditions are met:
(1) The luminaire is top-shielded or located below an eave.
(2) The lamp is rated less than 2,000 lumens.3
(3) Lights are directed so as to limit direct glare onto adjacent properties.
(4) Light switching is automated (e.g., motion sensor).
(5) When the lamp is activated, the illumination level at a distance 25 feet must not exceed 0.5
footcandles.
3 Commentary: Examples of lamp types of less than 2,000 lumens include a 100-watt standard incandescent, a 15-watt cool fluorescent, a 15-watt compact fluorescent,
and an 18-watt low pressure sodium lamp.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
179
11.18.06 Lighting plan
(a) General. At the time any exterior light is installed or substantially modified, and whenever a
development-related application is made a lighting plan must be submitted for review and approval consistent
with the requirements for a site plan set forth in Article 5.
(b) Content. A lighting plan must include the following:
(1) A description of all existing and proposed luminaires, including name of manufacturer, product number,
lamp type, mounting height, and lumen output. This may include manufacturer's catalog cut sheets.
(2) A photometric plan indicating the location of all existing and proposed luminaires, mounting and/or
installation height in feet, the overall illumination levels (in footcandles) and uniformities on the site, and
the illumination levels (in footcandles) at the property boundary lines. This may be accomplished by
means of an isolux curve or computer printout projecting the illumination levels.
(3) Other information the zoning administrator deems necessary to ensure compliance with this article.
(c) Amendment of an approved lighting plan. The zoning administrator may upon petition approve an
amendment to an approved lighting plan based on a finding that the amendment is minor and otherwise
complies with the requirements of this article in effect at the time. Any proposed amendment that the zoning
administrator determines to be substantial, shall require a new approval and all procedures and requirements in
place at the time must be followed.
The remainder of this page intentionally left blank.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
180
Sections
ARTICLE 19
NONCONFORMITIES
11.19.01 Legislative findings
11.19.02 Official registry of nonconforming lots,
buildings, and land uses
11.19.03 Nonconforming lots
11.19.04 Nonconforming buildings
11.19.05 Nonconforming uses
11.19.06 Special provisions for manufactured home
communities
11.19.07 Special provisions for mobile homes and
manufactured homes not in a mobile home
park
11.19.08 Special provisions for nonconforming
boathouses
11.19.09 Special provisions related to the shorelandwetland
overlay district
11.19.10 Special provisions related to the floodplain
overlay district
11.19.01 Legislative findings
The Common Council makes the following legislative findings relating to nonconformities:
(1) There may exist lots, structures, uses, and signs in the City of Wisconsin Rapids that were lawfully
established but that do not now comply with one or more provisions of the zoning district in which they
are located.
(2) It is not the intent of this chapter to perpetuate and/or encourage the long-term continuance of
nonconformities because they are inconsistent with the requirements and character of the zoning
districts involved, or to permit nonconformities to be generally enlarged upon, expanded, or extended
except as provided for herein.
(3) State law permits the reconstruction of nonconforming structures under certain circumstances.
11.19.02 Official registry of nonconforming lots, buildings and land uses
(a) Content of registry. The zoning administrator is authorized to develop and maintain a registry of (1) lots
known by him or her to be considered nonconforming, (2) buildings known by him or her to be considered
nonconforming, and (3) land uses known by him or her to be considered nonconforming and those which have
registered as a nonconforming use consistent with the requirements in Article 5.
(b) Form of registry. At the discretion of the zoning administrator, the registry may consist of either a written
list or digital records.
(c) Disclaimer. Given the nature of the registry, the city does not warrant that such information is complete
and/or accurate in all respects.
11.19.03 Nonconforming lots
(a) Generally. A legal nonconforming lot may be used for an allowable use, provided such use complies
with all other development standards of the zoning district in which the lot is located.
(b) Alteration of property boundary lines. The location of a property boundary line of a nonconforming lot
shall not be modified by any means, except when the new property boundary line location will make the
nonconforming lot to be conforming or lessen the nonconformity. Any such change in a property boundary
location shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission.
11.19.04 Nonconforming buildings
(a) Generally. A legal nonconforming building may be used for any conforming use.
(b) Enlargement. A nonconforming building that is used for a conforming use may be enlarged provided
the Planning Commission authorizes such enlargement pursuant to the requirements in Article 5.
(c) New foundation/basement. The placement of a new foundation or basement under an existing
nonconforming building that is not located in the 100-year floodplain is permitted provided the foundation or
basement does not extend beyond the vertical extent of the existing exterior wall.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
181
(d) Unsafe conditions. Nothing in this article shall preclude the building inspector or any other city official
from initiating remedial or enforcement actions when a nonconforming building is declared unsafe or presents a
danger to the public health, safety, or welfare; constitutes a public nuisance; or is in violation of any licensing
regulation.
(e) Ordinary repair and maintenance, and remodeling. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit or
limit based on cost, the repair, maintenance, renovation, or remodeling of a nonconforming building.
(f) Reconstruction following damage. A nonconforming building that is damaged by violent wind,
vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold, or infestation on or after March 2, 2006, may be restored to its condition
(e.g., size, location, and use) prior to the damage, except the building may be larger when necessary to comply
with state or federal requirements.4
(g) Relocation. A nonconforming building shall not be moved or relocated to any other location on the lot
unless such building is made to conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
11.19.05 Nonconforming uses
(a) Generally. A legal nonconforming use may continue to exist so long as it remains otherwise lawful,
subject to the provisions in this section.
(b) Cessation of use. If a nonconforming use ceases for any reason, whether intentional or otherwise, for
more than 12 continuous months, such use shall not thereafter be reestablished.5 A business of a seasonal nature
shall not be deemed to be discontinued during periods in which it is normally inactive (e.g., marinas, summer
camps). If the zoning administrator determines that a nonconforming use has ceased to operate for more than
the aforementioned time period, he or she shall initiate the process established under Article 5 to terminate the
nonconforming use. However, if a temporary structure houses a nonconforming use, such use shall terminate
when the temporary structure is removed.
(c) Change in extent. Except as may be provided in this article or in state law, a nonconforming use shall
not be enlarged, increased, or expanded and shall not occupy a greater area than what existed on the effective
date of this chapter or any amendment thereto that created the nonconforming use.
(d) Limitation on structural alterations to building housing nonconforming use. Structural alterations to a
building housing a nonconforming use shall not exceed, on an accumulative percentage basis, 50 percent of the
equalized assessed value of such structure.6 For example, if a property owner makes structural alterations, the cost
of which equals 40 percent of the current equalized assessed value of the building, any additional structural
alterations are limited to 10 percent of the equalized assessed value at the time of the work.
(e) Damage to structure housing nonconforming use. If a building housing a nonconforming use is
damaged beyond 50 percent of its present equalized assessed value, such nonconforming use shall not be
reestablished.
(f) Change of location. A nonconforming use shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of
the lot or to another structure than what was occupied on the effective date of this chapter or any amendment
thereto that created the nonconforming use.
(g) Casual, occasional, accessory, or incidental use. Casual, occasional, accessory, or incidental use after
the primary nonconforming use has terminated, shall not be deemed to perpetuate a nonconforming use.7
(h) Change of production. A change in the method or quantity of production and the incorporation of new
technology into a nonconforming use is permitted provided the original character of the use remains the same.8
(i) Termination due to effects on public health, safety, and welfare. In the event the zoning administrator
determines that a nonconforming use, regardless of its duration, is harmful to the public health, safety, or welfare,
he or she shall follow the procedure outlined in Article 5 relating to termination of a use. 9
4 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats.
5 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats.
6 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats.
7 Commentary: See Village of Menominee Falls v. Veirstahler, 183 Wis. 2d 96, 515 N.W.2d 290 (Ct. App. 1994)
8 Commentary: See Racine County v. Cape, 2002 WI App 19, 250 Wis. 2d 44, 639 N.W.2d 782, 01-0740
9 Commentary: See Town of Delafield v. Sharpley, 212 Wis. 2d 332, 568 N.W.2d 779 (Ct. App. 1997, 96-2458)
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
182
(j) Unsafe conditions. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to
a safe condition of any structure or part thereof, provided that such work conforms to the provisions in this
chapter.
(k) Licensing. The operator of a nonconforming use shall obtain such licenses as may be required by the
state of Wisconsin, or its designated agent; Wood County; or the City of Wisconsin Rapids, and maintain such
licenses for the life of the use or until the entity no longer requires such license.
(l) Conversion to another nonconforming use. Subject to the requirements in Article 5, a nonconforming
use may be converted to a different nonconforming use provided the new use is less nonconforming. Any
nonconforming use that has been converted shall continue to be subject to all applicable provisions related to
nonconforming uses and to the conversion order as approved by the Common Council.
(m) Permissible accessory residential uses. If an existing single-family dwelling unit is classified as a
nonconforming use, the establishment of accessory residential uses normally incidental to a single-family dwelling
is not considered to be an expansion of a nonconforming use and is permitted provided the accessory use is
otherwise allowed by the zoning code and all accessory buildings exceeding 600 square feet must be approved
by the Planning Commission upon a determination that the accessory building is otherwise allowed in the zoning
district in which it is located.
11.19.06 Special provisions for manufactured home communities
Notwithstanding subsection 11.19.05(d) above, a manufactured home community licensed under s. 101.935, Wis.
Stats., that is a legal nonconforming use continues to be a legal nonconforming use notwithstanding the
occurrence of any of the following activities within the community:
(1) Repair or replacement of any manufactured homes
(2) Repair or replacement of infrastructure.10
11.19.07 Special provisions for mobile home and manufactured homes not in a mobile home park
A mobile home or a manufactured home not located in a mobile home park is considered a nonconforming use
and must comply with s. 24.02(4) of the municipal code.
11.19.08 Special provisions for nonconforming boathouses
The ordinary maintenance and repair of a nonconforming boathouse that extends beyond the ordinary highwater
mark shall comply with s. 30.121, Wis. Stats.
11.19.09 Special provisions related to the shoreland-wetland overlay district
The shoreland-wetland provisions of this chapter authorized by s. 62.231, Wis. Stats., shall not limit the repair,
reconstruction, renovation, remodeling, or expansion of a nonconforming structure in existence on the effective
date of the shoreland wetland provisions, or of any environmental control facility in existence on May 7, 1982
related to such a structure. All other modifications to nonconforming structures are subject to s. 62.23(7)(h), Wis.
Stats., which limits total lifetime structural repairs and alterations to 50 percent of current fair market value.
11.19.10 Special provisions related to the floodplain overlay district
Special provisions relating to nonconformities in the floodplain overlay district are included in Article 9.
10 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(ham), Wis. Stats.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
183
The remainder of this page intentionally left blank.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
184
ARTICLE 20
RESERVED
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
185
This page intentionally left blank.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
186
Sections
ARTICLE 21
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS
11.21.01 Legislative findings
11.21.02 Reviews
11.21.03 General requirements
11.21.04 Confidentiality of applicant information
11.21.05 Nature of approval
11.21.06 Imposition of conditions
11.21.01 Legislative findings
The Common Council makes the following legislative findings relating to reasonable accommodations for persons
with disabilities:
(1) The federal government has adopted laws with respect to various rights afforded persons with
disabilities.
(2) Some of these laws, most notably the Fair Housing Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act, affect
how local zoning rules and regulations are administered by municipalities.
(3) Under the Fair Housing Act, reasonable accommodations must be made with respect to local zoning
laws so that a person with a disability has an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling unit.
(4) Under Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act, reasonable accommodations must be made with
respect to local zoning laws to avoid discrimination as provided in the act.
(5) If a local municipality can demonstrate that a requested modification would fundamentally alter the
nature of its service, program, or activity (in this instance zoning requirements) it is not required to grant
the modification.
(6) Requests for wheelchair ramps in setback and offset areas as authorized in this section do not
fundamentally alter the nature of this zoning code.
(7) Requests for all other types of reasonable accommodations will be reviewed individually to determine if
the requested accommodation fundamentally alters the nature of this zoning code.
11.21.02 Reviews
(a) Wheelchair ramps in setback and offset areas. The building inspector is authorized to approve the
construction of wheelchair access ramps in setback areas pursuant to s. 11.06.106.
(b) Other reasonable accommodations. All other requests for reasonable accommodations under the
above-mentioned federal laws shall be accomplished through the variance process described in Article 5.
11.21.03 General requirements
If a person’s disability is not obvious or otherwise known, the reviewing authority may request information that (1) is
necessary to verify that the person meets the federal government’s definition of disability (i.e., has a physical or
mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities), (2) describes the needed
accommodation, and (3) shows the relationship between the person’s disability and the need for the requested
accommodation.
11.21.04 Confidentiality of applicant information
In reviewing petitions for reasonable accommodations, the reviewing authority will attempt to balance the
privacy rights and reasonable request of an applicant for confidentiality, with normal procedural requirements
relating to public notice, public hearings, written decision documents that may include findings of fact and
conclusions of law, and maintaining adequate records. Any document identifying the disability or medical
condition of any specific person shall be treated as confidential and shall not be subject to disclosure by the City
for any reason, including Wisconsin’s Open Records law, unless ordered to do so by a court of competent
jurisdiction and notice is given to the person who provided the document to the City. Specifically, any medical
records regardless of source, including statements of medical providers, shall not be subject to disclosure. For any
other type of document, such as an application or determination, the document may be subject to disclosure,
but only after the nature or description of the person's disability or medical condition has been redacted by the
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
187
city attorney. A statement regarding the City’s handling of information subject to this provision should be included
in the decision document.
11.21.05 Nature of approval
Any accommodation approved under this chapter is considered a personal accommodation for the individual
applicant and does not run with the land.
11.21.06 Imposition of conditions
The reviewing authority may impose conditions of approval deemed necessary to uphold the overall intent of this
chapter. Typical conditions of approval include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) periodic inspection of the property to verify compliance with this section and any conditions of
approval;
(2) removal of the improvements, where removal would not constitute an unreasonable financial burden,
when the need for which the accommodation was granted no longer exists;
(3) time limits and/or expiration of the approval if the need for which the accommodation was granted no
longer exists;
(4) recordation of a deed restriction requiring removal of the accommodating feature once the need for it
no longer exists;
(5) measures to reduce the impact on surrounding properties and uses;
(6) measures in consideration of the physical attributes of the property and structures; and
(7) other conditions necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
The remainder of this page intentionally left blank.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
188
Sections
ARTICLE 22
ENFORCEMENT
11.22.01 Authority for enforcement
11.22.02 Actions constituting a violation
11.22.03 General procedure
11.22.04 Violation notice
11.22.05 Stop work order
11.22.06 Other remedies
11.22.07 Continuation
11.22.08 Release of contaminants in the wellhead
protection overlay district
11.22.09 Penalties
11.22.01 Authority for enforcement
The City has the authority under s. 62.23(7)(f), Wis. Stats., to enforce the provisions of this chapter and establish
penalties.
11.22.02 Actions constituting a violation
Each action that is not in full compliance with this chapter and/or with a condition or requirement of an approval
issued pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. Each day that a violation
continues is considered a separate offense.
11.22.03 General procedure
(a) General steps. After observing or receiving a complaint of an alleged violation, the zoning administrator
shall investigate to determine if a violation does exist. If the property owner does not allow the zoning
administrator the right to enter the subject property for the purpose of determining whether a violation exists or
not, he or she may request a special inspection warrant from the court pursuant to s. 66.0119, Wis. Stats. If the
zoning administrator determines that a violation does not exist, he or she shall notify the complainant and the
property owner explaining his or her determination.
If the administrator determines that a violation does exist and the violation does not constitute an immediate
threat to public health, safety, or welfare, the following general steps shall be followed.
(1) Notification of violation. The zoning administrator shall send a violation notice, as described in this article,
to the property owner by regular mail and certified mail.
(2) Stop work order. If the violation involves construction and/or any land-disturbing activity, the zoning
administrator shall prepare a stop work order and send a copy of the order to the property owner by
regular mail. The stop work order shall be posted on the property in a prominent location.
(3) Issuance of a citation. If the property owner does not bring the property into compliance as set forth in
the notice and the property owner has not obtained an extension, the zoning administrator or a law
enforcement officer employed by the City of Wisconsin Rapids shall send a citation to the property
owner consistent with s. 2.17 of the municipal code.
If the violation is an immediate threat to the public health, and/or safety, the City may pursue all remedies,
penalties, and enforcement powers available under this article and state law without any prior notice as
described in this section. If a stop work order is issued and work continues in violation of that order, the City may
then pursue all remedies, penalties, and enforcement powers available under this article and state law without
any prior notice as described in this section.
(b) Extension to compliance period. Upon request, the zoning administrator may grant an extension to the
compliance period if the property owner has demonstrated a good faith effort to comply and additional time is
needed because of the weather and practical difficulties in meeting the timeline. Any forbearance on the part of
the Common Council in this regard shall not be construed as waiving any provision of this chapter.
(c) Stay of enforcement proceedings. If the property owner submits an administrative appeal application or
variance application to the City consistent with the procedures and requirements set forth in Article 5 and the
appeal or variance relates specifically to the enforcement action, all legal proceedings relating to the
enforcement action may be stayed, unless the zoning administrator certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals that
such stay in his or her opinion, would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall not
be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by a
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
189
court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause
shown.11
(d) Reoccurring violation. If the zoning administrator determines that the property owner has violated this
chapter a second time for the same offense within 12 months of bringing the property into compliance, the
zoning administrator or a law enforcement officer employed by the City of Wisconsin Rapids shall send a citation
to the property owner consistent with the procedures and requirements set forth in s. 2.17 of the municipal code.
11.22.04 Violation notice
(a) Content. A violation notice shall include the following:
(1) a description of the violation,
(2) the section(s) of this chapter being violated,
(3) a statement describing the measures that would remedy the violation,
(4) a statement that the property owner has 30 days from the date of the violation notice to comply (or 15
days for the second notice),
(5) information about how the property owner may request an extension to the compliance period,
(6) information about the appeal process, and
(7) information concerning penalties for continued non-compliance.
(b) Effect of violation notice. Once a violation notice has been issued all construction or any land
development activity related to the violation, except that which is done to ensure compliance, shall cease. In
addition, if a property remains in violation the City shall not issue any other permits or approvals for any
development on the premises.
11.22.05 Stop work order
(c) Content. A stop work order shall state the section of this chapter that is being violated, the name of an
individual who should be contacted along with his or her work telephone number, a statement that all work on
the premises must cease immediately until the zoning administrator rescinds the stop work order, and that
removal of the stop work order constitutes a violation of this chapter.
(d) Effect of stop work order. Once a stop work order has been issued pursuant to this article all work on the
property shall cease until such time as it is lifted by the zoning administrator.
(e) Unauthorized removal of stop work order. No person, other than the zoning administrator, shall remove a
stop work order from the location it was posted. The removal of a stop work order by a person without authority to
do so constitutes a violation of this chapter.
11.22.06 Other remedies
The City or any aggrieved person may seek an injunction, restraining order, or other equitable relief in court to
stop any violation of this chapter and/or an order requiring the property owner to restore the property to the
condition that existed prior to the violation.
11.22.07 Continuation
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the continuation of previous enforcement actions undertaken by the City
pursuant to previous and valid ordinances and laws.
11.22.08 Release of contaminants in the wellhead protection overlay district
An individual and/or facility that releases a contaminant in the wellhead protection overlay district is subject to
the requirements in s. 11.13.05.
11 Commentary: See s. 62.23(7)(e)5, Wis. Stats.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
190
11.22.09 Penalties
Any person that violates this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in the municipal code.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
A - 1
Appendix A
Land-Use Matrix
Series / Land Use
Secondary
Review
RR
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
R-8
B-1
B-2
B-3
B-5
I-I
P-1
M-1
M-2
C-1
1 Agriculture
1.01 Agriculture, crop - P - - - - - - - - - - - - C -
1.02 Agriculture, general - P - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
1.03 Aquaculture AR,SP,PO,ZP C - - - - - - - - - - - C C C
1.04 Greenhouse SP,PO,ZP C - - - - - - C - - - - C C -
2 Resource-Based Uses
2.01 Dam SP,PO,ZP C - - - - - - - - - - C C C C
2.02 Forestry - P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
3 Residential
3.01 Manufactured home park SP,ZP - - - - - C - - - - - - - - -
3.02 Mixed-use housing AR,SP,ZP - - - - - - P C C - - - - - -
3.03 Multi-family, 2 units ZP - - P P - - - - - - - - - - -
3.04 Multi-family, 3 to 8 units AR,SP,ZP - - - P C - - - - - - - - - -
3.05 Multi-family, 9 to 15 units AR,SP,ZP - - - C P - - - - - - - - - -
3.06 Multi-family, more than 15
units
AR,SP,ZP - - - - C - - - - - - - - - -
3.07 Single-family dwelling ZP P P P - - - - - P - - - - - -
3.08 Townhouse, 3 to 8 units AR,SP,ZP - - - P C - - - - - - - - - -
3.09 Townhouse, 9 to 15 units AR,SP,ZP - - - C P - - - - - - - - - -
3.10 Townhouse, more than 15
units
AR,SP,ZP - - - - C - - - - - - - - - -
3.11 Twin home ZP - - P P - - - - - - - - - - -
4 Special Care Facilities
4.01 Adult family home ZP P P P P P - - - P - - - - - -
4.02 Community living
arrangement, 8 or fewer
residents
ZP P P P P P - - - P - - - - - -
4.03 Community living
arrangement, 9 to 15
residents
AR,SP,ZP - - C P P - - - C - - - - - -
4.04 Community living
arrangement, more than
15 residents
AR,SP,ZP - - - C C - - - C - - - - - -
4.05 Foster home and
treatment foster home
ZP P P P P P P - - P - - - - - -
4.06 Group day care center AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P C P C - - - -
4.07 Group day care center
(company)
AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P - P - - C C -
4.08 Hospice care center AR,SP,ZP - - - - - - C C C - C - - - -
4.09 Nursing home AR,SP,ZP - - - - - - C P C - C - - - -
4.10 Retirement home (assisted
living)
AR,SP,ZP - - - C C - C C - - C - - - -
4.11 Temporary residential
shelter
AR,SP,ZP - - - - - - - - - - C - - - -
5 Group Accommodations
5.01 Boarding house AR,SP,ZP - - - C C - - - - - - - - - -
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
A - 2
Series / Land Use
Secondary
Review
RR
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
R-8
B-1
B-2
B-3
B-5
I-I
P-1
M-1
M-2
C-1
5.02 Campground SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - C - - -
5.03 Group recreation camp SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - C - - -
5.04 Overnight lodging AR,SP,ZP - - - - - - P P - P - - - - -
5.05 Resort AR,SP,PO,ZP C - - - - - - - - - - - - - C
5.06 Tourist rooming house AR,SP,ZP C C C C - - - - - - - - - - -
6 Food and Beverage Sales
6.01 Brewpub AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P - C - - - - -
6.02 Restaurant AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P - C - - - - -
6.03 Tavern AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P - C - - - - -
7
Vehicle Rental, Sales, and
Service
7.01 Heavy vehicle sales and
service
AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - - P P -
7,02 Truck-trailer rental
establishment
AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - C - - - - P - -
7.03 Vehicle fuel station AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - P - - - - C - -
7.04 Vehicle repair shop AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - C - - - - P - -
7.05 Vehicle sales and rental AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - P - - - - C - -
7.06 Vehicle service shop AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - P - - - - P - -
7.07 Vehicle storage yard SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - - C C -
8 General Sales
8.01 Outdoor sales AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - C - - - - C C -
8.02 Retail sales, 10,000 sq ft or
less
AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P C C - - - - -
8.03 Retail sales, 10,001 to 40,000
sq ft
AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - C P - C - - - - -
8.04
Retail sales, more than
40,000 sq ft
AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - C C - C - - - - -
9 General Services
9.01 Administrative services AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P P P - - - - -
9.02 Adult-oriented establishment AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - - C C -
9.03 Body-piercing establishment AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P - - - - - - -
9.04 Commercial kennel AR,SP,PO,ZP C - - - - - - C - - - - C C -
9.05 Commercial stable AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - C - - C
9.06 Equipment rental, large AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - - P P -
9.07 Equipment rental, small AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P - - - - C - -
9.08 Financial services AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P P P - - - - -
9.09 Funeral home AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P P P - - - - -
9.10 General repair AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P - - - - C - -
9.11 General services AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P P C - - - - -
9.12 Health care center AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - C C - P - - - - -
9.13 Health care clinic AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P P P - - - - -
9.14 Instructional services AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P C C - - C - -
9.15 Landscape business AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - C - - - - P C -
9.16 Professional services AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P P P - - C - -
9.17 Tattoo establishment AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P - - - - - - -
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
A - 3
Series / Land Use
Secondary
Review
RR
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
R-8
B-1
B-2
B-3
B-5
I-I
P-1
M-1
M-2
C-1
9.18 Veterinary clinic, general AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - C - - - - C C -
9.19 Veterinary clinic, small
animal
AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P C - - - C C -
10 Recreation & Entertainment
10.01 Driving range AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - C - - C
10.02 Golf course AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - C - - C
10.03 Indoor entertainment AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P - - - - - - -
10.04 Indoor recreation AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P - - - - - - -
10.05 Indoor shooting range AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - C C - - - - C - -
10.06 Outdoor entertainment AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - C - - - C C - -
10.07 Outdoor recreation AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - C - - - C C C C
11
Government & Community
Services
11.01 Administrative government
center
AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P - P C - C - -
11.02 Animal shelter AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - C - P C -
11.03 Cemetery AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - C - - - -
11.04 Civic use facility AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - C P - C C C C - -
11.05 Community center AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P - C C C - - -
11.06 Community cultural facility AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P - C C C - - -
11.07 Community garden SP,ZP - - - - - - C C C C C C P P P
11.08 Educational facility, postsecondary
AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - C C - C C - C - -
11.09 Educational facility, pre-K
through 12
AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - C - - C - - - -
11.10 Maintenance garage AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - C - - C - P C -
11.11 Park AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P P P C P P P P
11.12 Public safety facility AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - C P - C C - P C -
11.13 Recreation trail - P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
11.14 Worship facility AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - C P - C C - - - -
12
Telecommunications and
Utilities
12.01 Radio broadcast facility AR,SP,PO,ZP C - - - - - - - - - - - C C -
12.02 Solar power plant SP,ZP - - - - - - - - - C - - C P C
12.03 Stormwater management
facility
- P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
12.04 Telecommunication
collocation (class 1)
ZP WT WT WT WT WT WT WT WT WT WT WT WT WT WT WT
12.05 Telecommunication
collocation (class 2)
ZP P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
12.06 Telecommunication tower SP,PO,ZP WT WT WT WT WT WT WT WT WT WT WT WT WT WT WT
12.07 Utility installation, major SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - C 0 C C C C C C
12.08 Utility installation, minor ZP P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
12.09 Utility maintenance yard AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - - C C -
13 Transportation
13.01 Airport AR,SP,PO,ZP C - - - - - - - - - C - C C -
13.02 Bus storage facility AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - C - - - - C C -
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
A - 4
Series / Land Use
Secondary
Review
RR
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
R-8
B-1
B-2
B-3
B-5
I-I
P-1
M-1
M-2
C-1
13.03 Mass transit terminal AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - C P - C C - C - -
13.04 Off-site parking lot SP,ZP - - - - - - C P C C C - C - -
13.05 Park-and-ride lot SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - C P - C C C C C -
13.06 Railroad - C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
14 General Storage
14.01 Boat and RV yard AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - - C P -
14.02 Bulk fuel storage AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - - C P
14.03 Indoor boat storage AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - - P C -
14.04 Personal storage facility AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - - P C -
14.05 Truck terminal AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - - P P -
14.06 Warehouse AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - - P P -
15 Industrial and Manufacturing
15.01 Artisan shop AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P C - - - C - -
15.02 Construction equipment
repair
AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - - P P -
15.03 Construction equipment
sales and service
AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - - P P -
15.04 Contractor yard AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - - C P -
15.05 Manufacturing AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - - P P -
15.06 Salvage yard AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - - - C -
16 Solid Waste
16.01 Composting facility AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - C C C C -
16.02 Recycling center AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - - C C -
16.03 Solid waste transfer station AR,SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - - C C -
17 Accessory Uses
17.01 Accessory building,
nonresidential
AR,SP,ZP - - - - - - - P P P P P P P -
17.02 Accessory building,
residential
ZP P P P P P - - - P - - - - - -
17.03 Accessory dwelling unit
(ADU)
SP,ZP C C C - - - - - C - - - - - -
17.04 Adult family home ZP P P P P P P - - P - - - - - -
17.05 Amateur radio and/or
citizens band antenna
ZP P P P P P P P P P P - - P P -
17.06 Bed and breakfast SP,PO,ZP C C C - - - - - C - - - - - -
17.07 Boat dock - P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
17.08 Boathouse ZP P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
17.09 Exterior communication
device
- P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
17.10 Family day care home ZP P P P P P P - - P - - - - - -
17.11 Fence - P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
17.12 Firewood storage - P P P - - - - - P - - - P P -
17.13 Foster home and treatment
foster home
ZP P P P P P P - - P - - - - - -
17.14 Home occupation ZP P P P P P P - - P - - - - - -
17.15 Household livestock ZP C - - - - - - - - - - - - - C
17.16 In-law dwelling unit ZP P P P - - - - - P - - - - - -
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
A - 5
Series / Land Use
Secondary
Review
RR
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
R-8
B-1
B-2
B-3
B-5
I-I
P-1
M-1
M-2
C-1
17.17 Kennel, hobby SP,PO,ZP C C C - - - - - - - - - - - -
17.18 Light industrial use incidental
to sales/service
SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - C C - - - - - - -
17.19 Outdoor food and beverage
service
SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - C C - C - - - - -
17.20 Play structure - P P P P P P - - P - - - - - -
17.21 Pond SP,ZP P P P P - - - - - P P P P P P
17.22 Retaining wall ZP P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
17.23 Sales incidental to industrial
use
SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - - - - - - P P -
17.24 Service window, drive-up SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - C P - - - - - - -
17.25 Service window, walk-up SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - C C - - - - - - -
17.26 Solar energy system,
building-mounted
ZP P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
17.27 Solar energy system, groundmounted
SP,ZP P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
17.28 Storage container SP - - - - - - - C - C - - C C -
17.29 Swimming pool ZP P P P P P P - - P - - - - - -
17.30 Utility cabinet ZP P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
17.31 Work/live dwelling unit SP,ZP - - - - - - P C P - - - - - -
18 Temporary Uses
18.01 Contractor’s office SP,ZP P P P P P P P P - P P P P P -
18.02 Earth materials stockpile SP,PO,ZP P P P P P P P P - P P P P P -
18.03 Farmers market [1] SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - P P - C P P - - -
18.04 Farm stand, off-site ZP - - - - - - C P - C - C C - -
18.05 Farm stand, on-site ZP P P - - - - - - - - - - - - -
18.06 Model home PO,ZP C C C C C C - - - - - - - - -
18.07 Nonmetallic mine SP,PO,ZP C - - - - - - - - - - C C C -
18.08 Off-site construction yard SP,PO,ZP - - - - - - - C - C - C C C -
18.09 Party tent - P P P P P P P P P P P - P P P
18.10 Portable storage container - P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
18.11 Seasonal product sales ZP - - - - - - - P - C - C C - -
18.12 Sidewalk café ZP - - - - - - P C - - - - - - -
18.13 Wind test tower ZP P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
18.14 Yard sale - P P P P P P - - P - - - - - -
Zoning Districts
RR Rural Residential; R-1 Single-Family Residential; R-2 Mixed Residential; R-3 Multi-Family Medium Density Residential; R-4 Multi-Family High Density
Residential; R-8 Manufactured Home Park; B-1 Downtown Commercial; B-2 General Commercial; B-3 Neighborhood Commercial; B-5 Mixed Use
Commercial; I-1 Institutional; P-1 Park and Recreation; M-1 General Industrial; M-2 Heavy Industrial; C-1 Conservancy
Key for Land Uses
"-" indicates that the use is not permitted in the zoning district.
"C" indicates that the use is permitted in the zoning district as a conditional use. In addition, secondary review procedures may apply as
indicated in the matrix. When a use is allowed as a conditional use, the reviewing authority may require submission and approval of a building
plan, site plan, and/or plan of operation even when not otherwise required.
"P" indicates that the use is permitted in the zoning district by right subject to secondary review procedures as indicated in the matrix. Any
commercial or industrial land use that is shown as permitted that emits air contaminants, fugitive dust, or potentially offensive odors outside of the
building; incinerates any substance; or handles radioactive materials, hazardous substances, hazardous waste, or regulated substances is
considered a conditional use.
"WT" indicates that the use is subject to the special review standards and procedures for Wireless Telecommunication Facilities.
Key for Secondary Review
“AR” indicates a building plan is required.
“PO” indicates a plan of operation is required.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
A - 6
“SP” indicates a site plan is required.
“ZP” indicates a zoning permit is required.
Notes:
1. In addition to the zoning districts listed, this use may occur with a governmental or institutional use (e.g., school or church) as a permitted
use).
B - 1
Appendix B
Land Uses
Series Land Use
1 Agriculture
1.01 Agriculture, Description: A place where nursery stock, trees, sod, fruit, vegetables, flowers, agricultural
crop crops and forage, and other plants typically grown by agricultural operations in the region are
grown.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Location. The raising of crops may occur within required setbacks.
(b) Buildings. A building related to the raising of crops shall only be allowed in the RR
zoning district. Copyright © Civic Webware
1.02 Agriculture,
general
Description: A place where nursery stock, trees, sod, fruit, vegetables, flowers, agricultural crops and forage, and other plants are
primarily grown for commercial purposes and/or livestock is raised primarily for commercial purposes. Buildings and other structures
necessary for the operation are allowed. The term does not include commercial stables.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Minimum lot area. A minimum lot area of 20 acres is required for general agriculture.
(b) Number of animals. The number of animals shall not exceed one animal unit for each full acre using the animal unit factors in
Appendix E. The zoning administrator is authorized to determine an appropriate animal unit factor for any animal not listed.
(c) Animals not allowed. The keeping of hogs, male goats, roosters, and fur-bearing animals, other than rabbits, is prohibited.
(d) Location of new buildings. A building that houses livestock or poultry shall not be located within the 100-year floodplain or closer
than 100 feet to the ordinary high-water mark of a navigable body of water, or closer than 75 feet to any property boundary line.
(e) Fencing. Any outdoor area where animals are allowed to pasture or run shall be adequately fenced and located at least 10 feet from
a property in a residential zoning district or a planned development district that allows residential uses.
1.03 Aquaculture Description: A place where fish, bait, and other aquatic animals are produced out of doors.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
Aside from generally applicable standards, no special standards apply to aquaculture.
1.04 Greenhouse Description: A place where fruit, vegetables, flowers, and other types of plants are grown
within an enclosed building for commercial purposes, whether using sunlight or artificial
lighting. Plants grown on site may be sold at retail along with other related merchandise
provided the sale of such merchandise is clearly subordinate to the sale of plants.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift, plus 1 space
for each 600 square feet of retail floor area if plants are offered for retail sale
Supplemental Standards:
Aside from generally applicable standards, no special standards apply to greenhouses.
Copyright © Civic Webware
2 Resource-Based Uses
2.01 Dam Description: An artificial barrier in or across a navigable watercourse which has the primary purpose of impounding or diverting water. A
dam includes all appurtenant works, such as a dike, canal, or powerhouse.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) State and federal compliance. A dam shall comply with all state and federal rules and regulations.
(b) Removal. A dam may be removed, provided the standards and requirements of ch. 31, Wis. Stats., are met.
(c) Safety. The owner of the dam shall comply with the safety measures required in s. NR 33.07(3), Wis. Admin. Code.
(d) Unsafe conditions. If it is determined that a dam is unsafe or otherwise defective, the zoning administrator shall follow the
procedure outlined in Article 5 relating to unsafe conditions.
(e) Termination of use. If the zoning administrator determines that a dam has not been operational for a continuous period of 12
months, the administrator shall follow the procedure outlined in Article 5 relating to the termination of an approval.
B - 2
3.02 Mixed-use
housing
Description: One or more dwelling units located in a building, commonly on the second floor,
that also houses a commercial land use, such as a retail use or a professional office.
Parking Requirements: 2 spaces for each dwelling unit
Supplemental Standards:
A dwelling unit on the second floor shall be served by stairs inside of the building (i.e.,
exterior stairs are not permitted).
Copyright © Civic Webware
3.03 Multi-family, 2 Description: A building containing 2 dwelling units that is situated on one lot. The units may
units be rented or owned as in a condominium. The term includes various construction types
including modular homes, panelized homes, pre-cut homes, and site-built
homes. (Sometimes referred to as duplex.)
Parking Requirements: 2 spaces for each dwelling unit
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Number of principal buildings per parcel. No more than one 2-unit multi-family building
shall occupy any single parcel of land. Copyright © Civic Webware
(b) Design and construction. A 2-unit multi-family building shall meet the design and construction standards for a single-family
dwelling.
(c) Garage required. A two-car garage containing at least 400 square feet shall be built for each dwelling unit at the same time the 2-
unit multi-family building is being constructed. Such garage may be attached or detached.
Series Land Use
2.02 Forestry Description: The harvesting, thinning, and planting of trees and related forest management
activities whether for commercial or noncommercial purposes. The term includes temporary
skidding yards necessary to store and sort logs harvested on the premises. The term does
not include on-site processing and permanent skidding yards.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Generally. No special standards apply to forestry except as provided in this section.
(b) Removal of a tree or shrub within a defined open space area in a development Copyright © Civic Webware
project. Trees and shrubs within an area set aside as open space as part of a development project shall not be removed except as
follows:
(1) A dead or dying tree or shrub may be removed when it poses a threat to public health and safety.
(2) Invasive species may be removed.
The removal of trees and shrubs is done consistent with a landscape management plan as prepared by a registered landscape architect,
an arborist, or a forester and as approved by the zoning administrator.
3 Residential
3.01 Manufactured Description: A place with 2 or more designated pads (i.e., lots) for lease or rent to the
home park general public for the placement of a mobile home or a manufactured home.
Parking Requirements: 2 spaces for each dwelling unit
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Mobile home space. A manufactured home space must be at least 40 feet wide and at
least 3,000 square feet in area.
(b) Location of mobile homes. A manufactured home or mobile home may not be closer
than 20 feet to another unit or 10 feet to an internal service road. Copyright © Civic Webware
(c) Water and sanitation. Each manufactured home space must be connected to a public water supply system and a public sewage
disposal system.
(d) Surfacing. All internal service roads, parking areas, and walkways must be hard surfaced.
(e) Ancillary uses. A manufactured home park shall not include a mobile home sales office or other business or commercial use.
However, laundries, washrooms, recreational rooms, maintenance equipment storage, and one management office are permitted.
(f) Screening. A manufactured home park must be completely enclosed, except for permitted entrances and exits by temporary planting
of fast-growing material, capable of reaching a height of 15 feet or more, and a permanent evergreen planting, the individual trees to be
of such a number and so arranged that within 10 years they will have formed a dense screen. Such permanent planting shall be grown
or maintained to a height of not less than 15 feet.
B - 3
Series Land Use
3.04 Multi-family, 3
to 8 units
Description: A building containing 3 to 8 dwelling units that is situated on one lot. The units
may be rented or owned as in a condominium.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each dwelling unit
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Number of principal buildings per parcel. More than one multi-family building with 3 to
8 dwelling units may be located on a parcel of land, provided the overall density is
maintained.
(b) Design and construction. A multi-family building with 3 to 8 dwelling units shall meet the
design and construction standards for a single-family dwelling.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(c) FHA Compliance. The developer is responsible for complying with all applicable standards in the Fair Housing Act, including
accessibility requirements.
3.05 Multi-family, 9 Description: A building containing 9 to 15 dwelling units that is situated on one lot. The units may be rented or owned as in a
to 15 units condominium.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each dwelling unit
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Number of principal buildings per parcel. More than one multi-family building with 9 to 15 dwelling units may be located on a
parcel of land, provided the overall density is maintained.
(b) Design and construction. A multi-family building with 9 to 15 dwelling units shall meet the design and construction standards for a
single-family dwelling.
(c) FHA Compliance. The developer is responsible for complying with all applicable standards in the Fair Housing Act, including
accessibility requirements.
3.06 Multi-family,
more than 15
units
Description: A building containing more than 15 dwelling units that is situated on one lot. The units may be rented or owned as in a
condominium.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each dwelling unit
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Number of principal buildings per parcel. More than one multi-family building with 16 or more dwelling units may be located on a
parcel of land, provided the overall density is maintained.
(b) Design and construction. A multi-family building with 16 or more dwelling units shall meet the design and construction standards for
a single-family dwelling.
(c) FHA Compliance. The developer is responsible for complying with all applicable standards in the Fair Housing Act, including
accessibility requirements.
3.07 Single-family Description: A building containing one dwelling unit that is situated on one lot and is not
dwelling attached to any other dwelling unit by any means. The term includes manufactured homes
and other construction types including modular homes, panelized homes, pre-cut homes, and
site-built homes. The term does not include mobile homes.
Parking Requirements: 2 spaces
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Number of principal dwellings per parcel. No more than one principal residential
building shall occupy any single parcel of land. Copyright © Civic Webware
(b) Design and construction. A single-family dwelling shall meet the following standards:
(1) The roof shall have a minimum pitch of 4 to 12, except when a flat roof is integral to the architectural style of the dwelling.
(2) Suitable roof coverings include slate, concrete, clay, or ceramic tiles; wood shingles or shakes; or metal, fiberglass, or asphalt
shingles; or standing seam panels.
(3) Exterior wall surfaces shall be covered with stucco, wood siding, cement-fiber siding, vinyl siding, metal horizontal lap siding,
wood shingles, or a masonry veneer.
(4) An overhang shall extend at least 12 inches beyond the face of the exterior wall, except when integral to the architectural
style of the dwelling (e.g., saltbox).
(5) The building shall be set on and anchored to a continuous permanent foundation that extends around its perimeter.
Consistent with the requirements in Article 5, the Planning Commission may approve a special exception authorizing the use of an
exterior material not specifically allowed in this subsection.
(c) Garage required. A two-car garage containing at least 400 square feet shall be built at the same time the single-family dwelling is
being constructed. Such garage may be attached or detached.
B - 4
Series Land Use
3.08 Townhouse, 3
to 8 units
Description: A building containing 3 to 8 dwelling units that are separated by a party wall
that extends from the ground to the roof and each of the units are located on a separate lot
and have a separate entrance. (Sometimes referred to as single-family attached or
rowhouse.)
Parking Requirements: 2 spaces for each dwelling unit
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Lot area. No more than 70 percent of the lot area shall be occupied by a building.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(b) Utility service. Each dwelling unit shall have independent service connections to all utilities, including water, sewer, and electricity.
(c) Subsequent divisions. Individual townhouses shall not be further subdivided.
(d) Driveways. When more than one garage is located in the front of a townhouse, a common driveway shall be used whenever
possible.
(e) Vertical off-sets. When a building includes 5 or more dwelling units, there shall be a vertical offset of at least 2 feet between each
adjoining dwelling unit.
(f) Accessory buildings. The floor area of accessory buildings, excluding garages and carports, shall not exceed 120 cumulative
square feet.
(g) Front entrances. The front entrance to each dwelling unit shall be clearly visible from the street on which it fronts and accentuated
by a porch or other architectural feature.
(h) Garage required. A one-car garage containing at least 200 square feet shall be built for each dwelling unit at the same time the
townhouse is being constructed. Such garage may be attached or detached.
3.09 Townhouse, 9 Description: A building containing 9 to 15 dwelling units that are separated by a party wall
to 15 units that extends from the ground to the roof and each of the units are located on a separate lot
and have a separate entrance. (Sometimes referred to as single-family attached or
rowhouse.)
Parking Requirements: 2 spaces for each dwelling unit
Supplemental Standards:
A townhouse with 9 to 15 dwelling units shall comply with the requirements for a townhouse
with 3 to 8 units. Copyright © Civic Webware
3.10 Townhouse,
more than 15
units
Description: A building containing more than 15 dwelling units that are separated by a party wall that extends from the ground to the
roof and each of the units are located on a separate lot and have a separate entrance. (Sometimes referred to as single-family attached
or rowhouse.)
Parking Requirements: 2 spaces for each dwelling unit
Supplemental Standards:
A townhouse with more than 15 dwelling units shall comply with the requirements for a townhouse with 3 to 8 units.
3.11 Twin home Description: A building containing 2 dwelling units that are separated by a party wall that extends from the ground to the roof and each
of the units are located on a separate lot and have a separate entrance. The term includes various construction types including modular
homes, panelized homes, pre-cut homes, and site-built homes. (Sometimes referred to as single-family attached or zero-lot-line duplex.)
Parking Requirements: 2 spaces for each dwelling unit
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Fire separation. Each dwelling unit of a twin home shall be separated from the abutting unit by a fire wall meeting applicable building
codes.
(b) General layout. The common wall between dwelling units in a twin home shall be approximately perpendicular to the front lot line.
(c) Utility service. Dwelling units in a twin home shall have separate connections for electric, natural gas, and municipal water.
(d) Sewer connection. Both of the dwelling units may be served by a single sanitary service line provided an access - maintenance
agreement is recorded in the Wood County register of deeds office.
(e) Written agreement required. Dwelling units in a twin home shall be subject to a joint cross access and maintenance agreement as
approved by the zoning administrator. Such agreement shall be recorded with each lot in the Wood County register of deeds office.
(f) Garage required. A two-car garage containing at least 400 square feet shall be built for each dwelling unit at the same time the twin
home is being constructed. Such garage may be attached or detached.
4 Special Care Facilities
B - 5
Series Land Use
4.01 Adult family Description: A place licensed by the state under s. 50.033(1m), Wis. Stats.
home Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 2 adults the facility is licensed by the state to accommodate; plus 1 space for each employee
on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
All residents of the adult family home, other than the operator or care provider and the operator or care provider’s immediate family, shall
be disabled persons as indicated in the required state license application.
4.02 Community
living
arrangement,
8 or fewer
residents
Description: Any one of the following with 8 or fewer residents (1) a residential care center for children and youth as defined in s.
48.02(15d), Wis. Stats., operated by a child welfare agency licensed under s. 48.60, Wis. Stats.; (2) a group home for children as defined
in s. 48.02(7), Wis. Stats.; and (3) a community-based residential facility as defined in s. 50.01(lg), Wis. Stats. The term does not include
adult family homes, as defined in s. 50.01, Wis. Stats.
Parking Requirements: 4 spaces
Supplemental Standards:
(a) State license. Prior to the establishment of a community living arrangement, the operator shall obtain a license from the state as may
be required by state law and maintain such license for the life of the use or until the state no longer requires such license. [1]
(b) Occupancy. All residents of the community living arrangement, other than the operator or care provider and the operator or care
provider’s immediate family, shall be disabled persons as indicated in the required state license application.
(c) City Council approval. The City has determined that the capacity of community living arrangements exceeds 25 or one percent of
the city's population, whichever is greater. As such, the Common Council has determined that additional community living arrangements
are prohibited from locating in the city without obtaining the approval of the Common Council. Such proposals are granted or denied at
the discretion of the City Council. [2]
(d) Advisory committee. Prior to initial licensure of the community living arrangement by the state of Wisconsin, the applicant shall
make a good faith effort to establish an ad hoc advisory committee consisting of representatives from the community living arrangement,
the neighborhood in which the proposed facility will be located, and a local unit of government, in accordance with s. 48.68(4), Wis.
Stats., or s. 50.03(4)(g), Wis. Stats., as applicable.
[1] Commentary: See subch. VII of chapter 254, Wis. Stats., and ch. DHS 197, Wis. Admin. Code
[2] Commentary: See s. 11.06.35 regarding this determination.
4.03 Community Description: Any one of the following with more than 8 but fewer than 16 residents (1) a residential care center for children and youth as
living defined in s. 48.02(15d), Wis. Stats., operated by a child welfare agency licensed under s. 48.60, Wis. Stats.; (2) a group h ome for
arrangement, children as defined in s. 48.02(7), Wis. Stats.; and (3) a community-based residential facility as defined in s. 50.01(lg), Wis. Stats. The
9 to 15 term does not include adult family homes, as defined in s. 50.01, Wis. Stats.
residents Parking Requirements: 6 spaces
Supplemental Standards:
A community living arrangement with 9 to 15 residents shall comply with the requirements for a community living arrangement with 8 or
fewer residents.
4.04 Community
living
arrangement,
more than 15
residents
Description: Any one of the following with 16 or more residents (1) a residential care center for children and youth as defined in s.
48.02(15d), Wis. Stats., operated by a child welfare agency licensed under s. 48.60, Wis. Stats.; (2) a group home for children as defined
in s. 48.02(7), Wis. Stats.; and (3) a community-based residential facility as defined in s. 50.01(lg), Wis. Stats. The term does not include
adult family homes, as defined in s. 50.01, Wis. Stats.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 3 residents
Supplemental Standards:
A community living arrangement with 16 or more residents shall comply with the requirements for a community living arrangement with 8
or fewer residents.
B - 6
4.06 Group day
care center
Description: A place licensed as a day care by the state where care is provided for 9 or
more children. This use may include outdoor play areas, playhouses, and related
recreational equipment, such as swings, slides, basketball hoops, and jungle gyms.
Note: A family day care home (4-8 children) is considered an accessory use and is
therefore listed in the 17 series.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 2 children the facility is licensed by the state to
accommodate; plus 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
Copyright © Civic Webware
An outdoor activity area associated with a group day care center shall not be located within 20 feet of a parcel in a residential zoning
district or a planned development district that allows residential uses.
4.07 Group day Description: A place licensed as a day care by the state where care is provided for 9 or more children and which is intended for families
care center working at the business. This use may include outdoor play areas, playhouses, and related recreational equipment, such as swi ngs,
(company) slides, basketball hoops, and jungle gyms.
Note: A family day care home (4-8 children) is considered an accessory use and is therefore listed in the 17 series.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
An outdoor activity area associated with a group day care center (company) shall not be located within 20 feet of a parcel in a residential
zoning district or a planned development district that allows residential uses.
4.08 Hospice care
center
Description: A place licensed by the state that provides palliative and supportive care and a place of residence to individuals with
terminal illness and provides or arranges for short-term inpatient care as needed.
Note: See s. 50.90(1), Wis. Stats.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 2 residents at capacity; plus 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) State license. Prior to the establishment of a hospice care center, the operator shall obtain a license from the state as provided for in
s. 50.92, Wis. Stats., and maintain such license for the life of the use or until the state no longer requires such license.
(b) Required green space. If a hospice care center is not located in a commercial zoning district, a minimum of 30 percent of the parcel
shall remain undeveloped (i.e., landscaped).
Series Land Use
4.05 Foster home Description: A place licensed by the state for the care of foster children and which is operated by a corporation, child welfare agency,
and treatment church, or other such entity.
foster home Note: See s. 48.62, Wis. Stats. A foster home and treatment foster home can either be a principal use or an accessory use. If the
operator lives in the residence with the children, it is considered an accessory use.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) State license. Prior to the establishment of a foster home or treatment foster home, the operator shall obtain a license from the state
as provided for in s. 48.75, Wis. Stats., and maintain such license for the life of the use or until the state no longer requires such license.
(b) Proximity to other such facility. A foster home or treatment foster home that is operated by a corporation, a child welfare agency, a
religious association, as defined in s. 157.061(15), Wis. Stats., an association, or a public agency, shall not be established within 2,500
feet of another such facility. An agent may apply for an exception to this requirement, and the Common Council at its discretion may
grant the exception. [1]
[1] Commentary: See s. 59.69(15)(bm), Wis. Stats.
B - 7
Series Land Use
4.09 Nursing home Description: A place where 5 or more persons who are not related to the operator or administrator reside, receive care or treatment
and, because of their mental or physical condition, require 24-hour nursing services, including limited nursing care, intermediate level
nursing care, and skilled nursing services. The term does not include (1) a convent or facility owned or operated exclusively by and for
members of a religious order that provides reception and care or treatment of an individual, (2) a hospice as defined in state law, or (3) a
residential care apartment complex as defined in state law.
Note: See s. 50.01(3), Wis. Stats.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 3 beds; plus 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) State license. Prior to the establishment of a nursing home, the operator shall obtain a license from the state as provided for in s.
50.02, Wis. Stats., and maintain such license for the life of the use or until the state no longer requires such license.
(b) Required green space. If a nursing home is not located in a commercial zoning district, at least 30 percent of the parcel shall remain
undeveloped (i.e., landscaped).
(c) Parking lot screening. If an off-street parking lot is located within 50 feet of a parcel in a residential zoning district or a planned
development district that allows residential uses, landscaping, fencing, a berm, or any combination thereof shall be used to effectively
screen the parking area from the residential property.
(d) Setbacks. Principal buildings shall be located at least 35 feet from a property in a residential zoning district or a planned
development district that allows residential uses.
4.10 Retirement
home
(assisted
living)
Description: A place where individuals, generally 62 years of age or older, may occupy independent dwelling units. The units may be
rented or owned as in a condominium. This use may include common areas for dining and entertainment and limited on-site commercial
and medical facilities for the exclusive use of residents.
Parking Requirements: 0.5 space for each dwelling unit, plus 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Required green space. If a retirement home is not located in a commercial zoning district, at least 30 percent of the parcel shall
remain undeveloped (i.e., landscaped).
(b) Parking lot screening. If an off-street parking lot is located within 50 feet of a parcel in a residential zoning district or a planned
development district that allows residential uses, landscaping, fencing, a berm, or any combination thereof shall be used to effectively
screen the parking area from the residential property.
(c) Setbacks. Principal buildings shall be located at least 35 feet from a property in a residential zoning district or a planned
development district that allows residential uses.
4.11 Temporary Description: A place where individuals and families live on a temporary basis and support services including counseling may be
residential provided. Residents typically receive housing at little or no cost, unrelated residents may share sleeping rooms, meals may or may not
shelter be provided, and unrelated residents may or may not share bathroom facilities.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area devoted to patron services; plus 1 space for each
employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Requirements for operator. A temporary residential shelter shall be managed by an organization operating a program approved by
the state of Wisconsin pursuant to ch. 51, Wis. Stats., and all relevant administrative rules including chs. DHS 72, DHS 75, and DHS 94,
Wis. Admin. Code.
(b) Other approvals. A temporary residential shelter shall be approved by all applicable government entities having authority under law
to license or authorize the operation.
(c) Number of residents. The number of residents at a temporary residential shelter shall not exceed 15 occupants at one time.
5 Group Accommodations
5.01 Boarding Description: A place where lodging is furnished by pre-arrangement for compensation for 4 or more persons, not members of a family,
house but not exceeding 12 persons and not open to transient customers.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each bedroom that is offered for rent, plus other parking requirements for principal residents
Supplemental Standards:
The primary access to a boarding house with more than 15 units must be off of a street classified as a major arterial or a higher
classification as depicted on the official map adopted in ch. 13 of the municipal code.
B - 8
Series Land Use
5.02 Campground Description: A place where members of the general public may set up tents, campers and
trailers of all types, and recreational vehicles for camping and sleeping purposes. Accessory
uses may include individual cabins, a dwelling unit for the manager of the campground, and
one or more buildings to house a laundromat and retail sales for the convenience of
campground guests, an office, maintenance equipment, supplies, and related materials.
Parking Requirements: 1 space at each camping space; plus 1 space at the office, if one is
provided, for each 15 camping spaces
Supplemental Standards:
(a) State permit. Prior to the establishment of a campground, the operator shall obtain a campground permit from the Wisconsin
Department of Health Services, or the department’s authorized agent, and maintain such permit for the life of the use or until the
department no longer requires such permit.[1]
(b) Minimum lot area. A minimum lot area of 10 acres is required for a campground.
(c) Density. The density shall not exceed 10 campground spaces per net acre.
(d) Setback from lot line. A campground space shall be no closer than 50 feet to the perimeter lot line of the site.
(e) Surfacing. All drives and parking areas shall be hard surfaced. The portion of the campground site reserved for parking campers and
recreational trailers should be hard surfaced.
(f) Access. Campground spaces shall be arranged to permit the safe and practical placement and removal of vehicles from a private
roadway internal to the development.
(g) Accessory facilities. Accessory facilities (e.g., laundry and food sales) may be allowed as a service to the occupants of the
campground but shall be designed, operated, and located to inhibit use by non-occupants.
(h) Limitation on addition of features. Storage sheds, decks, patios, and similar structures, whether permanent or temporary, are
prohibited within a camping space. Structural additions to a recreational vehicle, whether permanent or temporary, are prohibited. Raised
tent platforms are permitted.
(i) Solid waste collection. An off-street area for the collection of solid waste (trash) shall be provided within a campground.
(j) Continuing maintenance. The owner of the campground shall maintain the campground in a clean and sanitary manner.
[1] Commentary: See ch. DHS 178, Wis. Admin. Code
5.03 Group Description: A place where members of an association or other similar group, which operates the premises, and their invited guests
recreation may set up tents, campers and trailers of all types, and recreational vehicles for camping and sleeping purposes or stay overnight in a
camp lodge, cabin, or other similar accommodation. Accessory uses may include a dwelling unit for the manager of the camp, sleeping
accommodations for resident staff, and one or more buildings to house guest services, administrative offices, recreational facilities,
maintenance equipment, supplies, and related materials. The term includes youth camps and church camps.
Parking Requirements: 1 space at each camping space; plus 1 space at the office, if one is provided, for each 15 camping spaces
Supplemental Standards:
(a) State permit. Prior to the establishment of a group recreation camp, the operator shall obtain a permit from the Wisconsin
Department of Health Services, or the department's agent, as required by state law and maintain such permit for the life of the use or
until the state no longer requires such permit.[1]
(b) Minimum lot size. A minimum lot area of 10 acres is required for a group recreation camp.
(c) Continuing maintenance. The owner of the group recreation camp shall maintain the group camp in a clean and sanitary manner.
(d) Accessory facilities. Accessory facilities (e.g., laundry and food sales) may be allowed as a service to the occupants of the group
recreation camp but they shall be designed, operated, and located to inhibit use by nonoccupants.
(e) Density. If campground spaces are provided, the density shall not exceed 10 campground spaces per acre (gross).
(f) Access. If campground spaces are provided, they shall be arranged to permit the safe and practical placement and removal of
vehicles from a private roadway internal to the development.
(g) Setbacks from lot line. If campground spaces are provided, they shall be no closer than 40 feet to the perimeter lot line of the site.
(h) Solid waste collection. An off-street area for the collection of solid waste (trash) shall be provided within a group recreation camp.
(i) Limitation on addition of features. Storage sheds, decks, patios, and similar structures within a camping space, whether permanent
or temporary, are prohibited. Structural additions to a recreational vehicle within a camping space, whether permanent or temporary, are
prohibited. Tent platforms are permitted.
[1] Commentary: See ch. DHS 175, Wis. Admin. Code
B - 9
Series Land Use
5.04 Overnight
lodging
Description: A place where individual guest rooms with private bathrooms are offered to
transient guests for rent. This use may also include (1) recreational/fitness rooms and a food
service area for the exclusive use of guests and (2) banquet facilities for meetings and other
gatherings. The term includes hotels and motels but does not include bed and breakfasts.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each guest room and 1 space for each employee on the
largest work shift, plus any required spaces for other uses such as restaurants or banquet
facilities
Supplemental Standards:
Copyright © Civic Webware
(a) State permit. Prior to the establishment of overnight lodging, the operator shall obtain a hotel/motel permit from the Wisconsin
Department of Health Services, or the department’s authorized agent, and maintain such permit for the life of the use or until the
department no longer requires such permit.[1]
(b) Location of entrance. A customer entrance to an overnight lodging facility that is located on the side or rear of the building shall not
be located within 100 feet of a parcel in a residential zoning district or a planned development district that allows residential uses.
[1] Commentary: See ch. DHS 195, Wis. Admin. Code
5.05 Resort Description: A place with lodging facilities and on-site amenities primarily intended for the use of overnight guests. Guest rooms may be
located in one or more buildings and may include kitchen facilities. In addition to lodging facilities and recreational amenities, such as
golf, horseback riding, or lake/beach access, a resort may also include a lodge or other gathering place for guests, dining f acilities,
administrative facilities, and maintenance and storage facilities.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each guest room; plus 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) State permit. Prior to the establishment of a resort, the operator shall obtain a hotel/motel permit from the Wisconsin Department of
Health Services, or the department’s authorized agent, and maintain such permit for the life of the use or until the department no longer
requires such permit. [1]
(b) Minimum lot area. A minimum lot area of 20 acres is required for a resort.
(c) Special dimensional standards. Club houses and similar buildings, lodging facilities, and maintenance buildings with a floor area
exceeding 1,200 square feet shall be located at least 100 feet from a property in a residential zoning district or a planned development
district that allows residential uses.
[1] Commentary: See ch. DHS 195, Wis. Admin. Code
5.06 Tourist
rooming house
Description: A place where a single-family dwelling, individual rooms in a single-family dwelling, and/or one or more cabins and
cottages are offered to transient guests for rent, provided the total number of guest rooms does not exceed 8. The term does not include
other forms of transient lodging including bed and breakfasts and overnight lodging.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each guest room
Supplemental Standards:
(a) State permit. Prior to the establishment of a tourist rooming house, the operator shall obtain a tourist rooming house permit from the
Wisconsin Department of Health Services, or the department’s authorized agent, and maintain such permit for the life of the use or until
the department no longer requires such permit. [1]
(b) Display of permit. The operator shall display the current tourist rooming house permit in a conspicuous location inside the tourist
rooming house.
(c) Accommodations tax. Prior to the establishment of a tourist rooming house, the operator shall obtain any permit or license, as may
be required by the City, for the purpose of collecting an accommodations tax as may be adopted by the City and/or any other purpose.
(d) Registry. The operator of the tourist rooming house shall keep an accurate register showing the names of all guests. This registry
shall be kept on file for a period of one year and shall be available for inspection by city officials at any time upon request.
(e) Agent. The operator of a tourist rooming house shall name one or more agents, who shall be responsible for the management of the
property and who will serve as the primary point of contact. An agent must reside in the City of Wisconsin Rapids or within 5 miles of the
city. In the event a different agent is named, a revised permit application shall be filed with the City Clerk no less than 5 business days
prior to the effective date of the change in agent(s). Nothing herein shall be construed as to prohibit the property owner from being
named as an agent so long as he or she resides in the City.
(f) Building codes. Prior to the establishment of a tourist rooming house or the expansion of an existing tourist rooming house, the
building inspector shall certify that the dwelling meets all applicable building code requirements.
[1] Commentary: See ch. DHS 195, Wis. Admin. Code
6 Food and Beverage Sales
B -
10
Series Land Use
6.01 Brewpub Description: A place where fermented malt beverages are manufactured and those
beverages, along with other beverages and food, are offered for retail sale and on-site
consumption.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 3 patron seats or 1 space for each 300 square feet
of gross floor area devoted to patron service, whichever is greater; plus 1 for each employee
on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) State permits. Prior to the establishment of a brewpub, the operator shall obtain a restaurant permit from the Wisconsin Department
of Health Services, or the department’s authorized agent, and maintain such permit for the life of the use or until the depar tment no
longer requires such permit. [1] In addition, the operator shall obtain a brewpub permit from the Wisconsin Department of Revenue, or
the department’s authorized agent, and maintain such permit for the life of the use or until the department no longer require s such
permit. [2]
(b) Location of entrance. A customer entrance to a brewpub that is located on the side or rear of the building shall not be located within
50 feet of a parcel in a residential zoning district or a planned development district that allows residential uses as the predominant land
use.
(c) Limitation on floor area devoted to production. No more than 40 percent of the floor area shall be devoted to the production of
fermented malt beverages, including storage of raw materials and finished products.
(d) Limitation on production. Not more than 10,000 barrels (310,000 gallons) of fermented malt beverages may be manufactured in a
calendar year.
[1] Commentary: See ch. DHS 196, Wis. Admin. Code
[2] Commentary: See ch. 125, Wis. Stats.
6.02 Restaurant Description: A place where food and beverages are offered for retail sale for on-site or off-site consumption, and where the on-site
consumption of fermented malt beverages, wine, or liquor, if any, is clearly secondary and subordinate to the sale of food and
nonalcoholic beverages. A restaurant may also prepare food as part of a catering business. The term does not include a grocery store
with a food service section.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 3 patron seats or 1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area devoted to patron
service, whichever is greater; plus 1 for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) State permit. Prior to the establishment of a restaurant, the operator shall obtain a restaurant permit from the Wisconsin Department
of Health Services, or the department’s authorized agent, and maintain such permit for the life of the use or until the depar tment no
longer requires such permit. [1]
(b) Liquor license. If the establishment serves liquor, the operator shall obtain a liquor license from the City and maintain such license
for the life of the use or until the license is no longer required.
(c) Location of entrance. A customer entrance to a restaurant that is located on the side or rear of the building shall not be located
within 100 feet of a parcel in a residential zoning district or a planned development district that allows residential uses.
[1] Commentary: See ch. DHS 196, Wis. Admin. Code
6.03 Tavern Description: A place where fermented malt beverages, wine, or liquor are offered for retail
sale for on-site consumption and where food consumption, if any, is clearly secondary and
subordinate to the sale of alcoholic beverages. The term includes bars, drinking
establishments, sports bar, and lounges.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 3 patron seats or 1 space for each 300 square feet
of gross floor area devoted to patron service, whichever is greater; plus 1 for each employee
on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Liquor license. Prior to the establishment of a tavern, the operator shall obtain a liquor license from the City and maintain such
license for the life of the use or until the license is no longer required.
(b) Compliance with state requirements. A tavern shall comply with requirements as may be adopted by the state of Wisconsin.
(c) Location of entrance. A customer entrance to a tavern that is located on the side or rear of the building shall not be located within
50 feet of a parcel in a residential zoning district or planned development district that allows residential uses as the predominant land
use.
7 Vehicle Rental, Sales, and Service
B -
11
Series Land Use
7.01 Heavy vehicle
sales and
service
Description: A place where new and used large vehicles, such as recreational vehicles and campers, personal watercraft, and heavy
trucks, are offered for rent, sale, lease, or exchange, or are taken on consignment. This use may include the repair of such vehicles as a
subordinate use to the extent deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 350 square feet of retail floor area, plus 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
Outdoor display areas and other activity areas shall be located at least 50 feet from a property in a residential zoning district or a planned
development district that allows residential uses and 25 feet from a property in a commercial or mixed-use zoning district.
7.02 Truck-trailer Description: A place where trucks, utility trailers, and related items are kept and rented out,
rental generally to those moving their personal and household belongings. Servicing of vehicles and
establishment trailers stored on site is allowed provided such use is clearly incidental as may be established
by the Planning Commission.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift; plus 1 space
for each 7 trucks and trailers stored on site.
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Standards for placement in B-2. When located in the Highway Business (B-2) zoning district, trucks and trailers shall not be stored
within the front yard setback, the side yard setback, or the rear yard setback.
(b) Maximum number of units in B-2. When located in the Highway Business (B-2) zoning district, no more than a total of 15 trucks
and trailers may be stored on site.
(c) Size limitations in B-2. When located in the Highway Business (B-2) zoning district, trucks and trailers are limited to those that (i)
have no more than two axles per unit, (ii) have a maximum box length of 17 feet, (iii) have a maximum height of 12 feet in height, and (iv)
do not require a commercial driver’s license to operate.
(d) Site plan. The location on the property where trucks and trailers may be stored shall be clearly indicated on an approved site plan.
7.03 Vehicle fuel
station
Description: A place where fuels for cars, motorcycles, and light trucks are offered for retail
sale. Ancillary uses are limited to the retail sale of food and beverages and light maintenance
activities, such as engine tune-ups, lubrication, and minor repairs. The term does not include
truck stops or similar uses.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Restroom facilities. If a vehicle fuel station provides restroom facilities, the door to each
restroom shall be accessed from within the interior of the building in which they are located.
(b) Pump island canopies. A pump island canopy shall not exceed 22 feet in height.
(c) Special setbacks. The following setbacks shall apply to a vehicle fuel station:
(1) A fuel pump shall be located at least 50 feet from a property in a residential zoning district or a planned development district
that allows residential uses and at least 30 feet from a property in a nonresidential zoning district.
(2) A pump island canopy shall comply with the following setbacks: 10 feet for a front yard, 20 feet for a side yard, and 20 feet for
a rear yard.
(d) Surface. All vehicle use areas shall be concrete or a bituminous material capable of supporting a 4-ton axle load.
7.04 Vehicle repair Description: A place where motor vehicles, such as cars, motorcycles, and light trucks, are
shop typically left overnight for maintenance, service, or repair. Typical services include
transmission repair, body work and painting, vehicle upholstery, engine repair and overhauls,
and similar activities.
Parking Requirements: 2.5 spaces for each service bay; plus 1 for each employee on the
largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Work area. Motor vehicles shall not be serviced or repaired outside of the principal Copyright © Civic Webware
structure intended for such use, except when this use is located in an industrial zoning district, if otherwise allowed.
(b) Vehicle storage. When a vehicle repair shop is located in a commercial zoning district, no more than 15 motor vehicles shall be
stored out-of-doors overnight. When located in an industrial zoning district, if otherwise allowed, there is no limitation on the number of
motor vehicles that can be stored overnight. Storage of unlicensed vehicles is strictly prohibited.
B -
12
Series Land Use
7.05 Vehicle sales
and rental
Description: A place where new and used cars, light trucks, motorcycles, mopeds,
snowmobiles, and all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) are offered for rent, sale, lease, or exchange, or
are taken on consignment. This use may include the repair of such vehicles as a subordinate
use to the extent deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 space
for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) State license. Prior to the establishment of this use, the operator shall obtain a motor
Copyright © Civic Webware
vehicle dealer license from the Wisconsin Department of Transportation and maintain such license for the life of the use or until the state
no longer requires such license.[1]
(b) Show room. An indoor vehicle display area shall be provided that is at least 12 feet by 20 feet. If only motorcycles are sold, the
indoor vehicle display area shall be large enough to display at least 3 motorcycles.[2]
(c) Setback for display area. Display areas and other activity areas shall be located at least 30 feet from a property in a residential
zoning district or a planned development district that allows residential uses and 10 feet from a property in a commercial zoning district.
(e) Junk vehicles. Junk vehicles and inoperable vehicles shall not be kept out-of-doors.
[1] Commentary: See s. ch. 218, Wis. Stats.
[2] Commentary: See s. TRANS 138.03(a), Wis. Admin. Code
7.06 Vehicle Description: A place where motor vehicles, such as cars, motorcycles, and light trucks, are
service shop serviced while the owner waits and typically are not left overnight. Examples include quick
lube/oil change facilities, tire stores, car washes, and vehicle detailing.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each service bay; plus 1 for each employee on the
largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
Motor vehicles shall not be serviced or repaired outside of the principal structure intended for
such use, except when this use is located in an industrial zoning district, if otherwise allowed. Copyright © Civic Webware
7.07 Vehicle
storage yard
Description: A place where impounded motor vehicles are temporarily stored or where damaged motor vehicles are temporarily stored
before taken to a repair shop or while waiting for an insurance adjustment to occur. The salvaging of motor vehicle parts or the repair of
motor vehicles is prohibited.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Buffer yard. The reviewing authority may, as part of the site plan review process, require fencing, landscaping, or both to provide
adequate screening between a vehicle storage yard and adjoining properties.
(b) Setback requirements. Outdoor storage areas and other activity areas shall be located at least 40 feet from a property in a
residential zoning district or a planned development district that allows residential uses and 20 feet from a property in a commercial or
mixed-use zoning district. (Verify references to zoning districts)
(c) Fence. A 6-foot solid fence, subject to approval by the reviewing authority, shall be located around the perimeter of the area used to
store the motor vehicles.
(d) Fence plan. As part of the site plan review application, the applicant shall submit a fence plan which specifies construction materials
and specifications.
8 General Sales
8.01 Outdoor sales Description: A place where the merchandise offered for sale is primarily displayed outside of a building or other structure. This term
does not include those land uses otherwise defined in this section.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 5,000 square feet of outdoor display area; plus 1 space for each employee on the largest
work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Hours of operation. The hours of operation for outdoor sales shall comply with those hours as approved through the plan of
operation review process, taking into account surrounding land uses.
(b) Location. Display areas shall not be located in setback areas established for principal buildings.
B - 13
Series Land Use
8.02 Retail sales, Description: One or more establishments providing retail services in a single building with a floor area of 10,000 square feet or less.
10,000 sq ft or Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 300 square feet of retail floor area
less Supplemental Standards:
(a) Negative use agreements. All retail operations must comply with the prohibition of negative use agreements as set forth in s.
11.06.69.
(b) Licensing. Pawnbrokers, secondhand article dealers, and secondhand jewlry dealers must obtain a license from the city as set forth
in Chapter 20 of the municipal code.
8.03 Retail sales,
10,001 to
40,000 sq ft
Description: One or more establishments providing retail services in a single building with a floor area between 10,001 and 40,000
square feet in floor area.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 300 square feet of retail floor area
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Negative use agreements. All retail operations shall comply with the prohibition of negative use agreements as set forth in s.
11.06.69.
(b) Licensing. Pawnbrokers, secondhand article dealers, and secondhand jewlry dealers must obtain a license from the city as set forth
in Chapter 20 of the municipal code.
8.04 Retail sales, Description: One or more establishments providing retail services in a single building with a floor area of more than 40,000 square feet.
more than Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 300 square feet of retail floor area
40,000 sq ft Supplemental Standards:
(a) Negative use agreement. All retail operations shall comply with the prohibition of negative use agreements as set forth in s.
11.06.69.
(b) Licensing. Pawnbrokers, secondhand article dealers, and secondhand jewlry dealers must obtain a license from the city as set forth
in Chapter 20 of the municipal code.
(c) Access requirements. The primary access to a retail sales operation with more than 40,000 square feet of floor area must be off of
a street classified as a major arterial or higher classification as depicted on the official map adopted in ch. 13 of the municipal code.
9 General Services
9.01 Administrative Description: A place where employees primarily perform administrative functions and where
services customers are infrequent. The term includes data processing centers, customer service
centers via telecommunications, architectural firms, and engineering firms.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 350 square feet of gross floor area
Supplemental Standards:
Aside from generally applicable standards, no special standards apply to administrative
services.
9.02 Adult-oriented
esablishment
Description: A place where no more than one of the following are located: adult arcade, adult bath house, adult body painting studio,
adult book/video store, adult cabaret, adult massage parlor, adult modeling studio, or adult theater.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Legislative findings. The Common Council makes the following legislative findings regarding adult-oriented establishments:
(1) Negative secondary effects associated with adult, sexually-oriented establishments have been confirmed by the United States
Supreme Court in its decisions in, for example, City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc. (475 U.S. 41 (1986)) and by the United
States Court of Appeals in its decisions in, for example, Hang On, Inc. v. City of Arlington (65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir., 1995)), Fantasy
Ranch v. City of Arlington Texas (459 F.3d 546 (5th Circuit, 2006)), and Andy's Restaurant & Lounge, Inc. v. City of Gary (466
F.3d 550 (7th Cir., 2006)) and such negative secondary effects include, for example, personal and property crimes, prostitution,
lewd behavior, assault, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, potential spread of disease, negative
impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation.
(2) The decisions issued by the appellate courts constitute reliable sources of information that may be reasonably relied upon by
the Common Council.
(3) Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm that the City has a substantial governmental interest in
preventing and/or abating.
(4) Continued regulation of adult-oriented establishments is necessary to limit the aforementioned negative secondary effects
associated with adult-oriented establishments and thereby promote the health, safety, and welfare of the City of Wisconsin
Rapids.
(5) The Common Council intends, via this chapter, to establish reasonable regulations on adult-oriented establishments, while
preserving free speech pursuant to the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article I, Section 3 of the
Wisconsin Constitution.
B - 14
Series Land Use
(b) Purpose. This section is intended to regulate adult-oriented establishments in order to promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration
of adult-oriented establishments within the City. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation
or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor
effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment of the United
States Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither
is it the intent nor effect of this section to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
(c) Applicability. Upon any of the following events, an adult-oriented establishment shall comply with the provisions of this section:
(1) the opening or commencement of an adult-oriented establishment;
(2) the conversion of an existing business, whether or not a adult-oriented establishment, to an adult-oriented establishment;
(3) the addition of a new adult-oriented establishment to an existing adult-oriented establishment;
(4) the relocation of an adult-oriented establishment;
(5) the sale, lease, or sublease of an adult-oriented establishment;
(6) the transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in an adult-oriented establishment, whether by sale, exchange,
or similar means; or
(7) the establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device that transfers the ownership or control of an adult -oriented
establishment, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or
control.
(d) Exclusions. The provisions of this section do not apply to the following:
(1) Any business operated by or employing a licensed psychologist, licensed physical therapist, licensed masseuse, licensed
vocational nurse, registered nurse, licensed athletic trainer, licensed cosmetologist, or licensed barber provided such licensed
individual is only engaged in performing the normal and customary functions authorized under the license held;
(2) Any business operated by, or employing a licensed physician or licensed chiropractor while engaged in practicing the healing
arts;
(3) Any retail establishment whose principal business is the offering of wearing apparel for sale to customers and that does not
exhibit merchandise on live model(s); or
(4) An activity sponsored by a school licensed by the State of Wisconsin or a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation; or a private college or university that maintains or operates educational programs in which credits
are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation.
Any activity conducted or sponsored by an entity identified in subsection (4) above must meet all of the following requirements:
(1) The activity must be situated in a structure that has no sign or other advertising visible from the exterior of the structure
indicating a nude person is available for viewing;
(2) All students participating in the class must be enrolled at least 3 days in advance of the class; and
(3) Not more than one (1) nude model is on the premises at any one time.
(e) Licensing. Prior to the establishment of an adult-oriented establishment, the operator shall obtain a license from the City of
Wisconsin Rapids as may be required, and maintain such license for the life of the use or until the City no longer requires such license.
(f) Proximity to another adult-oriented establishment. An adult-oriented establishment shall not be located within 500 feet of another
adult-oriented establishment.
(g) Proximity to specified zoning districts. An adult-oriented establishment shall not be located within 500 feet of a residential zoning
district or a planned unit development that allows residential uses.
(h) Proximity to other specified land uses An adult-oriented establishment shall not be located within 600 feet of any of the following:
(1) public library;
(2) public playground or park, including nature trails, pedestrian/bicycle paths, or other public lands open for recreational
activities;
(3) educational facility, including K-12 and post-secondary, but not including facilities used primarily for another purpose and used
only incidentally at a school;
(4) state licensed family day care home, group day care home, or day care center;
(5) worship facility;
(6) any youth-oriented establishment;
(7) tavern; or
(8) any commercial business, other than a tavern, holding a valid liquor license.
If one of these specified uses locates within this area of separation after the adult-oriented establishment has been granted a building
permit or occupancy permit, the adult-oriented establishment shall not be required to relocate. This provision only applies to a renewal of
a valid permit or other license. It does not apply when a license or permit expires or when the City terminates this use due to a violation
of this chapter.
(i) Measurement of distances. For the purpose of this section, specified distances are measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure containing the adult-oriented establishment, to the
nearest lot line of the parcel with the specified use or to the specified zoning district. If an adult-oriented establishment is located on the
first floor of a multi-tenant building (e.g., shopping center), the measurement shall be taken from the outer boundary of such space (i.e.
B - 15
Series Land Use
from the outer edge of the party wall or the outer wall). If an adult-oriented establishment is located above the first floor of a multi-tenant
building (e.g., shopping center), the measurement shall be taken from the exterior door on the first floor that is nearest to the adultoriented
establishment, excluding emergency exists. The presence of a city, county, or other political subdivision boundary shall be
irrelevant for purposes of applying the separation requirements of this section.
(j) Licensing. Adult-oriented establishments shall comply with any licensing requirements established by the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
9.03 Body-piercing Description: A place where a body piercer performs body piercing.
establishment Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area
Supplemental Standards:
(a) State license. Prior to the establishment of a body-piercing establishment, the operator shall obtain a license from the Wisconsin
Department of Health Services, or the department’s authorized agent, and maintain such license for the life of the use or until the
department no longer requires such license. [1] In addition, each practitioner shall obtain a license from the department as required by
state law and maintain such license while at the establishment or until the state no longer requires such license. [2]
(b) Locational standards. A body-piercing establishment shall not be located within 600 feet of another body-piercing establishment or
a tattoo establishment. For the purpose of this section, such distance shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the exterior wall of the building containing the body-piercing establishment to the outer
wall of the building containing the other specified land use. If one or both of the specified land uses are located in a multi-tenant building
(e.g., shopping center), the measurement shall be taken from the outer boundary of such space (i.e. from the outer edge of the party wall
or the exterior wall). The presence of a city, county, or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of applying the
separation requirements of this section.
(c) Building standards. A patron who is being pierced shall not be visible from the exterior of the building through a window or entrance
to the building.
(d) Alcohol beverages prohibited. A body-piercing establishment shall not also sell, distribute, or allow consumption of alcohol
beverages on the premises.
[1] Commentary: See s. 252.24, Wis. Stats.
[2] Commentary: See s. 252.24, Wis. Stats.
9.04 Commercial
kennel
Description: A place not qualifying as a private kennel or a hobby kennel where dogs, cats,
or other domesticated animals over 6 months of age are housed for the purpose of boarding,
breeding, training, or sale. The term includes animal day care, boarding kennels, dog motels,
and dog training centers. The term does not include animal hospitals, animal grooming
parlors, or pet shops.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Buildings. A building used to house animals shall be at least 50 feet from a residential zoning district or a planned development
district that allows residential uses. An outdoor area where animals may be kept shall be at least 200 feet from a residential zoning
district or a planned development district that allows residential uses.
(b) Special events. Special events related to a commercial kennel, such as dog shows, exhibitions, field trials, and contests, may be
permitted as a temporary use as set forth in this appendix.
9.05 Commercial Description: A place where horses, donkeys, and other similar domesticated animals are
stable kept for boarding, instructional purposes, or hire on trail rides.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 4 stable stalls (or equivalent)
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Minimum lot area. A minimum lot area of 5 acres is required for a commercial stable.
(b) Buildings. Nonresidential buildings and other structures, such as barns, stables, riding
arenas, and sheds, necessary for the operation are allowed provided they comply with all
other requirements of the zoning district in which the subject property is located. Copyright © Civic Webware
(c) Location of new buildings. A building that houses livestock, shall not be located within a floodplain, or closer than 100 feet to the
ordinary high-water mark of a navigable body of water, or closer than 50 feet to any property boundary line.
(d) Manure management. As part of the site plan/operation plan review process, the handling and disposal of animal waste generated
by a commercial stable shall be addressed.
(e) Number of animals. The Planning Commission may establish a limitation on the maximum number of animals based on site
conditions, surrounding land uses, and preparation of an acceptable manure management plan.
(f) Special events. Special events related to a commercial stable, such as horse shows, exhibitions, and contests, may be permitted as
a temporary use as set forth in this appendix.
B - 16
Series Land Use
9.06 Equipment
rental, large
Description: A place where large equipment that is normally stored out of doors is offered for rent or lease. Typical items include
modular buildings, trucks and trailers, vertical lifts, skid loaders, forklifts, backhoes, excavators, and other types of heavy equipment.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 8,000 square feet of outdoor display area; plus 1 space for each employee on the largest
work shift
Supplemental Standards:
Outdoor display and storage areas and other activity areas shall comply with the setback requirements for the zoning district in which the
use is located.
9.07 Equipment Description: A place where equipment is offered for rent and related supplies are offered for retail sale or rent. Items for rent or sale are
rental, small predominantly stored indoors and may include hand tools, party equipment, and lawn and yard equipment.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area; plus 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
No special standards apply to small equipment rental.
9.08 Financial
services
Description: A place where financial and banking services are offered. The term includes
banks, savings and loan institutions, other lending institutions, auto title loan businesses, and
payday loan businesses.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area
Supplemental Standards:
A payday loan business or auto title loan business shall not be located within 5,000 feet of
another payday loan business or auto title loan business or within 150 feet of a residential
zoning district or a planned development district that allows residential uses. For the purpose
Copyright © Civic Webware
of this section, such distance shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest
portion of the exterior wall of the building containing the payday loan business or auto title loan business to the outer wall of the building
containing the other specified land use or, as appropriate, to the nearest lot line of a parcel in the specified zoning district. The presence
of a city, county, or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of applying the separation requirements of this
section. If a payday loan business or auto title loan business was operating on January 1, 2011 and does not comply with the locational
standards in this section, such business may continue to operate at that location.
[1] Commentary: See s. 59.69(4h), Wis. Stats.
9.09 Funeral home Description: A place where the deceased may be prepared for burial or cremation and people may gather for visitation or funeral
ceremonies. The indoor display of funeral equipment may also occur. The term includes mortuaries.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 3 patron seats at the maximum capacity; plus 1 space for each employee on the largest work
shift
Supplemental Standards:
Aside from generally applicable standards, no special standards apply to funeral homes.
9.10 General repair Description: A place where consumer goods such as shoes, bicycles, appliances, and business equipment are repaired. The term does
not include repair of motor vehicles or industrial equipment.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 450 square feet of gross floor area
Supplemental Standards:
All activities related to this use shall occur within an enclosed building, except when the parcel of land is located in an industrial zoning
district.
9.11 General Description: A place where services not otherwise included in any other service type category are offered. The term includes
services photography studios, weight loss centers, commercial postal services, beauty shops, pet grooming shops, photocopying and printing
services, linen services, dry cleaning services, and diaper services.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area
Supplemental Standards:
Aside from generally applicable standards, no special standards apply to general services.
B - 17
Series Land Use
9.12 Health care
center
Description: A place where medical treatment, or nursing, rehabilitative, or preventative care
is offered. The term includes ambulatory surgical facilities, hospitals, kidney treatment
centers, long-term care facilities, medical assistance facilities, mental health centers,
outpatient facilities, public health centers, and rehabilitation facilities.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 1.5 patient beds; plus 1 space for each employee
on the largest work shift; plus 1 space for each doctor on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Access requirements. The primary access to a health care center shall be off of a street
Copyright © Civic Webware
classified as a major arterial or a higher classification as depicted on the official map adopted in ch. 13 of the municipal code.
(b) Transition when allowed as a conditional use. When a health care center is allowed as a conditional use and is located in a
residential zoning district or abuts a residential zoning district or a planned development district that allows residential uses, the site shall
be designed so there is an appropriate transition to those adjoining residential uses which may be accomplished by providing additional
landscaping and screening and through the design and placement of buildings and other improvements on the site.
9.13 Health care Description: A place where medical services are offered and patients do not stay overnight.
clinic The term includes dental clinics, medical offices, chiropractic offices, acupuncture centers,
and sports medicine facilities. The term does not include those uses as classified as a health
care center.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each examination room or equivalent; plus 1 space for
each 300 square feet of gross floor area not devoted to examinations
Supplemental Standards:
Aside from generally applicable standards, no special standards apply to health care clinics. Copyright © Civic Webware
9.14 Instructional
services
Description: A place where instruction, training, or tutelage is offered in such areas as gymnastics, dance, art, music, and martial arts.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each student during the largest period of attendance; plus 1 space for each employee on the
largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
Aside from generally applicable standards, no special standards apply to instructional services.
9.15 Landscape Description: A place where a landscape contractor may establish a base of operation, which may include one or more of the following:
business retail sale of plant and landscape materials; office space; indoor and outdoor storage of materials, equipment, and machinery, such as
trucks and heavy equipment; and shops for the repair of machinery and equipment owned by the operator.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift; plus 1 space for each fleet vehicle parked on site
Supplemental Standards:
Outdoor work areas, parking areas, and storage of equipment and materials related to a landscape business shall not be located within
the setbacks established for the zoning district in which the use is located.
9.16 Professional
services
Description: A place where services involving predominant¬ly professional, clerical, or similar operations are preformed and where
customers may or could come on a regular basis. The term includes law offices, real estate offices, insurance offices, and travel
agencies.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area
Supplemental Standards:
Aside from generally applicable standards, no special standards apply to professional services.
B - 18
Series Land Use
9.17 Tattoo Description: A place where a tattooist applies a tattoo to another individual.
establishment Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area
Supplemental Standards:
(a) State license. Prior to the establishment of a tattoo establishment, the operator shall
obtain a license from the Wisconsin Department of Health Services, or the department’s
authorized agent, and maintain such license for the life of the use or until the department no
longer requires such license.[1] In addition, each practitioner shall obtain a license from the
department as required by state law and maintain such license while at the establishment or until the department no longer requires such
license.[2]
(b) Locational standards. A tattoo establishment shall not be located within 600 feet of another tattoo establishment or a body-piercing
establishment. For the purpose of this section, such distance shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures
or objects, from the nearest portion of the exterior wall of the building containing the tattoo establishment to the outer wall of the building
containing the other specified land use. If one or both of the specified land uses are located in a multi -tenant building (e.g., shopping
center), the measurement shall be taken from the outer boundary of such space (i.e. from the outer edge of th e party wall or the outer
wall). The presence of a city, county, or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of applying the separation
requirements of this section.
(c) Building standards. A patron who is being tattooed shall not be visible from the exterior of the building through any window or
entrance to the building.
(d) Alcohol beverages prohibited. A tattoo establishment shall not also sell, distribute, or allow consumption of alcohol beverages on
the premises.
[1] Commentary: See s. 252.23, Wis. Stats.
[2] Commentary: See s. 252.23, Wis. Stats.
9.18 Veterinary
clinic, general
Description: A place where medical services for small and large animals are offered. This use may include office space, medical labs,
appurtenant facilities, and indoor and outdoor enclosures for animals under the immediate medical care of a veterinarian.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Minimum lot area. When a veterinary clinic keeps large animals onsite for treatment and the clinic is located in a residential zoning
district, a minimum lot area of 5 acres is required.
(b) Placement of features. Any building used to house animals shall be at least 50 feet from a residential zoning district. Any outdoor
area where animals may be kept shall be at least 100 feet from a residential zoning district or a planned development district that allows
residential uses.
9.19 Veterinary Description: A place where medical services for small household animals are offered. This
clinic, small use may include office space, medical labs, appurtenant facilities, and indoor enclosures for
animal animals under the immediate medical care of a veterinarian. The term includes pet clinics,
dog and cat hospitals, and animal hospitals.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area
Supplemental Standards:
Aside from generally applicable standards, no special standards apply to small animal
veterinary clinics.
10 Recreation and Entertainment
10.01 Driving range Description: A place where golfers practice driving golf balls from a fixed central location.
This use may include one or more buildings and other structures directly related to the
operation of this use, such as an office, snack bar, and buildings for housing maintenance
equipment, supplies, and related materials.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each driving station
Supplemental Standards:
The reviewing authority may require the operator to install fencing when deemed necessary
to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
B - 19
Series Land Use
10.02 Golf course Description: A place where individuals, for a fee or other consideration, play golf outdoors.
This use may include one or more buildings and other structures directly related to the
operation of this use, such as an office, game room with snack bar, and buildings for housing
maintenance equipment, supplies, and related materials.
Parking Requirements: 36 spaces for each 9 holes of golf; plus 1 space for each employee
on the largest work shift. If a tavern or restaurant Is also part of the golf course facility, the
parking requirements of such use shall be 50 percent of the requirement.
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Minimum lot area. A minimum lot area of 25 acres is required for a golf course.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(b) Locational standards. Club houses and maintenance buildings with a floor area exceeding 1,200 square feet shall be located at
least 300 feet from a property in a residential zoning district or a planned development district that allows residential uses.
10.03 Indoor Description: A place where indoor entertainment is offered. The term includes theaters, movie theaters, dance halls, and theaters for
entertainment performing arts. The term does not include adult-oriented establishments.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 3 patron seats; plus 1 for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
Aside from generally applicable standards, no special standards apply to indoor entertainment.
10.04 Indoor
recreation
Description: A place where indoor recreational activities are offered. The term includes bowling alleys, skating rinks, billiard and pool
halls, and arcades.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 3 patron seats; plus 1 for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
Aside from generally applicable standards, no special standards apply to indoor recreation.
B - 20
Series Land Use
10.05 Indoor Description: An indoor area where patrons shoot guns and bow and arrows for target
shooting range practice.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 3 patrons at design capacity; plus 1 for each
employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Compliance with state and federal requirements. An indoor shooting range shall
comply with all applicable state and federal standards, including those relating to
environmental protection and occupational health and safety.
(b) Design specifications. A professional architect or engineer with demonstrated experience in indoor shooting range design shall
submit documentary evidence establishing the type and caliber of ammunition the range is designed to confine in a safe and controlled
manner. Design specifications may be derived from Range Design Criteria published by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Health,
Safety and Security; The Range Source Book published by the National Rifle Association of America; or any other similar authoritative
source.
(c) Ammunition. No ammunition shall be used within the indoor shooting range that exceeds the certified design and construction
specifications.
(d) Adoption of rules and procedures. The operator of the indoor shooting range shall establish and enforce clear rules and
procedures for the safe operation of the range. Such rules and regulations shall include the operational standards contained in this
section and those adopted by the state or federal government, and accepted industry practices, including those derived from the sources
identified in subsection (b) above. Such rules shall be conspicuously displayed inside of the indoor shooting range.
(e) Security plan. A security plan shall be established for the building securing the building from unauthorized entrants.
(f) Storage of guns. All firearms stored on the premises must be stored in a gun safe or other secure storage facility or container
approved by the Chief of Police.
(g) Enforcement of adopted rules and procedures. At least one adult who is an experienced shooting range operator shall be present
to manage the operation of the indoor shooting range when it is being used. The shooting range operator shall take reasonable actions
to ensure that employees and patrons comply with the rules and procedures governing the operation of the indoor shooting range.
(h) Minors. No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted inside of the indoor shooting range unless accompanied by an adult at all
times. A minor participating in a firearms safety class supervised by a qualified adult instructor shall be deemed to be accompanied by
an adult.
(i) Additional requirements. Unless preempted by state or federal law, the Planning Commission may recommend and the Common
Council may impose additional conditions or requirements including reporting or inspection requirements if it determines such conditions
or requirements are reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Consideration shall be given to the cost and
burden of such additional requirements upon the operation of the indoor shooting range and upon City resources compared to th e
additional public benefit to be achieved, industry practices, and evidence of experiences with similar operations in other communities.
(j) Additional criteria for conditional use reviews. In those instances where an indoor shooting range is allowed as a conditional use,
potential nuisances to the surrounding area related to air quality and noise shall be considered during the review process in addition to
those criteria used to evaluate conditional uses.
10.06 Outdoor
entertainment
Description: A place where outdoor, spectator-type uses or events are offered. The term
includes race tracks, motocross courses, tractor-pulling events, and sports arenas.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 3 patron seats at design capacity; plus 1 for each
employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Hours of operation. The Planning Commission may establish hours of operation for this
use when the operation may negatively affect surrounding properties.
(b) Site design considerations. The site shall be designed to minimize the effects of
outdoor lighting and noise on surrounding properties.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(c) Locational standards. Activity areas shall be located at least 300 feet from a property in a residential zoning district or a planned
development district that allows residential uses.
B - 21
Series Land Use
10.07 Outdoor Description: A place where outdoor recreational activities are offered. The term includes
recreation miniature golf, batting cages, water parks, and amusement parks. The term does not include
driving ranges and golf courses, parks, shooting ranges, and recreational trails.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 3 patrons at design capacity; plus 1 for each
employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Hours of operation. The Planning Commission may recommend and the Common
Council may establish hours of operation for this use when the operation may negatively Copyright © Civic Webware
affect surrounding properties.
(b) Site design considerations. The site shall be designed to minimize the effects of outdoor lighting and noise on surrounding
properties.
(c) Locational standards. Activity areas shall be located at least 300 feet from a property in a residential zoning district or a planned
development district that allows residential uses.
11 Government and Community Services
11.01 Administrative Description: A place where government employees perform administrative functions on behalf of the public. The term includes
government administrative offices, post offices, and courthouses.
center Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 350 square feet of gross floor area
Supplemental Standards:
Aside from generally applicable standards, no special standards apply to administrative government centers.
11.02 Animal shelter Description: A place where stray or unwanted household pets are temporarily housed.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 600 square feet of gross floor area; plus 1 space
for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Confinement of animals. All animals shall be continuously confined within an enclosed
building except as provided in this section. In an industrial zoning district an animal shelter
may have a fenced exercise area provided:
(1) it is at least 200 feet from a property in a residential zoning district, a planned development district that allows residential
uses, or a mixed-use zoning district, and
(2) no animal shall be allowed in the exercise area from sunset to sunrise.
(b) Noise control. The building shall be designed and operated so that noise from the animals at the facility cannot be heard beyond the
property boundary line of the parcel of land on which it is located.
B - 22
Series Land Use
11.03 Cemetery Description: A place where human remains may be buried or interned. Accessory uses may
include columbariums, mausoleums, crematories, and mortuaries when operated in
conjunction with and within the boundaries of such area. The sale of cemetery merchandise,
including monuments, markers, nameplates, vases and urns, and any services that are
associated with supplying or delivering those goods or with the burial of human remains is
allowed when accessory to the principal use.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift, plus any
required parking for other uses such as a funeral home Copyright © Civic Webware
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Minimum size. A cemetery shall be at least 10 acres without a public mausoleum or at least 20 acres with a public mausoleum.[1]
(b) Location of burial plots. Burial plots shall not be located within 20 feet of a property boundary line or a proposed right-of-way so
designated on the official map adopted under ch. 13 of the municipal code, in a designated floodplain, or in a wetland area; nor shall
internment occur below the groundwater table.
(c) Location of mausoleums. Private mausoleums shall be located at least 20 feet from a property boundary line. Public mausoleums
shall comply with the building setback requirements for principal buildings of the zoning district in which this use is located.
(d) Marker required. A permanent marker stating the name of the deceased and the birth and death dates, if known, shall identify the
location of each occupied burial plot unless the zoning administrator allows an unmarked grave due to exceptional circumstances.
(e) Name required. The cemetery shall have a formal name, which shall be placed on a permanent sign located by the main entrance to
the cemetery.
(f) Financial guarantee. Prior to the establishment a cemetery, the property owner shall submit a financial guarantee to the City
pursuant to the requirements in Article 4 consistent with any requirement the Common Council may adopt. This financial guarantee
relates to the long-term upkeep of the cemetery.
(g) Compliance with state law. A cemetery shall comply with all requirements set forth in subch. II of ch. 157, Wis. Stats.
[1] Commentary: See s. 157.129, Wis. Stats.
11.04 Civic use
facility
Description: A place where large gatherings of people may assemble for public purposes. The term includes zoos, arenas, stadiums,
and fairgrounds.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area or 1 space for each 4 patrons at maximum capacity,
whichever is greater; plus 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
The primary access to a civic use facility with 600 seats or more shall be off of a street classified as a major arterial or a higher
classification as depicted on the official map adopted in ch. 13 of the municipal code.
11.05 Community Description: A place where short-term and intermittent meetings or gatherings of individuals are held for purposes of sharing
center information, entertainment, social service, or similar activities. The term includes senior centers; neighborhood recreational centers;
fraternal, social, or civic clubs; lodges; and union halls.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area or 1 space for each 4 patrons at design capacity,
whichever is greater; plus 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
The primary access to a community center with 600 seats or more shall be off of a street classified as a major arterial or a higher
classification as depicted on the official map adopted in ch. 13 of the municipal code.
11.06 Community
cultural facility
Description: A place where people may gather for studying, reading, personal education, or
viewing the visual arts. The term includes libraries, museums, art galleries, and
observatories. The term does not include performing arts.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area or 1 space for
each 4 patrons at maximum capacity, whichever is greater; plus 1 space for each employee
on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
The primary access to a community cultural facility with 600 seats or more shall be off of a
Copyright © Civic Webware
street classified as a major arterial or a higher classification as depicted on the official map adopted in ch. 13 of the mun icipal code.
B - 23
Series Land Use
11.07 Community Description: A place where a group of unrelated individuals grow vegetables, fruits, and
garden flowers for their personal use. A community garden can be divided into individual plots of land
for the exclusive use of the person assigned each plot, or the entire garden may be a
cooperative effort of any number of people, or a combination thereof.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 10,000 square feet of land available for
production, if on-street parking is not readily available as determined by the zoning
administrator
Supplemental Standards: Copyright © Civic Webware
The following structures/uses are generally permitted in community gardens subject to the review and approval of the Planning
Commission through the site review process: tool sheds, shade pavilions, rest-room facilities with composting toilets, indoor work areas,
benches, bike racks, raised/accessible planting beds, compost bins, picnic tables, and children’s play areas. All such struct ures/uses
shall comply with the setback provisions for principal buildings of the zoning district in which this use is located.
11.08 Educational
facility, postsecondary
Description: A place where post-secondary educational opportunities are offered. The term includes colleges, universities, community
colleges, and vocational schools.
Parking Requirements: 0.5 spaces for each student during the largest class attendance period; plus 1 space for each employee on the
largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
The primary access to a post-secondary educational facility shall be off of a street classified as a major arterial or a higher classification
as depicted on the official map adopted in ch. 13 of the municipal code.
11.09 Educational Description: A place where primary and secondary educational opportunities are offered.
facility, pre-K The term includes preschools, elementary schools, junior high schools, and high schools.
through 12 Parking Requirements: 0.5 space for each (K-8) classroom; 1 space for each 8 students
(grades 9-12) at design capacity; plus 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
A temporary building may used as a classroom when an existing facility is being renovated or
when school enrollment exceeds the capacity of the existing facility, provided such building
complies with all building code requirements. Copyright © Civic Webware
11.10 Maintenance
garage
Description: A place where a municipal government maintains administrative offices, equipment, and supplies necessary for
maintaining public roadways, parks, and other types of public facilities.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
Outdoor storage areas and other activity areas shall be located at least 50 feet from a property in a residential zoning district or a
planned development district that allows residential uses and 25 feet from a property in a commercial zoning district.
11.11 Park Description: A place where primarily outdoor recreational activities may occur. A park may be operated by a public entity for the benefit of
the general public or by a homeowners association for the benefit of its members. A park may be developed with recreational facilities or
undeveloped. When operated by a public entity, the term includes zoos, dog parks, and neighborhood recreation centers.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 3 patrons at the peak use period
Supplemental Standards:
Aside from generally applicable standards, no special standards apply to parks.
11.12 Public safety
facility
Description: A place where public safety services are offered. The term includes ambulance services, fire stations, police stations, and
jails. The term does not include correctional facilities.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 500 gross square feet of office area; 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift; plus
1 space for each vehicle normally parked on the premises
Supplemental Standards:
Aside from generally applicable standards, no special standards apply to public safety facilities.
B - 24
Series Land Use
11.13 Recreation
trail
Description: A linear path, not otherwise part of a public park, that is dedicated to a single
recreational use or multiple uses. Examples include hiking trails, bike trails, cross-country ski
trails, and horse trails.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
Aside from generally applicable standards, no special standards apply to recreation trails.
Copyright © Civic Webware
11.14 Worship
facility
Description: A place where people can regularly assemble for religious worship and
associated activities and which is operated by an entity with tax-exempt status. The term
includes sanctuaries, chapels, cathedrals, churches, synagogues, and temples and other
onsite accessory buildings such as parsonages, friaries, convents, fellowship halls, and
rectories. The term does not include day care centers, community recreation facilities,
dormitories, private educational facilities, emergency shelters, and health care facilities.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 4 patrons at design capacity; plus 1 space for
each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
Copyright © Civic Webware
(a) Required green space. If a worship facility is located in a residential zoning district, at least 30 percent of the parcel shall remain
undeveloped (i.e., landscaped).
(b) Access requirements. If a worship facility has 600 seats or more, the primary access shall be off of a street classified as a major
arterial or a higher classification as depicted on the official map adopted in ch. 13 of the municipal code.
(c) Limitations on events and functions. No event or function shall be conducted that creates a demand for parking spaces that is
greater than the number provided on site, unless parking is allowed on the public road fronting on the site.
12 Telecommunications and Utilities
12.01 Radio
broadcast
facility
Description: A free-standing tower with or without an equipment compound and other
structures that is intended for the regular provision of a commercial or noncommercial service
involving the transmission, emission, or reception of radio waves for the transmission of
sound or images in which the transmissions are intended for direct reception by the general
public.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Legislative findings. The Common Council makes the following legislative findings with regard to radio broadcast facilities:
(1) The state legislature passed 2013 Wisconsin Act 20 (Section 1269(K)) that imposed limits on local municipalities with respect
to regulating radio broadcast facilities within their jurisdictions.
(2) The regulations in this section are intended to promote the public health, safety, and welfare, while at the same time not
unduly restricting the development of needed radio broadcast facilities.
(3) The regulations in this section are intended to accomplish the following purposes, to the fullest extent permitted by law:
(i) protect the visual character of the City from the potential adverse effects of radio broadcast facilities; and
(ii) avoid damage to adjoining properties by establishing setback standards.
(b) Federal requirements. A radio broadcast facility shall comply with all applicable requirements of the Federal Communications
Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, and any other federal agency with authority to regulate radio broadcast facilities. In the
event of a conflict between federal law and this section, federal law shall prevail.
(c) Single parcel. The fall zone and all structures related to the radio broadcast facility shall be located on a single parcel, including the
tower, equipment compound, and anchor points for a guyed tower.
(d) Fall zone and other setbacks. To ensure the fall zone for the tower is located entirely on the subject property, the center of the
tower shall not be located closer to a property boundary line than height of the tower. If an applicant submits an engineering certification
with the application that show the fall zone is smaller than this distance, the fall zone shall be the smaller calculated area, unless the City
provides the applicant with substantial evidence that the engineering certification is flawed. In all cases, the tower and equipment
compound and any related buildings shall be located no closer to a property boundary line than 50 feet or the setback requirements for
the zoning district, whichever is greater. The fence around anchor points for a guyed tower shall be located at least 25 feet from a
property boundary line.
(e) Security fencing. A tower and related equipment compound (but not buildings for offices or production), shall be enclosed by a
security fence (height and material to be established through the site plan review process). If the tower is a guyed tower, each of the
anchor points shall be enclosed by a security fence.
(f) Lighting. A tower or any attachment shall not be artificially lighted, except when specifically required by a state agency, the Federal
B - 25
Aviation
Administratio
n, or another
federal
authority.
Such
required
lighting shall
be the least
obtrusive to
the
surrounding
views and be
B - 25
Series Land Use
avian friendly.
(g) Equipment buildings. The exterior of equipment buildings, shelters, and cabinets exceeding 1,500 cubic feet shall be covered with
building materials typically used on buildings found in the area.
(h) Emergency power system. A backup generator may be placed within the equipment compound.
(i) Landscaping. Landscaping shall be placed around the equipment enclosure and anchor points for guyed towers consistent with a
landscaping plan as approved by the Planning Commission. After reviewing the location of the facility and the visibility of the facility from
public right-of-ways and adjoining properties, the Planning Commission may waive this landscape requirement or defer the requirement
to a later date.
(j) Lease agreement. If the operator of the radio broadcast facility does not own the land where the facility is to be located, the property
owner and the operator shall execute a lease agreement prior to any land-disturbing activity. Such agreement shall be binding on future
property owners and future operators and shall address the rights and responsibilities of each party with respect to subs. (l) and (m) of
this section.
(k) Ongoing maintenance. The subject property shall be maintained and kept in a good condition, so as not to become a nuisance as
determined by the Planning Commission. Proper maintenance includes regular lawn and landscaping care, and painting and regular
care of building(s), fences, towers, and other improvements. Additionally, the site shall be kept clear of junk and debris.
(l) Termination of approval. If the zoning administrator determines that the radio broadcast facility is unsafe or otherwise defective or
that the radio broadcast facility has not been operating a for a continuous period of 12 months, the administrator shall foll ow the
procedure outlined in Article 5 relating to termination of the approval. Within 90 days after the date of termination, the property owner
shall remove the radio broadcast facility and restore the site to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator. In the event such work is not
done within the specified period, the City shall have the right to use the financial guarantee as required by this section to pay for such
work.
(m) Financial guarantee. Prior to issuance of a building permit authorizing construction of a radio broadcast facility, the applicant shall
submit a financial guarantee to the City pursuant to the requirements in Article 4 in the amount of $20,000.00.[1]The financial guarantee
shall be held until the radio broadcast facility is removed and the site restored to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator.
(n) Third party consultant. The zoning administrator may, at the applicant’s expense, hire a third party consultant to conduct an
objective analysis of the submitted materials including the application and calculation of the fall zone. The third party consultant may not
charge the applicant for any travel expenses incurred in such review.
(o) Duration of approval. The approval authorizing a radio broadcast facility shall run with the land and shall be binding on successors
in interest.
[1] Commentary: See s. 66.0404(4)(f), Wis. Stats.
B - 26
12.03 Stormwater
management
facility
Description: A natural or manmade feature that collects, conveys, channels, holds, inhibits,
or diverts the movement of stormwater.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
A stormwater facility shall be designed to meet any requirements in the municipal code.
Copyright © Civic Webware
Series Land Use
12.02 Solar power Description: A utility-scale commercial facility that converts sunlight into electricity with the
plant primary purpose of wholesale or retail sales of generated electricity.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Minimum lot area. The mimum area for a solar power plant is 3 acres.
(b) Setbacks. Solar panels and other related structures shall not be located within the
building setback area. Additional setbacks may be required to mitigate noise and glare
impacts, as identified through the site plan review process. Copyright © Civic Webware
(c) Security fencing. With approval of the Planning Commission, a security fence (height and material to be established through the site
plan review process) may be placed around the perimeter of the solar power plant. If a security fences is installed, knox boxes and keys
shall be provided at locked entrances for emergency personnel access.
(d) Identification sign. An identification sign no larger than 18 inches by 24 inches shall be placed in a visible location near the primary
entrance of the site that lists (1) the name of the facility owner/operator, (2) a telephone number to contact in case of an emergency, and
(3) information relating to potential voltage hazards.
(e) Warning signs. Appropriate warning signage may be placed at the entrance and around the perimeter of the solar power plant
project as approved through the site plan review process.
(f) Electric power lines. Power lines within a solar power plant shall be placed underground, except that power lines that leave the
project site may be overhead.
(g) Approval by electric utility company. The owner/operator shall submit documentation acceptable to the zoning administrator
indicating that the system meets all applicable regulations and requirements of the affected electric utility company.
(h) Landscaping. As part of the site plan review process the Planning Commission shall require appropriate landscaping and/or other
screening materials to help screen the solar power plant from public right-of-ways and neighboring residences. After reviewing the
location of the facility and the visibility of the facility from public right-of-ways and adjoining properties, tis or defer the requirement to a
later date
(i) Outdoor lighting. Lighting of the solar power plant and accessory structures shall be limited to the minimum necessary for site
security.
(j) Lease agreement. If the operator of the solar power plant does not own the land where the facility is to be located, the property
owner and the operator shall execute a lease agreement prior to any land-disturbing activity. rights and responsibilities of each party with
respect to subs. (l) and (m) of this section
(k) Ongoing maintenance. The solar power plant shall be properly maintained and kept in a good condition, so as not to become a
nuisance. Proper maintenance includes regular lawn and landscaping care, and painting and regular care of building(s), fences, and
other improvements. Additionally, the site shall be kept clear of junk and debris.
(l) Termination of approval. If the zoning administrator determines that the solar power plant is unsafe or otherwise defective or that the
site has not produced any electricity for a continuous period of 12 months, the administrator shall follow the procedure outlined in Article
5 relating to termination of the approval. Within 90 days after termination, the property owner shall remove the solar power plant and all
related equipment and improvements and restore the site to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator. In the event such wo rk is not
done within the 90-day period, the City shall have the right to use the financial guarantee as required by this section to pay for such
work.
(m) Financial guarantee. Prior to issuance of a building permit authorizing construction of a solar power plant, the applicant shall submit
a financial guarantee to the City pursuant to the requirements in Article 4 in the amount of $20,000.00.[1] The financial gua rantee shall
be held until the solar power plant and related improvements are removed and the site restored to the satisfaction of the zoning
administrator.
(n) Solar access. The property owner may submit a solar access permit to the City pursuant to the provisions set forth in s. 66.0404,
Wis. Stats.
[1] Commentary: See s. 66.0404(4)(f), Wis. Stats.
B - 27
Series Land Use
12.04 Telecommunication Description: The placement of a new mobile service facility on an existing support structure which constitutes a substantial modification.
collocation Note: This definition is based on the corresponding definition in s. 66.0404, Wis. Stats.
(class 1)
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
Aside from generally applicable standards, no special standards apply to a class 1 telecommunication collocation.
12.05 Telecommunication Description: The placement of a new mobile service facility on an existing support structure
collocation
(class 2)
which does not constitute a substantial modification.
Note: This definition is based on the corresponding definition in s. 66.0404, Wis.
Stats.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
Aside from generally applicable standards, no special standards apply to a class 2
telecommunication collocation.
Copyright © Civic Webware
B - 28
12.06 Telecommunication Description: A free-standing tower with or without an equipment compound that is intended for the placement of one or more mobile
tower service facilities.
Note: This definition is based on the corresponding definition in s. 66.0404, Wis. Stats.
Parking Requirements: 1 space
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Legislative findings. The Common Council makes the following legislative findings with regard to telecommunication towers
providing mobile telecommunication services:
(1) The state legislature passed 2013 Wisconsin Act 20 (Section 1269(I)) that imposed limits on local municipalities with respect
to regulating telecommunication facilities within their jurisdictions.
(2) The federal government adopted the Telecommunications Act of 1996 which established various requirements relating to
telecommunication facilities.[1]
(3) The regulations in this section are intended to promote the public health, safety, and welfare, while at the same time not
unduly restricting the development of needed telecommunications facilities.
(4) The regulations in this section are intended to accomplish the following purposes, to the fullest extent permitted by law:
(i) protect the visual character of the City from the potential adverse effects of telecommunication facilities;
(ii) ensure that a competitive and broad range of telecommunications services and high quality telecommunications
infrastructure are provided;
(iii) create and preserve telecommunication facilities that will serve as an important and effective part of the citys
emergency response network;
(iv) minimize the number of towers by requiring collocation; and
(v) avoid damage to adjoining properties by establishing setback standards.
(b) Federal requirements. A telecommunication tower shall comply with all applicable requirements of the Federal Communications
Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, and any other federal agency with authority to regulate telecommunication facilities. In
the event of a conflict between federal law and this section, federal law shall prevail.
(c) Single parcel. The fall zone and all structures related to the telecommunication facility shall be located on a single parcel, including
the tower, equipment compound, and anchor points for a guyed tower.
(d) Fall zone and other setbacks. To ensure the fall zone for the tower is located entirely on the subject property, the center of the
tower shall not be located closer to a property boundary line than height of the tower. If an applicant submits an engineering certification
with the application that show the fall zone is smaller than this distance, the fall zone shall be the smaller calculated area, unless the City
provides the applicant with substantial evidence that the engineering certification is flawed.[2] In all cases, the tower and equipment
compound shall be located no closer to a property boundary line than 50 feet or the setback requirements for the zoning distr ict,
whichever is greater. The fence around anchor points for a guyed tower shall be located at least 25 feet from a property boundary line.
(e) Security fencing. A tower and related equipment compound consisting of equipment buildings, shelters, and cabinets, shall be
enclosed by a security fence (height and material to be established through the site plan review process). If the tower is a guyed tower,
each of the anchor points shall be enclosed by a security fence.
(f) Lighting. A tower or any attachment shall not be artificially lighted, except when specifically required by a state agency, the Federal
Aviation Administration, or another federal authority. Such required lighting shall be the least obtrusive to the surrounding views and be
avian friendly.
(g) Equipment buildings. The exterior of equipment buildings, shelters, and cabinets exceeding 1,500 cubic feet shall be covered with
building materials typically used on buildings found in the area.
B - 28
Series Land Use
(h) Emergency power system. A backup generator may be placed within the equipment compound.[3]
(i) Identification sign. An identification sign no larger than 18 inches by 24 inches shall be placed in a visible location near the base of
the tower that lists (1) the name of the tower owner, (2) the Federal Communications Commission identification number, and (3) a
telephone number to contact in case of an emergency.
(j) Accommodation of other users on new towers (collocation). A tower over 150 feet in height, along with the tower site and all
support facilities and appurtenances, shall accommodate at least two additional users, unless the zoning administrator determines that
evidence presented by the tower operator demonstrates it is not technically feasible to do so. Further, the tower operator an d their
successors in interest shall allow other users to use the tower, the tower site, support facilities, and appurtenances at fair market rates as
negotiated by those parties. If the Planning Commission determines the tower operator has made access to the tower and tower site
unfeasible, the zoning administrator shall notify the tower operator via registered mail of such determination. If the tower operator does
not take corrective action within 45 days of such determination, the permit for that tower shall become null and void and the tower shall
be removed and the site restored within 90 days of such determination.
(k) Requirement for collocation. A new tower shall only be permitted if the applicant demonstrates with a sworn statement that
collocation on an existing or planned tower within the applicant’s search ring would not result in the same mobile service functionality,
coverage, and capacity; is technically infeasible; or is economically burdensome to the mobile service provider.[4] If the applicant does
not provide such analysis and sworn statement, the application for a new tower shall be denied.[5]
(l) Collocation review. The collocation of an antenna or antenna array on an existing tower is permitted subject to site plan, building
plan, and plan of operation review.
(m) Landscaping. Landscaping shall be placed around the equipment enclosure and anchor points for guyed towers consistent with a
landscaping plan as approved by the Planning Commission. After reviewing the location of the facility and the visibility of the facility from
public right-of-ways and adjoining properties, the Planning Commission may waive this landscape requirement or defer the requirement
to a later date.
(n) Lease agreement. If the operator of the telecommunication tower does not own the land where the facility is to be located, the
property owner and the operator shall execute a lease agreement prior to any land-disturbing activity. Such agreement shall be binding
on future property owners and future operators and shall address the rights and responsibilities of each party with respect to subs. (p)
and (q) of this section.
(o) Ongoing maintenance. The subject property shall be maintained and kept in a good condition, so as not to become a nuisance as
determined by the Planning Commission. Proper maintenance includes regular lawn and landscaping care, and painting and regular
care of building(s), fences, towers, and other improvements. Additionally, the site shall be kept clear of junk and debris.
(p) Termination of approval. If the zoning administrator determines that the tower is unsafe or otherwise defective or that the tower has
not hosted an operational antenna for a continuous period of 12 months, the administrator shall follow the procedure outlined in Article
5 relating to termination of the approval. Within 90 days after the date of termination, the property owner shall remove the tower,
equipment cabinets, and all related equipment and improvements that are part of its communication facilities and restore the site to the
satisfaction of the zoning administrator. In the event such work is not done within the specified period, the City shall have the right to use
the financial guarantee as required by this section to pay for such work.
(q) Financial guarantee. Prior to issuance of a building permit authorizing construction of a tower, the applicant shall submit a financial
guarantee to the City pursuant to the requirements in Article 4 in the amount of $20,000.00.[6] The financial guarantee shall be held until
the tower and related improvements are removed and the site restored to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator.
(r) Third-party consultant. The zoning administrator may, at the applicant’s expense, hire a third-party consultant to conduct an
objective analysis of the submitted materials including the application, calculation of the fall zone, and certification that collocation is not
possible. The third-party consultant may not charge the applicant for any travel expenses incurred in such review.[7]
(s) Duration of approval. The approval authorizing a telecommunication tower shall run with the land and shall be binding on
successors in interest.[8]
[1] Commentary: In particular see s. 704 of the act.
[2] Commentary: See s. 66.0404(2)(g), Wis. Stats.
[3] Commentary: See s. 66.0404(4)(j), Wis. Stats.
[4] Commentary: See s. 66.0404(2)(b)6, Wis. Stats.
[5] Commentary: See s. 66.0404(2)(e), Wis. Stats.
[6] Commentary: See s. 66.0404(4)(f), Wis. Stats.
[7] Commentary: See s. 66.0404(4)(f), Wis. Stats.
[8] Commentary: See s. 66.0404(4)(n), Wis. Stats.
B - 29
Series Land Use
12.07 Utility
installation,
major
Description: A place, building and/or structure, or portion thereof, whether public or private,
used or is intended for providing basic infrastructure or utility services and which could
potentially have a moderate to high impact on neighboring property. The term includes
pipeline pumping stations, sewage treatment plants, electric substations, water towers,
electric transmission lines with a design capacity of 110kV or more, underground pipelines,
and hydroelectric facilities.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each on-site employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
Copyright © Civic Webware
If a major utility installation involves a building of any type and is located in a residential zoning district or a planned development district
that allows residential uses, such building shall be compatible with residential buildings in regard to design and exterior materials.
12.08 Utility
installation,
minor
Description: A utility installation generally having low impact on neighboring property. The term includes public water system wells,
without a tower; below ground sewer lift stations; and stormwater pumping stations. The term does not include utility cabinets, which are
classified as an accessory use (Series 17).
Parking Requirements: 1 space, although the zoning administrator may grant a waiver
Supplemental Standards:
Aside from generally applicable standards, no special standards apply to minor utility installations.
12.09 Utility
maintenance
yard
Description: A place where a public or private entity maintains administrative offices, equipment, and supplies necessary for
maintaining the infrastructure it provides.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage areas and other activity areas shall be located at least 100 feet from a property in a residential
zoning district or a planned development district that allows residential uses and 20 feet from a property in a commercial zoning district.
(b) Control of fugitive dust. As part of the site plan/operation plan review process, the control of fugitive dust generated by this use, if
any, shall be addressed.
13.01 Airport Description: A place where airplanes, ultralights, helicopters, or similar aircraft may land and
takeoff. This use may also include facilities for the housing and maintenance of the same and
facilities for passenger ticket sales and accessory food service areas primarily intended for
pilots and passengers.
Parking Requirements: Determined on a case-by-case basis
Supplemental Standards:
All buildings, outdoor airplane or helicopter storage areas, and other activity areas shall be
located at least 100 feet from the perimeter of the airport property.
13.02 Bus storage
facility
Description: A place where buses are parked when not in use and may include
administrative offices and a building for the storage, care, and maintenance of buses in the
fleet.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage areas and other activity areas shall be located at least
50 feet from a property in a residential zoning district or a planned development district that
allows residential uses and 20 feet from a property in a commercial zoning district.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(b) Control of fugitive dust. As part of the site plan and operation plan review process, the control of fugitive dust generated by this
use, if any, shall be addressed.
B - 30
Series Land Use
13.03 Mass transit
terminal
Description: A place where passengers can board mass transit. This use may include
facilities for ticket sales and accessory food service areas primarily intended for passengers.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area devoted to a
passenger waiting area; plus 1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area devoted to
offices
Supplemental Standards:
The primary access to a mass transit terminal shall be located in close proximity to a street
classified as a major arterial or a higher classification as depicted on the official map adopted
in ch. 13 of the municipal code.
Copyright © Civic Webware
13.04 Off-site
parking lot
Description: A place where motor vehicles associated with an off-site use may be parked for a short duration. It may be available to the
public or reserved to accommodate parking for a specific purpose.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
Aside from generally applicable standards, no special standards apply to off-site parking lots.
13.05 Park-and-ride
lot
Description: A designated place where people can park their motor vehicles for a short
duration to board public transportation or to carpool or vanpool.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
The primary access to a park-and-ride lot shall be located in close proximity to a street
classified as a major arterial or a higher classification as depicted on the official map adopted
in ch. 13 of the municipal code.
Copyright © Civic Webware
13.06 Railroad Description: A linear strip of land with rail tracks and auxiliary facilities for track operation
such as signal bungalows. The term does not include passenger stations, freight terminals,
loading platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive maintenance shops, and
switchyards. The term further does not include properties owned by a railroad company that
are leased for use by others.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
Aside from generally applicable standards, no special standards apply to railroads.
Copyright © Civic Webware
14.01 Boat and RV
yard
14.02 Bulk fuel
storage
Description: An outdoor area where watercraft and recreational vehicles may be kept during
the off season or while not in use. Owners/operators may conduct minor repairs and
maintenance on their watercraft or recreational vehicles while kept in storage.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
No portion of a boat yard and RV yard shall be located within a setback for the zoning district
in which the use is located.
Description: A place where liquid or compressed fuel products may be stored in bulk.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Additional standards. Upon recommendation of the fire chief, the reviewing authority
may impose development standards when needed to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare.
(b) Access. A bulk fuel storage facility shall have legal and physical access to a street
designated by the City as a truck route.
Copyright © Civic Webware
Copyright © Civic Webware
B - 31
Series Land Use
14.03 Indoor boat
storage
Description: A place where watercraft may be kept indoors during the off season or while not in use. Owners/operators may conduct
minor repairs and maintenance on their watercraft while kept in storage.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift; plus 1 space for the first 30 rental spaces or 2 spaces for
more than 30 rental spaces
Supplemental Standards:
No special standards apply to indoor boat storage.
14.04 Personal
storage facility
Description: A place where individual storage units are offered for rent, lease, sale, or other
arrangement. The term includes a tract of land used to store motor vehicles and watercraft.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 50 rental units when an office is provided; plus 1
space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area for a personal storage facility is 2 acres.
(b) Access. Access to a cubicle shall not open directly onto a public road right-of-way.
(c) Internal access drives. An internal access drive providing access to a storage unit must
be hard surfaced.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(d) Storage of prohibited substances. No cubicle shall be used to store explosives, toxic substances, hazardous materials, or
radioactive materials.
(e) Uses. Only uses that are accessory to storage shall occur. Human habitation, fabrication, repair, sales of any type including garage
sales, and any similar use are prohibited.
(f) Fencing of outdoor storage area. An area used for outdoor storage of operational vehicles, watercraft, and the like shall be
enclosed by a security fence as approved by the Planning Commission through the site review process.
(g) Setback of outdoor storage area. Outdoor storage areas shall comply with the setback standards for the zoning district in which the
use is located.
14.05 Truck terminal Description: A place where goods carried by motor transport are received and temporarily
stored until transferred to another truck for delivery.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift; plus 1 space
for each fleet vehicle parked on site
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Setback of outdoor storage area. Outdoor storage areas and other activity areas shall
be located at least 100 feet from a property in a residential zoning district or a planned
development district that allows residential uses.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(b) Control of fugitive dust. As part of the site plan/operation plan review process, the control of fugitive dust generated by this use
shall be addressed.
(c) Access. A truck terminal shall have legal and physical access to a street designated as a truck route.
14.06 Warehouse Description: A place where goods, merchandise, and other materials are temporarily stored
for eventual shipment. The term includes moving and storage facilities. The term does not
include bulk fuel storage.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift; plus 1 space
for each fleet vehicle parked on site
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Setback of outdoor storage area. Outdoor storage areas and other activity areas shall
be located at least 100 feet from a property in a residential zoning district or a planned development district that allows r esidential uses.
(b) Control of fugitive dust. As part of the site plan/operation plan review process, the control of fugitive dust generated by this use, if
any, shall be addressed.
(c) Access. A warehouse shall have legal and physical access to a street designated by the City as a truck route.
B - 32
Series Land Use
15.01 Artisan shop Description: A place where handmade craft items or works of art are made on a small-scale
and offered for retail sale. Examples of such items include paintings, textiles, weaving,
photography, sculptures, pottery, leather products, handmade paper, jewelry, hand-blown
glass, small wooden items, candles, soaps, and lotions.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 300 square feet of display area; plus 1 space for
each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Generally. When an artisan shop is located in a commercial zoning district, all materials
Copyright © Civic Webware
and activities, except loading and unloading, shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
(b) Demonstrations and workshops. The operator may conduct demonstrations and workshops within the confines of the building
provided attendance at the event or function does not create a demand for parking spaces that is greater than the number provided on
site, unless parking is allowed on the public street fronting on the site.
15.02 Construction
equipment
repair
Description: A place where construction equipment, such as dump trucks, excavators,
graders, and scrapers are typically left overnight for maintenance, service, or repair.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift; plus 1 space
for each fleet vehicle parked on site
Supplemental Standards:
Outdoor storage areas and other activity areas related to this use shall be located at least 30
feet from a property in a residential zoning district or a planned development district that
allows residential uses and 10 feet from a property in a commercial zoning district. When
Copyright © Civic Webware
allowed in a commercial zoning district, all repair work shall occur within an enclosed building. When allowed in an industrial zoning
district, repair work may be conducted out-of-doors.
15.03 Construction
equipment
sales and
service
Description: A place where new and used construction equipment, such as dump trucks,
excavators, graders, and scrapers are offered for rent, sale, lease, or exchange, or are taken
on consignment. This use may include the repair of such equipment.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift; plus 1 space
for each fleet vehicle parked on site
Supplemental Standards:
Display areas and other activity areas related to this use shall be located at least 30 feet from
a property in a residential zoning district or a planned development district that allows
residential uses and 10 feet from a property in a commercial zoning district.
Copyright © Civic Webware
B - 33
Series Land Use
15.04 Contractor
yard
Description: A place where a contractor or builder may establish a base of operation, which may include one or more of the following:
office space; indoor and outdoor storage of construction materials, equipment, and machinery, such as trucks and heavy equipment; and
shops for the repair of machinery and equipment owned by the operator.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee working on site; plus 1 space for each fleet vehicle parked on site
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Type of outdoor storage. Outside storage of construction equipment and fleet vehicles is allowed. Construction materials may be
kept out of doors, provided such materials are being staged for a specific work project. The storage of construction debris, tree branches,
wood chips, and the like is strictly prohibited.
(b) Equipment repair and maintenance. The repair and maintenance of construction equipment and vehicles must occur within an
enclosed building, unless specifically permitted in the conditional use order authorizing the use.
(c) Sales. The on-premise sale, at retail or wholesale, of any material is strictly prohibited.
(d) Incidental uses. Fabrication and assembly of component parts for use in a building project is permitted inside of a building on the
subject property, provided such activity is of an incidental nature.
(e) Location of use areas. Outdoor storage areas and other activity areas related to this use may not be located (1) in the front -yard
building setback area; (2) within 30 feet of a side or rear lot line when the adjoining property is located in a residential zoning district, an
agricultural zoning district, or a planned development district that allows residential uses; (3) within 20 feet of a side or rear lot line when
the adjoining property is located in a commercial zoning district; and (4) 10 feet from a side or rear lot line when the adjoining property is
located in any other zoning district. Employee parking areas may be located in those areas otherwise allowed in the zoning code.
(f) Fencing. Depending on the scale and nature of the contractor yard, the Planning Commission may on a case-by-case basis require a
solid fence, as approved by the Planning Commission, in those areas where screening is needed in the judgment of the Planning
Commission to mitigate potential impacts to adjoining properties.
(g) Control of fugitive dust. As part of the site plan and operation plan review process, the control of fugitive dust (e.g., dust from a
gravel yard) generated by this use, if any, shall be addressed to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission.
15.05 Manufacturing Description: A place where products or parts are manufactured, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging,
incidental storage, and administrative offices. The term includes a tool and die maker, furniture production, metal fabrication, apparel
manufacturing, printing, and publishing.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift; plus 1 space for each fleet vehicle parked on site
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Restriction on location of manufacturing processes. All manufacturing processes shall be conducted entirely within the confines
of a building.
(b) Location of outdoor activity areas. Outdoor activity areas shall be located at least 100 feet from a property in a residential zoning
district or a planned development district that allows residential uses.
15.06 Salvage yard Description: A place where salvage materials, such as scrap metal, rubber tires, and used
timber and lumber, may be bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or
handled. (In contrast see recycling center.)
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Proximity to other specified property. All buildings, structures, and outdoor storage
areas and any other activity areas shall be located at least 200 feet from a property in a
residential zoning district, planned development district that allows commercial and/or
residential uses, mixed-use district, or commercial zoning district.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(b) Landscaping. The reviewing authority shall require landscaping along the property boundary line deemed necessary to provide
adequate screening between this use and adjoining properties.
(c) Fence. A 6-foot solid fence, subject to approval by the reviewing authority, shall be located around the perimeter of the area used to
store salvage materials.
(d) Fence plan. As part of the site plan review application, the applicant shall submit a fence plan which specifies construction materials
and specifications.
(e) Compliance with state law. A salvage yard located within 1,000 feet of a right-of-way of an interstate or primary highway shall
comply with the requirements set forth in s. 84.31, Wis. Stats., and any administrative rule adopted pursuant to that section.
B - 34
Series Land Use
16.01 Composting
facility
Description: A place where vegetation (but not food wastes) may be collected and composted. The term includes the storage and
manipulation of materials prior to, during, and following composting.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Legislative intent. A composting facility, if not properly designed and operated, has the potential to cause negat ive impacts to the
natural environment, including water resources, and be harmful to the safety and general welfare of the City and its citizens. This section
is therefore intended to define basic requirements necessary to protect the public while providing waste alternatives and promoting
sustainability within the community.
(b) Compliance with other requirements. In addition to meeting the requirements in this section, a composting facility shall comply
with all county, state, and federal regulations that may apply, including s. NR 502.12, Wis. Admin. Code.
(c) Distance to specified features. A composting facility shall not be located within 600 feet of a residential zoning district or a planned
development district that allows residential uses, an educational facility, a worship facility, or any other place where the public
congregates.
(d) Setbacks. All buildings, structures, and activity areas shall be located at least 100 feet from the perimeter of the site.
(e) Location. No portion of a composting facility used for storing compostable materials or composted materials or processing of
compostable materials shall be located within an area determined to be within a 100-year floodplain.
(f) Maximum capacity. The reviewing authority may establish the maximum amount of compostable materials that may be stored and
processed onsite. There is no limit on the amount of finished compost that may be stored.
(g) Access. A composting facility shall have legal and physical access to a street designated by the City as a truck route.
(h) Buffer. The reviewing authority may require fencing and/or landscaping along the property boundary line deemed necessary to
provide adequate screening between this use and adjoining properties.
16.02 Recycling
center
Description: A place where recoverable materials, which have been removed from the waste stream, may be stored prior to shipment to
others who use those materials to manufacture new products. Typical recoverable materials include glass, paper, metal, and plastic. The
term does not include salvage yard.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Compliance with other requirements. In addition to meeting the requirements in this section, a recycling center shall comply with
all county, state, and federal regulations that may apply.
(b) Location of materials and activities. All materials and activities, except loading and unloading of materials, shall be conducted
entirely within the confines of a building.
16.03 Solid waste
transfer station
Description: A place where solid waste may be temporarily stored prior to transport to a processing plant or to final disposal.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Compliance with other requirements. In addition to meeting the requirements in this section, a solid waste transfer station shall
comply with all county, state, and federal regulations that may apply.
(b) Location of materials and activities. All materials and activities, except loading and unloading of materials, shall be conducted
entirely within the confines of a building.
(c) Distance to specified features. A solid waste transfer station shall not be located within 600 feet of a residential zoning district or a
planned development district that allows residential uses, an educational facility, a worship facility, or any other place where the public
congregates.
17.01 Accessory
building,
nonresidential
Description: A building intended to house motor vehicles, yard equipment, and/or items
related to the principal use of the premises. A detached building customarily found with a
non-residential use as an accessory use. The term includes detached garages, storage
sheds, and the like.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Number and floor area. The number of nonresidential accessory buildings and the floor
area must comply with standards set forth in Appendix C.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(b) Exterior materials. Exterior materials for a nonresidential accessory building with a floor area of more than 192 square feet shall be
the same as, substantially the same as, or complement those materials used on the principal building.
(c) Prohibition on specific materials. Soft-sided structures and canopies are specifically prohibited.
(d) Rooflines. The roof lines of a nonresidential accessory building with a floor area of more than 192 square feet shall match the roof
lines of the principal building to the greatest practical extent.
B - 35
Series Land Use
17.02 Accessory
building,
residential
Description: A detached building customarily found with a residential use as an accessory use. The term includes greenhouses,
detached garages, sheds, gazebos, pool cabanas, and the like.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Number and floor area. The number of residential accessory buildings and the floor area must comply with standards set forth in
Appendix C.
(b) Exterior materials. Exterior materials for a residential accessory building with a floor area of more than 192 square feet (but not
greenhouses) shall be the same as, substantially the same as, or complement those materials used on the principal building.
(c) Prohibition on specific materials. Soft-sided structures and canopies are specifically prohibited.
(d) Roof lines. The roof lines of a residential accessory building with a floor area of more than 192 square feet (but not greenhouses)
shall match the roof lines of the principal building to the greatest practical extent.
(e) Plumbing fixtures. A residential accessory building may have a single compartment bar sink and separate half-bath (toilet and a
lavatory sink in a single room). If the detached building is directly related to an outdoor swimming pool or an outdoor sauna , such
building may also have a standup shower. Bath tubs are prohibited in all accessory buildings.
17.03 Accessory
dwelling unit
(ADU)
Description: A second dwelling unit that is located on the same lot as a principal dwelling
unit and is subordinate to the principal dwelling unit. An ADU may be attached to the principal
dwelling unit, detached, or located in another building (e.g., above a garage).
Parking Requirements: 1 space
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Legislative intent. Accessory dwelling units represents a way to increase the housing
stock in the City and promote housing choice and affordability. Accessory dwelling units must
be compatible with the surrounding area and must be clearly subordinate to the principal
dwelling unit.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(b) Location. An accessory dwelling unit shall only be located on the upper floor of a detached garage that is located in the rear yard
and complies with all setback requirements for the zoning district in which the subject property is located. If a variance is granted
allowing construction of the garage closer to a property boundary line than what is otherwise allowed in the zoning district, such garage
is not eligible to also include an accessory dwelling unit.
(c) Character of building. Any exterior changes or additions for an accessory dwelling unit shall be constructed of similar materials and
shall be architecturally compatible with the principal dwelling unit.
(d) Size limitation. The floor area of the accessory dwelling unit shall not be more than 65 percent of the total floor area of the principal
dwelling unit up to a maximum of 700 square feet.
(e) Number. There shall be no more than one accessory dwelling unit on the subject property.
(f) Lot area. The lot containing an accessory dwelling unit shall be at least 2,500 square feet greater than the minimum lot area for the
zoning district in which the lot is located.
(g) Owner occupancy required. The property owner shall occupy either the principal dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit.
(h) Walkway. There shall be an unobstructed walkway leading from the public street to the accessory dwelling unit.
(i) Compliance with building codes. Prior to establishment of an accessory dwelling unit, the building inspector shall certify that the
garage meets all applicable building codes. In addition, an accessory dwelling unit shall comply with all applicable building codes.
17.04 Adult family
home
(accessory)
Description: A private residence licensed by the state under s. 50.032 (1m), Wis. Stats.
Note: An adult family home can either be a principal use or an accessory use. If the operator lives in the residence with the
adults, it is considered an accessory use.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
Prior to the establishment of an adult family home, the operator shall obtain a license from the state as required by state law and
maintain such license for the life of the use or until the state no longer requires such license.
B - 36
Series Land Use
17.05 Amateur radio
and/or citizens
band antenna
Description: An antenna and related support structure used to send and receive telecommunications for noncommercial purposes.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Legislative findings. The Common Council makes the following legislative findings regarding amateur radio and/or citizens band
antennas:
(1) The placement of amateur radio antennas and support structure of unregulated height and type could have a negative impact
on surrounding properties and especially on the smallest of lots allowed in the city.
(2) Pursuant to s. 59.69(4f), Wis. Stats., the regulations in this section constitute the least restrictive measures needed to
promote community aesthetics, public health, and safety while allowing amateur radio communications.
(b) Number. Antennas shall be placed on no more than 2 support structures, such as a tower or on top of a building.
(c) Type of tower. An antenna may be placed on a monopole or lattice tower.
(d) Anti-climbing measures required. If a tower is used to support the antenna, the tower shall have anti-climbing measures to prevent
unauthorized climbing.
(e) Placement. An antenna shall not be located in a front yard.
(f) Setback requirements. The center of the antenna shall be no closer than 110 percent of the total height of the antenna to a lot line
and overhead electric lines.
17.06 Bed and
breakfast
Description: A single-family residence that offers overnight accommodations for a daily
charge and that also serves as a primary residence of the operator or owner.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each guest room
Supplemental Standards:
(a) State permit. Prior to the establishment of a bed and breakfast, the operator shall obtain
a permit from the Wisconsin Department of Health Services, or the department’s authorized
agent, and maintain such license for the life of the use or until the department no longer
requires such permit.[1]
Copyright © Civic Webware
(b) Display of permit. The operator shall display the current bed and breakfast permit in a conspicuous location inside the bed and
breakfast.
(c) Accommodations tax. Prior to the establishment of a bed and breakfast, the operator shall obtain any permit or license, as may be
required by the City, for the purpose of collecting an accommodations tax as may be adopted by the City and/or any other purpose.
(d) Registry. The operator of the bed and breakfast shall keep an accurate register showing the names of all guests. This registry shall
be kept on file for a period of one year and shall be available for inspection by city officials at any time upon request.
(e) Compliance with applicable building codes. Prior to the establishment of a bed and breakfast or the expansion of an existing bed
and breakfast, the building inspector shall certify that the dwelling meets all applicable building code requirements.[2]
(f) Type of dwelling. A bed and breakfast shall only occur within a single-family dwelling.
(g) Exterior character of the dwelling unit. The exterior appearance of the building shall not be altered from its single-family
appearance.
(h) Residency requirement. The operator of a bed and breakfast shall reside in the single-family dwelling during those times when one
or more of the rooms are occupied.
(i) Number of allowable guest rooms. No more than 8 guest rooms shall be offered.
(j) Number of guests. There shall not be more than a total of 20 guests at any one time.
(k) Food preparation. No food preparation or cooking shall be allowed in guest rooms.
(l) Meals. Meals shall only be offered to overnight guests.
(m) Maximum stay. The maximum stay for any occupant is 14 consecutive days in any 30-day period.
(n) Change in ownership. When a bed and breakfast is approved as a conditional use, such approval is personal to the applicant.
Thereafter, any change in ownership shall require issuance of a new conditional use approval pursuant to the procedures and
requirements in effect at the time an application is made.
[1] Commentary: See subch. VII of ch. 254, Wis. Stats., and ch. DHS 197, Wis. Admin. Code
[2] Commentary: Bed and breakfasts must comply with the residential building code requirements; the commercial building code does
not apply because the dwelling is the operator's residence and the operator is residing in the residence when guests are present.
17.07 Boat dock Description: A pier or wharf.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
A boat dock must comply with all rule and regulations established in state statutes and administrative rules established pursuant to those
statutes.
B - 37
Series Land Use
17.08 Boathouse Description: A building placed above or near a waterbody that is used for the
noncommercial storage of one or more watercraft and related equipment.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Other permits. The property owner shall obtain all necessary permits from the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources, United States Army Corps of Engineers, and other
regulatory agencies as may be required.
(b) Allowable uses. The use of a boathouse is limited to the storage of watercraft and
related equipment. A boathouse shall not be used for human habitation.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(c) Yard setbacks. A boathouse may be located within a shoreyard, but shall be no closer than 10 feet to the ordinary high-water mark
of the stream or lake on which it fronts. A boathouse shall not be closer than 3 feet to a side lot line.
(d) Number. No more than one boathouse shall be located on a parcel of land.
(e) Floor area. The boathouse shall contain at least 200 square feet of floor area but not more than 400 square feet.
(f) Access door requirement. A boathouse shall have a garage-type door on the side of the building facing the water.
(g) Plumbing fixtures. A boathouse may contain plumbing for 2 sinks, one toilet, and one standup shower, provided such fixtures are
connected to an approved wastewater system.
(h) Use of flat roof. If the boathouse has a flat roof, the rooftop area may be used as an outdoor living area, provided the roof is
designed for such use and otherwise meets applicable building codes (e.g., safety railing) and the top of the railing shall not be higher
than the maximum height for accessory buildings in the zoning district in which it is located.
(i) Construction standards. A boathouse shall be placed on a continuous perimeter foundation that extends below the frost line or on a
concrete slab.
(j) Human habitation. A boathouse shall not be used for human habitation.
17.09 Exterior
communication
device
Description: An antenna used to capture wireless telecommunication signals.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
A ground-mounted radio/television antenna shall not exceed a height of 25 feet as measured from the ground surface. A buildingmounted
radio/television antenna shall not extend more than 10 feet above the roofline.
17.10 Family day
care home
Description: A private residence licensed as a day care center by the state where care is provided for 4 to 8 children.
Note: See s. 66.1017, Wis. Stats. A group day care (9 or more children) is considered a principal use and is therefore listed as a
special care facility (4.0 series)
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
Prior to the establishment of a family day care home, the operator shall obtain a license from the state as may be required by state law
and maintain such license for the life of the use or until the state no longer requires such license.
17.11 Fence Description: A linear structure constructed for aesthetics, as a visual barrier, and/or to
control entry or exit into an area. Typical materials include wood, metal, wire, masonry,
stacked rocks, or logs.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
Fences must comply with all applicable provisions in Article 15 of the zoning code.
Copyright © Civic Webware
B - 38
Series Land Use
17.12 Firewood
storage
Description: Storage of firewood for use on the premises.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Location. Firewood shall only be stored in the side and rear yard, except that firewood
may be temporarily stored in the front yard or side yard for a period not exceeding 10 days
from the date of delivery.
(b) Setbacks. Firewood may not be stacked closer than 2 feet to a side or rear lot line and
not higher than 8 feet above grade, except adjacent to a fence where firewood can be
Copyright © Civic Webware
stacked no higher than the height of the fence. Fences as used in this section do not include hedges and other vegetation.
(c) Debris removed. All brush, debris, and refuse relating to the processing of firewood onsite shall be removed within 5 days of the
date of delivery.
(d) Diseased wood. Woodpiles shall not contain diseased wood that is capable of transmitting disease to healthy trees.
(e) Lot coverage. Not more than 10 percent of the side and rear yard may be used for storage of firewood.
17.13 Foster home
and treatment
foster home
17.14 Home
occupation
Description: A facility licensed by the state for the care of foster children and which is operated by a foster parent who lives with the
children.
Note: See s. 48.62, Wis. Stats. A foster home and treatment foster home can either be a principal use or an accessory use. If the
operator lives in the residence with the children, it is considered an accessory use.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
Prior to the establishment of a foster home or treatment foster home, the operator shall obtain a license from the state as p rovided for in
s. 48.75, Wis. Stats., and maintain such license for the life of the use or until the state no longer requires such license.
Description: An occupation, profession, enterprise, or similar commercial activity that is
conducted entirely within a dwelling unit and is compatible in size and scope in a residential
setting. The term does not include hobbies or similar noncommercial activities.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for a company vehicle, as may be permitted
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Validity of use. The individual primarily responsible for operating the home occupation
shall reside in the dwelling unit on the parcel.
(b) Location and space limitation. The home occupation shall occur entirely within the dwelling unit. The space specifically designated
for use of the home occupation shall occupy no more than 25 percent of the total floor area of the dwelling unit.
(c) Exterior character of building. The exterior character of the building housing the home occupation shall not be altered to
accommodate such use.
(d) Storage of materials. Exterior storage of materials or equipment is prohibited. Flammable, combustible, or explosive materials that
exceed levels normally found on a residential property are strictly prohibited.
(e) Limitation on number of on-site workers. The number of individuals working on-site shall be limited to those individuals living in
the dwelling unit and one individual not living in the dwelling unit.
(f) Retail sales. Retail sale of merchandise that is assembled, produced, or fabricated on the premises is permitted. Such items,
however, shall not be displayed out of doors or in any window. Retail sale of merchandise that is not assembled, produced, or fabricated
on the premises is prohibited, except the incidental retail sales may be made in connection with other permitted home occupations. For
example, a single-chair beauty parlor could sell combs, hair spray, and other miscellaneous items to customers.
(g) Limitation on customer traffic. A home occupation shall not generate more than 10 customer trips per business day, which is
determined to be an acceptable level of non-residential traffic in residential neighborhoods.
(h) Nuisance. A home occupation shall not create any smoke, odor, glare, noise, dust, vibration, fire hazard, or small electrical
interference not normally associated with typical residential uses in the zoning district.
(i) Special exception for an operator with a disability. Consistent with the procedures and requirements of Article 21, the Planning
Commission may approve a special exception to any of the requirements in this section when the operator has a temporary or
permanent disability and the home occupation is or would be his or her primary livelihood and such deviation is needed to facilitate the
operation of the home occupation in a reasonable manner.
(j) Multiple home occupations. More than one home occupation may be permitted on a single lot provided all of the general
requirements set forth in this section can be met based on an accumulation of activities.
B - 39
Series Land Use
17.15 Household
livestock
Description: A place where livestock are kept primarily for the use and enjoyment of those
living on the premises and occasional commercial purposes. (The term does not include
backyard chickens.)
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Minimum lot area. A minimum lot area of 3 acres is required for household livestock.
(b) Number of animals. The number of animals shall not exceed one animal unit for each
full acre enclosed by fencing using the animal unit factors in Appendix E. The zoning
administrator is authorized to determine an appropriate animal unit factor for any animal not listed.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(c) Prohibited animals. The keeping of hogs, male goats, roosters, or fur-bearing animals, other than rabbits, is prohibited.
(d) Location of new buildings. A building that houses household livestock shall not be located within a floodplain, or closer than 100
feet to the ordinary high-water mark of a navigable body of water, or closer than 50 feet to any property boundary line.
(e) Fencing. Any area where household livestock are allowed to pasture or run shall be adequately fenced to keep them confined to
such area. Any such fence shall be located not less than 6 feet from any property boundary line.
17.16 In-law dwelling
unit
Description: A room or suite of rooms having a separate kitchen facility, located in a single-family dwelling, occupied by not more than
two persons related by blood or marriage to the family occupying the primary portion of the dwelling.
Parking Requirements: 1 space (in addition to required parking for the single-family residence)
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Compliance with building codes. Prior to establishment of an in-law dwelling unit, the building inspector must certify that the singlefamily
dwelling meets all applicable building codes.
(b) Limitation on floor area and bedrooms. The maximum living area in an in-law unit must not exceed 800 square feet for a onebedroom
unit and 900 square feet for a two-bedroom unit.
(c) Exterior appearance. The architecture of the residence must be compatible with the adjacent residential neighborhood and appear
to be a single-family residence.
(d) Exterior doors. An in-law dwelling unit shall not have a primary exterior door. A patio-type door is allowed as a secondary exterior
door if it opens onto a deck or patio and does not face the front of the lot.
(e) Interior door between units. The Planning Commission may determine that it is appropriate to have an interior door between the
living units.
(f) Deed restriction. Prior to the establishment of an in-law dwelling unit, the property owner must file a deed restriction in the Wood
County register of deeds office, acceptable to the zoning administrator, that includes a statement that the living unit is for family members
of the principal dwelling unit only and the approval of an in-law dwelling unit is not transferable to another property owner without formal
approval of the Planning Commission, and other provisions deemed appropriate by the reviewing authority.
(g) Required actions following termination of use. At such time as the in-law dwelling unit is no longer occupied by a person that is
related by blood or marriage to the family occupying the primary portion of the single-family dwelling, the property owner must remove
the stove and/or oven in the in-law dwelling unit or in the other dwelling unit and the interior door separating the two units, if allowed,
must be removed.
17.17 Kennel, hobby Description: A place where [5] or more, but less than [11] adult dogs or other pet animals
are kept for the occupant’s private, non-commercial purposes. The term also includes the
sale and training of up to 2 litters per year.
Note: A commercial kennel is considered a principal use and is therefore listed in
Series 9.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
If the keeping of animals allowed as a hobby kennel becomes a nuisance to the neighborhood, as determined by the Planning
Commission or the Common Council, the Common Council may take appropriate steps to terminate the use consistent with Article 5.
17.18 Light industrial
use incidental
to
sales/service
Description: A place where light repairs are made to products that are offered for retail or wholesale sale.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Maximum floor area. The total floor area devoted to the light industrial activity shall not exceed 15 percent of the total floor area of
the building, or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less.
(b) Required separation. The area devoted to the light industrial activity shall be physically separated by a wall or partition from other
activity areas.
B - 40
Series Land Use
17.19 Outdoor food
and beverage
service
Description: An outdoor area with tables and chairs located on the same lot as a brewpub,
restaurant, or tavern where customers can consume food and drink.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 3 patron seats or 1 space for each 300 square feet
of area devoted to patron service, whichever is greater
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Maximum size of service area. The size of the outdoor service area shall not be more
than 50 percent of the floor area of the brewpub, restaurant, or tavern.
(b) Location of service area. The outdoor service area shall be located on the same parcel
Copyright © Civic Webware
of land as the brewpub, restaurant, or tavern or on an adjoining parcel. The outdoor service area shall not be located in a public right-ofway,
a required landscape area, or the setback of a front yard, side yard, shore yard, or rear yard.
(c) Consistency with state liquor license. No alcohol beverages shall be served or consumed within the outdoor service area unless
the liquor, beer, or wine license, whichever is applicable, as issued by the City, explicitly states that consumption is permitted within the
outdoor service area.
(d) Entrance to service area if alcohol beverages are served. If alcohol beverages are served, the entrance or entrances to the
outdoor service area shall be exclusively through the brewpub, restaurant, or tavern, and a barrier such as a rope or fence shall be
erected to prevent entry to the outdoor service area by any other means.
(e) Restroom requirements. The restroom facilities in the brewpub, restaurant, or tavern shall be of sufficient capacity to serve both the
indoor and outdoor patrons. Temporary toilet facilities are not permitted.
17.20 Play structure Description: A playhouse and recreational equipment, such as swings, slides, and jungle
gyms, normally found in a residential setting or with a group day care center.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
A play structure shall comply with the setback requirements for accessory structures in the
zoning district in which this use is located.
Copyright © Civic Webware
17.21 Pond Description: A manmade body of water with a surface area observed or recorded within the last ten years of at least 5,000 square feet
that is not otherwise required to meet stormwater requirements of a development project.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Minimum lot area. A minimum lot area of 3 acres is required for a pond.
(b) Pond design. A pond shall not create the potential for flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate drainage, or unfavorable
topography.
(c) Placement. A pond shall be located at least 75 feet from all property boundary lines.
17.22 Retaining wall Description: A structure, more than 18 inches above grade, that is constructed to resist the
lateral pressure of soil, loose rock, and the like creating a step in the grade of a site.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Maximum height. The maximum height of a retaining wall is 4 feet above finished grade.
A second retaining wall may be used provided the base of the second wall is setback from
the top of the first wall a distance that is equal to or greater than the height of the second
retaining wall.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(b) Setback, side and rear yard of the retaining wall. For example, if a retaining wall is 3 feet in height, it must be at least 3 feet from
the lot line.
(c) Setback, front yard. A retaining wall located in the front yard must be setback from the front lot line at least 6 inches.
17.23 Sales
incidental to
industrial use
Description: A place where items manufactured on site are offered for sale as a subordinate use to the manufacturing operation.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 300 square feet of retail floor area
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Maximum floor area. The total floor area devoted to indoor sales shall not exceed 25 percent of the total floor area of the building.
(b) Required separation. The area devoted to wholesale/retail sales shall be physically separated from those areas used for industrial
purposes by a physical barrier such as a full-height interior wall or a half-wall.
B - 41
Series Land Use
17.24 Service
window, driveup
Description: An opening in a building through which patrons are served while remaining in a
motor vehicle.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Crosswalks. A pedestrian crosswalk shall be marked on the pavement when the lane for
a drive-up service window is situated between on-site parking and a building entrance.
(b) Length of queue lane. The lane leading up to a drive-up service window shall be of
sufficient length so that at the anticipated customer peak, all motor vehicles waiting in queue will be entirely on the premi ses.
(c) Location. A drive-up service window shall only be located to the side or rear of the building in which it is located and at least 60 feet
from a property in a residential zoning district or a planned development district that allows residential uses.
17.25 Service
window, walkup
Description: An opening in a building through which patrons are served while standing outside of the building.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
A walk-up service window shall not be located within 8 feet of a setback of a front yard, side yard, shore yard, or rear yard.
17.26 Solar energy
system,
buildingmounted
Description: An installation that is mounted on a building and uses sunlight to produce
electricity or provide heat or hot water to a building.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Maximum surface area. No portion of a panel used to collect solar energy may extend
beyond the roof surface or the wall surface to which it is attached.
(b) Maximum height. A building-mounted solar energy system shall comply with the
maximum height requirements of the zoning district in which the building is located.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(c) Placement on a roof. The panels of a solar energy system that are mounted on a roof may be either fixed or movable and may be
placed at an angle to optimize efficiency of the system.
(d) Placement on a façade. A solar energy system may be mounted on the façade of a commercial building if integrated into the overall
design of the building. Such installations shall not project more than 4 feet from the face of the wall.
(e) Certification. A solar panel shall be certified by one of the following: Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.; National Renewable Energy
Laboratory; Solar Rating and Certification Corporation; or other recognized body as approved by the zoning administrator. The building
inspector may approve the use of a homemade panel.
(f) Approval by electric utility company. If the solar energy system is designed to produce electricity, the property owner shall submit
documentation acceptable to the building inspector indicating that the system meets all applicable regulations and requirements of the
affected electric utility company.
(g) Termination of use. If the zoning administrator determines that more than 50 percent of the panels (measured by total area) have
not been operational for a continuous period of 12 months, the administrator shall follow the procedure outlined in Article 5 relating to the
termination of an approval.
(h) Compliance with state law. The provisions in this section are intended to satisfy the requirements of s. 66.0401(1m), Wis. Stats. On
a case by case basis, if the restrictions of this subsection are found not to comply with the authority of s. 66.0401(1m), Wisconsin
Statutes, they shall not be required. The Planning Commission shall have the ability to add additional restrictions on a case -by-case
basis, provided they are within the authority of the City pursuant to s. 66.0401(1m), Wis. Stats., and in particular the restriction must
satisfy one of the following conditions:
(1) Serves to preserve or protect the public health or safety.
(2) Does not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency.
(3) Allows for alternative system of comparable cost and efficiency.
(i) Solar access. The property owner may submit a solar access permit to the City pursuant to the provisions set forth in s. 66.0404,
Wis. Stats.
B - 42
Series Land Use
17.27 Solar energy
system,
groundmounted
Description: An installation that is mounted on the ground and uses sunlight to produce
electricity or provide heat or hot water to a building.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Surface area. The surface area of a free-standing solar energy system shall not exceed 5
percent of the lot area.
(b) Number. There is no limit on the number of free-standing solar energy systems on a
parcel of land.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(c) Maximum height. A free-standing solar energy system in any position shall not exceed 15 feet in height as measured from the
surrounding grade.
(d) Setback. A free-standing solar energy system in any position shall not extend into the setback of a front yard, side yard, shore yard,
or rear yard as established for the zoning district in which the parcel is located. Pursuant to the procedures and requirements in Article 5,
the Planning Commission may approve a special exception to allow a free-standing solar energy system to extend into a setback when
no other location on the parcel is acceptable and the encroachment is the least necessary to allow the system to operate.
(e) Placement in yards. A free-standing solar energy system located in a residential or commercial zoning district shall only be located
in the rear or side yard. Pursuant to the procedures and requirements in Article 5, the Planning Commission may approve a spe cial
exception to allow a free-standing solar energy system in the front yard when no other location on the parcel is acceptable and the
encroachment is the least necessary to allow the system to operate. A solar panel in a manufacturing zoning district may be located in
any yard area.
(f) Certification. A free-standing solar energy system shall be certified by one of the following: Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.; National
Renewable Energy Laboratory; Solar Rating and Certification Corporation; or other recognized body as approved by the zoning
administrator. The building inspector may approve the use of a homemade panel.
(g) Approval by electric utility company. If the solar energy system is designed to produce electricity, the property owner shall submit
documentation acceptable to the building inspector indicating that the system meets all applicable regulations and requirements of the
affected electric utility company.
(h) Termination of use. If the zoning administrator determines that a free-standing solar energy system has not been operational for a
continuous period of 12 months, the administrator shall follow the procedure outlined in Article 5 relating to the terminatio n of an
approval.
(i) Compliance with state law. The provisions in this section are intended to satisfy the requirements of s. 66.0401(1m), Wis. Stats. On
a case-by-case basis, if the restrictions of this subsection are found not to comply with the authority of s. 66.0401(1m), Wisconsin
Statutes, they shall not be required. The Planning Commission shall have the ability to add additional restrictions on a case-by-case
basis, provided they are within the authority of the City pursuant to s. 66.0401(1m), Wis. Stats., and in particular the rest riction must
satisfy one of the following conditions:
(1) Serves to preserve or protect the public health or safety.
(2) Does not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency.
(3) Allows for alternative system of comparable cost and efficiency.
(j) Solar access. The property owner may submit a solar access permit to the City pursuant to the provisions set forth in s. 66.0404,
Wis. Stats.
Commentary: If the total surface area of the solar energy system exceeds the standards stated in this section or if two or more separate
arrays are used, such use is considered a principal use and is listed in the 12 series.
17.28 Storage
container
Description: An enclosed metal container exceeding 900 cubic feet typically used to
temporarily store merchandise.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Location. A storage container in a commercial zoning district shall only be located in a
rear yard, but not within a setback or in a parking area required by this chapter.
(b) Stacking prohibited. Storage containers shall not be stacked one on top of another.
(c) Character. A storage container shall be structurally sound and in good repair as
determined by the building inspector.
Copyright © Civic Webware
B - 43
Series Land Use
17.29 Swimming
pool
Description: An outdoor structure placed on the ground surface or below-ground that is filled
with water for swimming. The term does not include those pools with a maximum diameter of
15 feet and a maximum wall height of 15 inches and which are taken down and stored in the
off-season.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Location. A swimming pool shall not be located closer than 10 feet to the principal
structure. A swimming pool may only be located in a side or rear yard, but not closer than 6
Copyright © Civic Webware
feet to a property boundary line or the minimum setback for an accessory building whichever is greater. A swimming pool shall have a
horizontal separation distance of at least 15 feet from any septic tank or soil absorption field. The inside wall of the pool shall be located
at least 10 feet from the vertical plane formed by the electrical wire perpendicular to the ground surface. The filter unit, pump, heating
unit, and any other mechanical equipment shall be located at least 15 feet from a property boundary line.
(b) Patios. Patios around a pool must be at least 5 feet from a property boundary line.
(c) Decks. Decks around a pool must be at least 5 feet from a property boundary line.
(d) Draining of water. Water that is drained out of a swimming pool shall not flow onto adjoining property without the property owner’s
explicit approval, into a wetland, into a navigable waterbody, or into a sanitary sewer without the approval of the public works director.
(e) Area. The ground area of a swimming pool shall not exceed 30 percent of the rear and side yards of the parcel on which it is located.
(f) Design specifications. A swimming pool shall meet the most current standards published by the National Spa and Pool Institute
(NSPI) and the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) including those for plumbing, electrical service, sanitation, fencing, security,
and safety.
(g) Fencing. A fence shall be located around a swimming pool consistent with the standards in the most current edition of ANSI/IAF-8
as promulgated by the American National Standards Institute and Association of Pool and Spa Professionals that relate to barriers and
fencing. Any swimming pool existing as of August 1, 2018 that does not meet the fencing requirements shall comply with the fencing
requirements before water is placed in the pool.
17.30 Utility cabinet Description: A ground-mounted pedestal, junction box, cabinet, or similar feature that a
service provider uses to provide telephone, electric, natural gas, cable television, cable
Internet, or similar public service to properties in the area. A utility cabinet may be located
within a public right-of-way or on private property.
Parking Requirements: Determined on a case-by-case basis
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Number limited. No more than 4 utility cabinets shall be located on a parcel of land. Five
or more utility cabinets on a parcel of land shall be considered a minor utility installation. A
Copyright © Civic Webware
utility cabinet is considered an accessory use in all situations and may be placed on private property and public property, such as a
public right-of-way.
(b) Setbacks. A utility cabinet is exempt from yard setback standards as may be established for the zoning district in which this use is
located.
(c) Placement on private property. Prior to establishing a utility cabinet on private property, the operator and property owner shall
establish a proper lease or easement governing the use of the property for this purpose and submit the same to the zoning administrator
for his or her approval.
(d) Placement on public property. Prior to establishing a utility cabinet on public property under the jurisdiction of the city, county, or
state, the operator shall obtain all approvals as may be required by the governmental entity having jurisdiction.
(e) Placement in a stormwater easement. Prior to establishing a utility cabinet within a stormwater management easement under the
jurisdiction of the city, county, or state, the operator shall obtain all approvals as may be required by the governmental entity having
jurisdiction.
B - 44
Series Land Use
17.31 Work/live
dwelling unit
Description: A dwelling unit located in a building also housing a business. The work/live dwelling unit is an accessory use to the
business and its use is limited to the business operator or a household that includes the business operator.
Parking Requirements: 2 spaces for the dwelling, plus parking for the business
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Number. No more than one work/live dwelling unit shall be located on the subject property.
(b) Occupancy. A work/live dwelling unit shall be occupied and used only by the operator of the business, or a household of which at
least one member shall be the business operator. If the business operator ceases to occupy the work/live dwelling unit for more than 12
months, the floor area of the work/live dwelling unit shall be converted to business purposes. If both the business area and the work/live
dwelling unit are unoccupied, the work/live dwelling unit may remain during the vacancy.
(c) Sale or rental of portions of unit. No portion of a building with a work/live dwelling unit may be rented, leased, sold, or otherwise
conveyed to any person not living in the work/live dwelling unit.
(d) Prohibited uses. A work/live dwelling unit shall not be established or used in conjunction with any of the following activities even if
otherwise permitted in the zoning district:
(1) adult-oriented establishment;
(2) motor vehicle or heavy equipment maintenance or repair;
(3) any use that stores or uses flammable, combustible, or hazardous materials beyond that normally associated with a
residential use; and
(4) any use, as determined by the reviewing authority, that is likely to not be compatible with residential activities because of the
type of materials or processes used in the business operation or the presence of dust, glare, heat, noise, gasses or other
emissions, odor, smoke, vibration, or any other similar or related condition created by the business operation.
(e) Floor area. The floor area of a work/live dwelling unit shall not exceed 30 percent of the floor area of the entire building in which the
unit is located, or 1,200 square feet, whichever is less. The remaining floor area shall be reserved and regularly used for business
purposes.
(f) Exterior door. There shall be an exterior entrance door to the work/live dwelling unit that is clearly separated from the entrance to the
business.
(g) Restriction on future land division changes to lot lines. The subject property shall not be subdivided or otherwise divided by any
means so long as the live/work dwelling unit is being occupied for residential purposes. Further, the location of the lot lines shall not be
altered by any means without the written approval of the Planning Commission.
(h) Imposition of conditions. The reviewing authority may establish conditions of approval that in the opinion of the reviewing authority,
are needed to ensure the work/live dwelling unit is compatible with the business on the subject property and the commercial or industrial
use of other properties in the vicinity.
(i) Deed restriction. Prior to the establishment of a work/live dwelling unit, the property owner shall file a deed restriction in the Wood
County register of deeds office, acceptable to the zoning administrator, that includes one or more of the use or operational requirements
contained in this section and other provisions deemed appropriate by the zoning administrator or other reviewing authority.
(j) Required findings. As part of the review process, the reviewing authority shall only approve a work/live dwelling unit after making a
positive finding for all of the following requirements:
(1) The building containing the work/live dwelling unit contains a bona fide business that is otherwise permitted in the zoning
district in which it is located.
(2) The establishment of the work/live unit dwelling unit will not conflict with or inhibit permitted business uses in the area.
18.01 Contractor’s
office
Description: A portable building or enclosed trailer temporarily placed on a construction site
for use by the contractor as a field office.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Generally. A contractor’s office may be established for commercial and industrial
construction projects, and townhomes and multi-family residential projects with 15 or more
dwelling units.
(b) Duration of use. A contractor’s office shall be removed within 10 days after the date of issuance of the last occupancy permit for the
building under construction.
(c) Location. A contractor’s office shall be placed in a location with the least impact to adjoining property owners.
(d) Limitation on use. The use of a contractor’s office shall be limited to construction management activities related to the construction
project on the parcel of land on which it is located.
(e) Review as a conditional use. A contractor’s office that is on site for more than 365 days shall be reviewed as a conditional use.
B - 45
Series Land Use
18.02 Earth
materials
stockpile
Description: A place where an earth material (e.g., topsoil or gravel) is piled and temporarily
stored. The earth material must be derived from an on-site land development project and/or
be used on site.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Hours of operation. When the earth materials stockpile is located within or next to a
residential zoning district or a planned development district that allows residential uses,
equipment used to load, move, or process materials shall only be used between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(b) Term of use. As part of the site plan/operation plan review, the reviewing authority may establish the maximum length of time this
use may operate.
18.03 Farmers
market
Description: A place where agricultural producers gather on a regular basis to offer their
agricultural products directly to retail consumers.
Parking Requirements: 1.5 space for each vendor space when sufficient on street parking is
not available
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Hours of operation. The display of products and sales shall only occur between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 30 minutes past sunset.
(b) Removal and clean up. All features solely associated with the farmers market shall be removed and all trash and debris shall be
removed within 24 hours following the close of the farmers market.
18.04 Farmstand,
off-site
18.05 Farmstand,
on-site
Description: A place where agricultural products not produced on the premises are offered
for sale at retail.
Parking Requirements: 2 spaces
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Size limitation. If a structure or building is used, the ground area shall not exceed 500
square feet.
(b) Hours of operation. The sale of items shall not occur before 7:00 a.m. or after 30
minutes past sunset.
(c) Number. No more than one stand is allowed on any one premises.
Description: A place where agricultural products produced exclusively on the premises are
offered for sale at retail.
Parking Requirements: 2 spaces
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Limitation on sales. Products offered for sale shall be produced on the premises.
(b) Hours of operation. If this use is located in a residential zoning district or a planned
development district that allows residential uses, the hours of operation are limited to sunrise
to sunset.
Copyright © Civic Webware
Copyright © Civic Webware
(c) Use of structure. A structure may be used to store or display products and for sales, provided the following conditions are met:
(1) Term of use. The structure is only used from April 1 through November 30 and is removed no later than December 3.
(2) Floor area. The floor area of the structure shall not exceed 500 square feet.
(3) Structure height. The height of the structure shall not exceed 12 feet.
(4) Location. The structure may be located within the front-yard setback area but no closer than 15 feet to the lot line.
B - 46
Series Land Use
18.06 Model home Description: A residential dwelling in a residential development temporarily used as a sales
office for other on-site and off-site residential dwellings and properties.
Parking Requirements: Determined on a case-by-case basis
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Generally. A model home may only be established when the residential project in which it
located is developed by a single developer and the project will have 3 or more dwelling units.
(b) On-street parking required. A model home may only be established when on-street
parking is permitted on the street directly in front of the model home.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(c) Appearance. The dwelling unit used as a model home shall be of the same type and character as the dwelling units being offered for
sale within the development.
(d) Duration of use. The model home shall operate for no more than 3 years. Prior to the expiration of this time period, the model home
shall be closed when 80 percent of the dwelling units within the entire development have been sold.
(e) Limitation on use. The model home is intended to facilitate the sale of residential housing units in the development in which it
occurs and off-site sales activity shall be clearly incidental. The model home may be furnished but shall not be occupied as a residence.
(f) Hours of operation. The model home may not be open between 8:00 pm and 8:00 am, except by appointment.
(g) Conversion. Upon cessation as a model home, the property owner shall take all necessary actions to convert the building to a
dwelling unit.
18.07 Nonmetallic
mine
Description: A place where nonmetallic minerals are removed from the ground by any method for use on-site or off-site for no more
than 3 years. The following activities may be associated with a nonmetallic mine: excavating and transporting nonmetallic min erals,
stockpiling of nonmetallic minerals, blending of nonmetallic minerals, blasting, grading, crushing, screening, scalping, and
dewatering. The term does not include (1) premining activities, such as site surveying, coring, mapping and other functions necessary
solely for proper preparation of the permit application; (2) excavations in conjunction with a utility installation, which is to be backfilled; (3)
excavations within the limits of a public right-of-way in conjunction with road construction or reconstruction, when construction plans
have been approved by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation or other governmental authority; (4) excavations which by nature is
of limited duration, such as graves, septic tanks, and swimming pools; (5) agricultural drainage work incidental to agricultural operations
and irrigation/stock watering ponds, if no material is removed from the property; (6) excavations for structures and parking areas; (7)
stripping of up to 1.5 feet of topsoil for the development of subdivisions, following subdivision approval; (8) regrading of property for
aesthetic purposes that does not affect existing drainage, if no material is removed from the property; (9) dredging operations under the
jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other governmental authority; (10) ponds developed for wildlife purposes, if no
material is removed from the property; (11) excavation related to sod farming; (12) reclamation of an existing nonmetallic mine consistent
with an approved reclamation plan; (13) activities conducted at a solid or hazardous waste disposal site required to prepare, operate, or
close a solid waste disposal facility under ss. 144.435—144.445, Wis. Stats., or a hazardous waste disposal facility under ss. 144.60—
144.74, Wis. Stats., for the exception of mineral extraction operations conducted for the purpose of lining, capping, or covering such
disposal site; and (14) any other use determined to be exempt by the Planning Commission.
Parking Requirements: Determined on a case-by-case basis
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Air quality. Particulate emmissions must comply with ch. NR 415, Wis. Admin. Code.
(b) Blasting. Blasting with explosives, if otherwise allowed, must shall comply with ch. Comm 7, Wis. Admin. Code
(c) Reclamation. The operator of a nonmetallic mine must reclaim the site so that it can be used for a residential, commercial, industrial
or civic purpose as approved by the Planning Commission and in compliance with an approved mining reclamation plan.
(d) Minimization of noise, dust, and vibrations. Roads, machinery, and equipment shall be located, constructed, and used in such a
manner as to minimize noise, dust, and vibrations.
(e) Hours of operation. A nonmetallic mine shall not be operated on Sunday and may be operated Monday through Saturday during the
standard hours of operation specified in the table below based on the proximity of the site to a residence or commercial esta blishment
open to the public. Upon written request, the Planning Commission may authorize specific activities past the standard hours or operation
but no later than the hour specified in the table below for limited or temporary periods taking into account the proximity an d nature of
adjoining uses and the extent of noise, dust, and vibration associated with the activity. Such approval shall be in writing and shall specify
the time period the extended hours of operation are in effect, the activities that are permitted, and conditions, if any, the commission may
impose to address off-site effects.
Permissible hours of operation for a nonmetallic mine
Proximity of Site to Specified
Uses
Day
Standard Hours of
Operation
Extended Hours of
Operation With Approval
of Planning Commission
Lot line of the site is located
w i t
B - 47
Series Land Use
hin 500 feet of a residence or
Monday through Friday
From 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
From 6:00 p.m. to 10:00
p.m.
B - 48
Series Land Use
commercial establishment open
to the public Saturday
From 6:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m.
From 2:00 p.m. to 7:00
p.m.
Lot line of the site is not located
within 500 feet of a residence or
commercial establishment open
From 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
Monday through Friday
p.m.
From 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
From 6:00 p.m. to 10:00
p.m.
From 6:00 p.m. to 10:00
to the public Saturday
p.m. p.m.
(f) Locational requirements. A nonmetallic mine shall comply with the following distance requirements:
(1) 500 feet minimum from a residential zoning district or a planned development district that allows residential uses
(2) 200 feet from all property boundary lines
(g) Plan of operation. A nonmetallic mine, including those that existed before August 1, 2018, shall prepare a plan of operation for the
site that includes (1) a statement of ownership of the parcel and control of the operations; (2) a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the
lateral extent of existing and proposed excavations; the location and width of all easements and right of way on or abutting the site;
existing water bodies, water courses and drainageways and proposed modifications; estimated direction of flow or groundwater; the
location of existing and proposed buildings, structures, machinery and equipment; and the location of all existing and proposed storage
and stockpiling areas; and (3) cross sections of the site, drawn to scale, that show the vertical extent of existing and prop osed
excavations.
(h) Term of permit. Under this chapter, a nonmetallic mine is a temporary use for the term set forth in the definition for this use, or for a
lesser term if so specified in the conditional use order.
(i) Transfer of permit. When an operator succeeds to the interest of another in an uncompleted site, the Common Council shall release
the present operator of the responsibilities imposed by the permit only if:
(1) both operators are in compliance with the requirements and standards of this section, and
(2) the new operator assumes the responsibility of the former operator's permit requirements.
18.08 Off-site
construction
yard
Description: A place where construction materials and equipment may be stored, prepped, or staged for an off-site construction project
(e.g., highway reconstruction project or construction of an electric transmission line or pipeline).
Parking Requirements: 0.5 space for each dwelling unit, plus 1 space for each employee on the largest work shift
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Setback requirements. Outdoor storage areas and other activity areas shall be located at least 40 feet from a property in a
residential zoning district or a planned development district that allows residential uses and 20 feet from a property in a commercial
zoning district.
(b) Site restoration. As part of the review process, the applicant shall prepare and submit a restoration plan and obtain the approval of
the same. Such restoration plan shall identify those areas of the parcel that will be disturbed and how those areas will be r estored
following the cessation of this temporary use.
(c) Financial guarantee. Prior to the establishment of an off-site construction yard, the property owner shall submit a financial guarantee
to the City pursuant to the requirements in Article 4 in an amount equal to 110 percent of the estimated cost of site restoration identified
in the restoration plan that is approved for the project.
18.09 Party tent Description: A nonpermanent tent that is associated with a temporary event that is permitted
under this code.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Duration. A party tent shall not be erected for more than 7 continuous days.
(b) Not counted as a building. A party tent does not count as a building with regard to the
maximum number of buildings allowed on a parcel.
B - 49
Series Land Use
18.10 Portable
storage
container
Description: An enclosed metal container that is used to temporarily store household items
and similar goods.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Duration. A portable storage container shall not be located on a parcel of land for more
than 60 days during any 9-month period. A 30-day extension may be granted with proof of a
valid building permit.
(b) Location. A portable storage container shall not be located in the front or side yard
Copyright © Civic Webware
setback established for the zoning district in which this use occurs, except when placed in a driveway. In no case shall the portable
storage container be located within the public right-of-way.
(c) Maximum floor area. The cumulative floor area of one or more portable storage containers shall not exceed 250 square feet.[1]
(d) Limitation on use. When located in a residential zoning district or a planned development district that allows residential uses, a
portable storage container shall only be used to store household goods during an on-site construction/remodeling project or when used
to move household goods to another location.
[1] Commentary: Although portable storage containers come in different sizes, units are generally 10 feet by 10 feet and 10 feet by 15
feet.
18.11 Seasonal
product sales
Description: An outdoor area where merchandise typically associated with a seasonal
holiday or festival is displayed and offered for sale at retail immediately before the event.
Examples of such merchandise include Christmas trees and wreaths for Christmas and
pumpkins for Halloween.
Parking Requirements: Determined on a case-by-case basis, but not less than 2 when on
street parking is not available
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Duration of use. Merchandise shall not be sold any sooner than 30 days prior to the date
Copyright © Civic Webware
of the seasonal event. Cleanup and removal of all related items shall be completed within 2 days following the date of the seasonal
event.
(b) Removal and clean up. Within 24 hours following the termination of the sale, all features associated with the sale and trash and
debris of all kinds shall be removed from the site.
(c) Not counted as a building. A tent used for the sales operation does not count as a building with regard to the maximum number of
buildings allowed on a parcel.
18.12 Sidewalk café Description: An outdoor dining area located on public property, typically a sidewalk, and
operated as an integral part of an adjacent restaurant where food and beverages are sold or
served primarily for consumption on the premises.
Parking Requirements: 1 space for each 3 patron seats or 1 space for each 300 square feet
of area devoted to patron service, whichever is greater if on-street parking is not readily
available as determined by the zoning administrator
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Legislative findings. To further encourage the revitalization of the downtown and other
Copyright © Civic Webware
areas of the City, including the development of social and economic activity, the City Council finds and determines:
(1) That there exists a need for outdoor eating facilities in certain areas of the City to provide a unique environment for relaxation,
social interaction, and food consumption.
(2) That sidewalk cafés will permit enhanced use of the available public rights-of-way, will complement restaurants operating from
fixed premises, and will promote economic activity in the area.
(3) That the existence of sidewalk cafés encourages additional pedestrian traffic but their presence may impede the free and safe
flow of pedestrians. Therefore, a need exists for regulations and standards for the existence and operation of sidewalk cafés to
ensure a safe environment.
(4) That the establishment of permit conditions and safety standards for sidewalk cafés is necessary to protect the public health
safety and welfare.
(b) General location. Sidewalk cafés may be permitted on public sidewalks and parking space decks only on that portion of the public
sidewalk or parking space deck that is directly adjacent to the building, or portion of the building, where the operator’s restaurant
business is located, and shall not be in conflict with zoning requirements.
(c) Unobstructed sidewalk, hydrants, standpipes. The operator shall provide at least 5 feet of unobstructed sidewalk for pedestrian
right-of-way past the sidewalk café, and shall not place anything within 2 feet of the curb or street (curb setback not required if a parking
space deck is part of the sidewalk café area). The required two 2-foot setback from the curb or street must be separate from the required
B - 50
Series Land Use
5-foot unobstructed pedestrian right-of-way. Access to and view of fire hydrants and standpipes shall be provided.
B - 51
Series Land Use
(d) Distance from curb-cut, crosswalk. No portion of a sidewalk café shall be located within 5 feet of a curb-cut or marked crosswalk.
(e) Parking space decks. A sidewalk café may also include the parking space deck subject to the following specific conditions:
(1) Approval of a parking space deck shall be part of the approval for a sidewalk café. A parking space deck is not permitted
separate from a sidewalk café.
(2) A building permit is required for all parking space decks. Plans for a parking space deck shall be approved by the City prior to
the start of construction. A minimum of a 36-inch guardrail shall be provided on the sides of the deck not adjacent to the
sidewalk.
(3) The size of the parking space deck shall be limited to the area occupied by parking spaces located entirely within the frontage
of the restaurant. A minimum of 3-foot setback from adjacent parking spaces and a 4-foot setback from the traffic lane shall be
provided.
(4) If parking space decks are approved for an adjacent restaurant, the decks may be integrated and constructed as one large
parking space deck.
(5) Parking space decks shall be installed no earlier than May 1st and shall be removed no later than November 1. Earlier setup
is permitted with the permission of the zoning administrator in the event of early spring weather.
(6) Cost for the construction, installation, removal and storage of the parking space deck is the responsibility of the operator. If
the structure is not removed as set forth in this section, the City may remove the structure after a 15-day notice and charge the
expense of removal to the operator or property owner.
(f) Signage. No signs shall be allowed in the sidewalk café area except for table umbrellas with the name of the restaurant and one (1)
sandwich board sign showing daily specials. Table top documents and menus are not considered signs for the purpose of this section.
(g) Furnishings. The operator shall use, and maintain in good repair, safe and sturdy furniture, furnishings, and equipment which
enhance the aesthetics of the surrounding area. Umbrellas shall be anchored so they will not lift and blow away.
(h) Hours. A sidewalkcafé may only be open during the hours of the principal restaurant, but in no case shall the sidewalk café be open
from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(i) Use after hours. The sidewalk café area shall not be utilized for any purpose after hours. It is the responsibility of the operator to
prevent loitering and unauthorized use of the sidewalk café area and site furnishings.
(j) Food service availability. A sidewalk café shall not be open during hours when food service is not available.
(k) Music/noise. The sidewalk café area shall not have music directed to it from speakers nor shall live music take place at the sidewalk
café.
(l) Use of public property. The operator shall not use public property such as light poles, utility poles, flower planters, trees or other
amenities as a point of attachment for anything, including ropes, posters, or signs.
(m) Trash removal. The operator shall remove all trash from the sidewalk café on a regular basis during business hours and shall keep
the sidewalk café area in a clean, orderly, litter-free and hazard-free condition. The operator shall remove litter from the abutting
properties that may have come from the sidewalk café. The operator shall provide covered trash containers for the costumers. The
operator shall not place trash in the City trash containers.
(n) Restroom facilities. Facilities within the restaurant shall be sufficient to adequately serve the additional seating and capacity
provided by the sidewalk café area as required by the State of Wisconsin Commercial Building Code.
(o) Non-smoking. Smoking in a sidewalk cafe is prohibited, pursuant to the authority set forth in s. 101.123(4m), Wis. Stats, and s.
25.35(4m), Municipal Code. A person in charge of the business to which the sidewalk café is associated may designate an outside area
on his or her private property that is a reasonable distance from the entrance, where persons may smoke.
(p) Alcohol beverages. The operator may sell and serve alcohol beverages in a sidewalk café consistent with the following conditions:
(1) The operator has a valid and appropriate alcohol license for the principal premises.
(2) The alcohol license includes the sidewalk café area in the description of the licensed premises.
(3) The alcohol license permits the sale of the type of alcohol beverages to be served at the sidewalk café.
(4) Alcohol beverages are sold and served only to seated customers of the sidewalk café and are served by the licensee or
licensee’s employees in compliance with the alcohol beverage laws, ordinances and regulations.
(5) Alcohol beverages may only be served when food service is available through the principal restaurant.
(6) The operator shall be responsible for policing the sidewalk café area to prevent underage persons from entering or remaining
in the sidewalk café, except when underage persons are allowed to be present on the licenses premises under applicable laws.
(7) The operator shall not allow patrons of the sidewalk café to bring alcohol beverages from another location, nor to carry open
containers of alcohol beverages about in the sidewalk café area, nor to carry open containers of alcohol beverages served in the
sidewalk café outside the sidewalk café area.
(8) The bar from which the alcohol beverages are dispensed shall be located indoors and shall not be located in the sidewalk
café area.
(9) No container of alcohol beverages shall be present in the sidewalk café area between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(q) Insurance. The operator must provide and maintain insurance for the sidewalk café as follows:
(1) Commercial General Liability: $1,000,000 per occurrence/general aggregate.
(2) Workers Compensation: statutory.
(3) Employers Liability: $300,000 disease policy limit; $100,000 per employee.
B - 52
Series Land Use
The operator must provide, upon request, policies and endorsements. The policies shall be endorsed to name the city as an additional
insured, and shall provide that the policies of insurance shall not be canceled or altered without 30 days prior written notice to the City.
The insurance requirements are not intended to waive any immunity or statutory procedures that the City may have or be entitled to
under provisions of law.
(r) Indemnification. The operator shall sign an indemnification agreement provided by the City Attorney prior to operation of the
sidewalk café.
18.13 Wind test
tower
Description: A tower on which equipment is attached that measures parameters needed to assess the site’s suitability for a wind energy
system.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
Pursuant to s. 66.0401(3), Wis. Stats., there are no standards or requirements for the establishment of a wind test tower or similar
testing facility. If the Planning Commission and/or Common Council determines that the anticipated or actual testing is detrimental to the
public health, safety, or welfare, such bodies may, individually or jointly, submit a written petition to the Public Service Commission
requesting the imposition of reasonable restrictions on such use.
18.14 Yard sale Description: A temporary event where used household items are offered for sale.
Note: Also known as garage sale or rummage sale.
Parking Requirements: On-site parking is not required
Supplemental Standards:
(a) Required principal use. A yard sale shall only occur with a principal residential use or
with a governmental or institutional use, such as a worship facility, library, or school.
(b) Duration. A yard sale shall not be operated for more than 4 consecutive days or more than a total of 12 days in a calendar year.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
C - 1
Rural Residential (RR) district
Appendix C
Zoning Districts and Dimensional Standards
Description: This district is intended to accommodate single-family dwellings on larger lots, limited agricultural uses,
and other compatible land uses.
Dimensional Standards:
Lot Standards
Additional
Details
Illustration
Symbol
Lot area, minimum s. 11.06.102 A 5 acres
Lot width, minimum s. 11.06.103 B 250 feet
Street frontage, minimum s. 11.06.104 C 100 feet
Water frontage, minimum s. 11.06.105 - 100 feet
Building Setbacks
Front yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 D 35 feet [1,2]
Side yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 E 25 feet
Rear yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 F 25 feet
Building Standards
Building height, maximum s. 11.06.108 - 2 stories, but not more than 35 feet for principal buildings; 1 story, but not more
than 18 feet for detached accessory building
Building coverage, maximum s. 11.06.109 G 30 percent for principal buildings; 20 percent of rear yard area, but not greater
than 900 square feet for detached accessory building
Residential floor area, minimum s. 11.06.111 - 900 square feet on ground floor and total floor area as follows: one bedroom,
1,000 square feet; two bedrooms, 1,100 square feet; three bedrooms, 1,200
square feet, four or more bedrooms, 1,400 square feet
Floor area of attached garage,
maximum
s. 11.06.112 - 50 percent of ground floor living area; the Planning Commission may allow
more than 50 percent as a special exception provided the floor area over 50
percent is deducted from the allowable floor area of detached accessory
buildings
Number of detached accessory
buildings, maximum
s. 11.06.115 H 2
Other
Distance between driveway and
property boundary line, minimum
- I 5 feet
Notes:
1. If a lot is 1.0 acre or larger and abuts the right-of-way line of an expressway, primary arterial, or standard arterial, the front yard setback for
principal buildings constructed after September 1, 1995 is 75 feet.
2. If a lot is 1.0 acre or larger and abuts the right-of-way line of an expressway the setback for a detached accessory building constructed
after September 1, 1995 is 35 feet or if abutting a primary arterial or standard arterial, the setback is 25 feet if construc ted after September 1,
1995.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
C - 2
Single-Family Residential (R-1) district
Description: This district is intended to accommodate single-family dwellings along with compatible community
and civic uses.
Dimensional Standards:
Lot Standards
Additional
Details
Illustration
Symbol
Lot area, minimum s. 11.06.102 A 10,000 square feet
Lot width, minimum s. 11.06.103 B 85 feet
Street frontage, minimum s. 11.06.104 C 50 feet
Water frontage, minimum s. 11.06.105 - 75 feet
Building Setbacks
Front yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 D 25 feet for principal buildings; 5 feet behind the front face of the principal
building for detached accessory building, but not less than 25 feet [1,2,3]
Side yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 E 7 feet on one side and 10 feet on the other for principal buildings; 3 feet for
detached accessory building [4]
Rear yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 F 20 percent of lot depth for principal buildings; 3 feet for detached accessory
building without an alley; 5 feet for detached accessory building with an alley
Building Standards
Building height, maximum s. 11.06.108 - 2 stories, but not more than 30 feet for principal buildings; 1 story, but not more
than 15 feet for detached accessory building
Building coverage, maximum s. 11.06.109 G 30 percent for principal buildings; 20 percent of rear yard area, but not greater
than 900 square feet for detached accessory building
Residential floor area, minimum s. 11.06.111 - 900 square feet on ground floor and total floor area as follows: one bedroom,
1,000 square feet; two bedrooms, 1,100 square feet; three bedrooms, 1,200
square feet, four or more bedrooms, 1,400 square feet
Floor area of attached garage,
maximum
s. 11.06.112 - 50 percent of ground floor living area; the Planning Commission may allow
more than 50 percent as a special exception provided the floor area over 50
percent is deducted from the allowable floor area of detached accessory
buildings
Number of detached accessory
buildings, maximum
s. 11.06.115 H 2
Other
Distance between driveway and
property boundary line, minimum
- I 3 feet
Notes:
1. The minimum front yard setback may be less than or more than what is stated if setback averaging applies, but not less than 15 feet.
2. If a lot is 1.0 acre or larger and abuts the right-of-way line of an expressway, primary arterial, or standard arterial, the front yard setback for
principal buildings constructed after September 1, 1995 is 75 feet.
3. If a lot is 1.0 acre or larger and abuts the right-of-way line of an expressway the setback for a detached accessory building constructed
after September 1, 1995 is 35 feet or if abutting a primary arterial or standard arterial, the setback is 25 feet if constructed after September 1,
1995.
4. If the lot width for an existing lot is less than what is required, the side yard setback may be reduced proportionately to the ratio between
the actual width and the required width, but not less than 75 percent of the required setback.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
C - 3
Mixed Residential (R-2) district
Description: This district is intended to accommodate single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings along with
compatible community and civic uses.
Dimensional Standards:
Lot Standards
Additional
Details
Illustration
Symbol
Lot area, minimum s. 11.06.102 A 7,500 square feet for single-family; 10,000 square feet for two-family
Lot width, minimum s. 11.06.103 B 75 feet
Street frontage, minimum s. 11.06.104 C 50 feet for single-family; 85 feet for two-family
Water frontage, minimum s. 11.06.105 - 75 feet
Building Setbacks
Front yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 D 25 feet for principal buildings; 5 feet behind the front face of the principal
building for detached accessory building, but not less than 25 feet [1,2,3]
Side yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 E 7 feet on one side and 10 feet on the other for principal buildings; 3 feet for
detached accessory building [4]
Rear yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 F 20 percent of lot depth for principal buildings; 3 feet for detached accessory
building without an alley; 5 feet for detached accessory building with an alley
Building Standards
Building height, maximum s. 11.06.108 - 2 stories, but not more than 30 feet for principal buildings; 1 story, but not more
than 15 feet for detached accessory building
Building coverage, maximum s. 11.06.109 G 30 percent for principal buildings; 20 percent of rear yard area, but not greater
than 900 square feet for detached accessory building
Residential floor area, minimum s. 11.06.111 - 900 square feet on ground floor and total floor area as follows: one bedroom,
1,000 square feet; two bedrooms, 1,100 square feet; three bedrooms, 1,200
square feet, four or more bedrooms, 1,400 square feet
Floor area of attached garage,
maximum
s. 11.06.112 - 50 percent of ground floor living area; the Planning Commission may allow
more than 50 percent as a special exception provided the floor area over 50
percent is deducted from the allowable floor area of detached accessory
buildings
Number of detached accessory
buildings, maximum
s. 11.06.115 H 2
Other
Distance between driveway and
property boundary line, minimum
- I 3 feet
Notes:
1. The minimum front yard setback may be less than or more than what is stated if setback averaging applies, but not less than 15 feet.
2. If a lot is 1.0 acre or larger and abuts the right-of-way line of an expressway, primary arterial, or standard arterial, the front yard setback for
principal buildings constructed after September 1, 1995 is 75 feet.
3. If a lot is 1.0 acre or larger and abuts the right-of-way line of an expressway the setback for a detached accessory building constructed
after September 1, 1995 is 35 feet or if abutting a primary arterial or standard arterial, the setback is 25 feet if constructed after September 1,
1995.
4. If the lot width for an existing lot is less than what is required for a single-family, the side yard setback may be reduced proportionately to the
ratio between the actual width and the required width, but not less than 75 percent of the required setback.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
C - 4
Multi-Family Medium Density Residential (R-3) district
Description: This district is intended to accommodate medium density housing consisting of multi-family buildings
and townhomes with 3 to 15 dwelling units in any given project. Compatible community and civic uses may also
be located in the district.
Dimensional Standards:
Lot Standards
Additional
Details
Illustration
Symbol
Lot area, minimum s. 11.06.102 A 10,000 square feet for two-family; 3,000 square feet per dwelling unit for multifamily
Lot width, minimum s. 11.06.103 B 75 feet for two-family; 120 feet for multi-family
Street frontage, minimum s. 11.06.104 C 50 feet for two-family; 85 feet for multi-family
Water frontage, minimum s. 11.06.105 - 75 feet
Building Setbacks
Front yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 D 25 feet for principal buildings; 5 feet behind the front face of the principal
building for detached accessory building, but not less than 25 feet [1,2,3]
Side yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 E 7 feet on one side and 10 feet on the other for duplexes; 15 feet on each side
for buildings with 3 or more dwelling units; 3 feet for detached accessory
building
Rear yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 F 20 percent of lot depth for one or two-family principal building; one-half the
height or one-half of the depth of the building for multi-family; 3 feet for
detached accessory building without an alley; 5 feet for detached accessory
building with an alley
Building Standards
Building height, maximum s. 11.06.108 - 2 stories, but not more than 35 feet for principal building; 1 story, but not more
than 18 feet for detached accessory building
Building coverage, maximum s. 11.06.109 G 40 percent for principal building; 20 percent of rear yard area, but not greater
than 500 square feet for detached accessory building (per dwelling unit)
Residential floor area, minimum s. 11.06.111 - 800 square feet for each dwelling unit
Number of detached accessory
buildings, maximum
s. 11.06.115 - 2
Other
Distance between driveway and
property boundary line, minimum
- H 5 feet
Distance between parking lot and
property boundary line, minimum
- I 5 feet
Notes:
1. The minimum front yard setback may be less than or more than what is stated if setback averaging applies, but not less than 15 feet.
2. If a lot is 1.0 acre or larger and abuts the right-of-way line of an expressway, primary arterial, or standard arterial, the front yard setback for a
principal building constructed after September 1, 1995 is 75 feet.
3. If a lot is 1.0 acre or larger and abuts the right-of-way line of an expressway the setback for a detached accessory building constructed
after September 1, 1995 is 35 feet or if abutting a primary arterial or standard arterial, the setback is 25 feet if constructed after September 1,
1995.
Multi- Family
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
C - 5
High Density Residential (R-4) district
Description: This district is intended to accommodate high density housing consisting of multi-family buildings and
townhomes with more than 15 dwelling units in any given project. Compatible community and civic uses may also
be located in the district.
Dimensional Standards:
Lot Standards
Additional
Details
Illustration
Symbol
Lot area, minimum s. 11.06.102 A 10,000 square feet for two-family; 3,000 square feet per dwelling unit for multifamily
Lot width, minimum s. 11.06.103 B 75 feet for two-family; 120 feet for multi-family
Street frontage, minimum s. 11.06.104 C 50 feet for two-family; 85 feet for multi-family
Water frontage, minimum s. 11.06.105 - 75 feet
Building Setbacks
Front yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 D 25 feet for principal buildings; 5 feet behind the front face of the principal
building for detached accessory building, but not less than 25 feet [1,2,3]
Side yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 E 7 feet on one side and 10 feet on the other for duplexes; 15 feet on each side
for buildings with 3 or more dwelling units; 3 feet for detached accessory
building
Rear yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 F 20 percent of lot depth for one or two-family principal building; one-half the
height or one-half of the depth of the building for multi-family; 3 feet for
detached accessory building without an alley; 5 feet for detached accessory
building with an alley
Building Standards
Building height, maximum s. 11.06.108 - 2 stories, but not more than 35 feet for principal building; 1 story, but not more
than 18 feet for detached accessory building
Building coverage, maximum s. 11.06.109 G 40 percent for principal building; 20 percent of rear yard area, but not greater
than 500 square feet for detached accessory building (per dwelling unit)
Residential floor area, minimum s. 11.06.111 - 800 square feet for each dwelling unit
Number of detached accessory
buildings, maximum
s. 11.06.115 - 2
Other
Distance between driveway and
property boundary line, minimum
- H 5 feet
Distance between parking lot and
property boundary line, minimum
- I 5 feet
Notes:
1. The minimum front yard setback may be less than or more than what is stated if setback averaging applies, but not less than 15 feet.
2. If a lot is 1.0 acre or larger and abuts the right-of-way line of an expressway, primary arterial, or standard arterial, the front yard setback for a
principal building constructed after September 1, 1995 is 75 feet.
3. If a lot is 1.0 acre or larger and abuts the right-of-way line of an expressway the setback for a detached accessory building constructed
after September 1, 1995 is 35 feet or if abutting a primary arterial or standard arterial, the setback is 25 feet if constructed after September 1,
1995.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
C - 6
Manufactured Home Park (R-8) district
Description: This district is intended to accommodate mobile homes and/or manufactured homes as part of a
unified project, which may also include compatible community and civic uses.
Dimensional Standards:
Lot Standards
Additional
Details
Lot area, minimum s. 11.06.102 5 acres
Lot width, minimum s. 11.06.103 150 feet
Street frontage, minimum s. 11.06.104 85 feet
Building Setbacks
Front yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 25 feet
Side yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 20 feet
Rear yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 20 feet
Other
Distance between driveway and
property boundary line, minimum
- 5 feet
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
C - 7
Downtown Commercial (B-1) district
Description: This district is primarily intended to accommodate and create a high level of employment and
business activity consisting of large- and small-scale uses. Smaller retail stores and specialty shops are common
along with indoor attractions. Although professional services are allowed, they are less common. Sidewalk cafes
are common during the warmer months of the year. The wide range of permissible uses and development
standards are intended to provide significant incentives for infill development, redevelopment, and the continued
economic viability of existing development. Residential uses can occur in this district primarily on the upper levels
of buildings. Parking is available on the street and in nearby public parking lots and garages. There is a balanced
mix of one- and multi-story buildings.
Dimensional Standards:
Lot Standards
Additional
Details
Illustration
Symbol
Lot area, minimum s. 11.06.102 - none
Lot width, minimum s. 11.06.103 - none
Street frontage, minimum s. 11.06.104 - none
Water frontage, minimum s. 11.06.105 - none
Building Setbacks
Front yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 - none
Side yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 - none
Rear yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 none
Build to line, minimum s. 11.07.107 A 4 feet except that up to 40 percent of the building frontage may be 8 feet if
the area is used for outdoor seating, public art, or other such design element
approved by the Planning Commission
Building Standards
Building height, maximum s. 11.06.108 - 45 feet for principal building adjacent to a residential district; 60 feet for
principal building not adjacent to a residential district; 15 feet for detached
accessory building adjacent to a residential district; 2 stories for detached
accessory building not adjacent to a residential district
Building coverage, maximum s. 11.06.109 B 100 percent
Impervious surface, maximum s. 11.06.110 C 100 percent
Other
Distance between driveway and
property boundary line, minimum
- - 3 feet
Distance between parking lot and
property boundary line, minimum
- - 0 feet
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
C - 8
General Commercial (B-2) district
Description: This district is primarily intended to accommodate a wide range of large- and small-scale commercial
development along major arterials along with compatible community and civic uses.
Dimensional Standards:
Lot Standards
Additional
Details
Illustration
Symbol
Lot area, minimum s. 11.06.102 A 10,000 square feet
Lot width, minimum s. 11.06.103 B 90 feet
Street frontage, minimum s. 11.06.104 C 50 feet
Water frontage, minimum s. 11.06.105 - none
Building Setbacks
Front yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 D 25 feet for principal building and detached accessory building [1,2,3]
Side yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 E 20 feet for principal building; 10 feet for detached accessory building
Rear yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 F 20 feet for principal building; 10 feet for detached accessory building
Building Standards
Building height, maximum s. 11.06.108 - 35 feet for principal building adjacent to a residential district; 45 feet for
principal building not adjacent to a residential district; 15 feet for detached
accessory building
Building coverage, maximum s. 11.06.109 G 60 percent
Impervious surface, maximum s. 11.06.110 H 80 percent
Other
Distance between driveway and
property boundary line, minimum
- I 5 feet
Distance between parking lot and
property boundary line, minimum
- J 5 feet if adjacent to non-residential; 10 feet if adjacent to residential
On-site parking in front of principal
building, maximum
s. 11.06.118 K 35 percent; 50 percent with special exception consistent with s. 11.06.118
Notes:
1. The minimum front yard setback may be less than or more than what is stated if setback averaging applies, but not less than 15 feet.
2. If a lot is 1.0 acre or larger and abuts the right-of-way line of an expressway, primary arterial, or standard arterial, the front yard setback for a
principal building constructed after September 1, 1995 is 75 feet.
3. If a lot is 1.0 acre or larger and abuts the right-of-way line of an expressway the setback for a detached accessory building constructed
after September 1, 1995 is 35 feet or if abutting a primary arterial or standard arterial, the setback is 25 feet if constructed after September 1,
1995.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
C - 9
Neighborhood Commercial (B-3) district
Description: This district is intended to accommodate low-intensity commercial uses in a residential setting.
Dimensional Standards:
Lot Standards
Additional
Details
Illustration
Symbol
Lot area, minimum s. 11.06.102 A 10,000 square feet
Lot width, minimum s. 11.06.103 B 90 feet
Street frontage, minimum s. 11.06.104 C 50 feet
Water frontage, minimum s. 11.06.105 - none
Building Setbacks
Front yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 D 25 feet for principal building and detached accessory building [1,2,3]
Side yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 E 10 feet for principal building; 10 feet for detached accessory building
Rear yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 F 20 feet for principal building; 10 feet for detached accessory building
Building Standards
Building height, maximum s. 11.06.108 - 35 feet for principal building adjacent to a residential district; 45 feet for
principal building not adjacent to a residential district; 15 feet for detached
accessory building
Building coverage, maximum s. 11.06.109 G 60 percent
Impervious surface, maximum s. 11.06.110 H 80 percent
Other
Distance between driveway and
property boundary line, minimum
- I 5 feet
Distance between parking lot and
property boundary line, minimum
- J 5 feet if adjacent to non-residential; 10 feet if adjacent to residential
On-site parking in front of principal
building, maximum
s. 11.06.118 K 35 percent; 50 percent with special exception consistent with s. 11.06.118
Notes:
1. The minimum front yard setback may be less than or more than what is stated if setback averaging applies, but not less than 15 feet.
2. If a lot is 1.0 acre or larger and abuts the right-of-way line of an expressway, primary arterial, or standard arterial, the front yard setback for a
principal building constructed after September 1, 1995 is 75 feet.
3. If a lot is 1.0 acre or larger and abuts the right-of-way line of an expressway the setback for a detached accessory building constructed
after September 1, 1995 is 35 feet or if abutting a primary arterial or standard arterial, the setback is 25 feet if construc ted after September 1,
1995.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
C - 10
Mixed Use Commercial (B-5) district
Description: This district is intended to be applied exclusively to those areas depicted on the city's adopted land
use plan map as "general mixed use." These areas have been determined, via the city's comprehensive plan
process, to potentially be appropriated for a variety of land uses given the (1) character of the existing
development pattern in the area; (2) proximity of the area to major transportation facilities; and (3) availability of
blocks of land which are sufficiently large to allow for integrated, coordinated, comprehensive site planning and
mixing of compatible, well-planned land uses.
Dimensional Standards:
Lot Standards
Additional
Details
Illustration
Symbol
Lot area, minimum s. 11.06.102 A 20,000 square feet
Lot width, minimum s. 11.06.103 B 120 feet
Street frontage, minimum s. 11.06.104 C 100 feet
Water frontage, minimum s. 11.06.105 - none
Building Setbacks
Front yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 D 25 feet for principal building; 15 feet for detached accessory building [1,2,3]
Side yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 E 20 feet for principal building; 10 feet for detached accessory building
Rear yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 F 20 feet for principal building; 10 feet for detached accessory building
Building Standards
Building height, maximum s. 11.06.108 - 35 feet for principal building adjacent to a residential district; 45 feet for
principal building not adjacent to a residential district, or 3 stories whichever is
less; 18 feet for detached accessory building
Building coverage, maximum s. 11.06.109 G 50 percent
Impervious surface, maximum s. 11.06.110 H 75 percent
Other
Distance between driveway and
property boundary line, minimum
- I 5 feet
Distance between parking lot and
property boundary line, minimum
- J 3 feet if adjacent to non-residential; 10 feet if adjacent to residential
On-site parking in front of principal
building, maximum
s. 11.06.118 K 25 percent; 35 percent with special exception consistent with s. 11.06.118
Notes:
1. The minimum front yard setback may be less than or more than what is stated if setback averaging applies, but not less than 15 feet.
2. If a lot is 1.0 acre or larger and abuts the right-of-way line of an expressway, primary arterial, or standard arterial, the front yard setback for
principal buildings constructed after September 1, 1995 is 75 feet.
3. If a lot is 1.0 acre or larger and abuts the right-of-way line of an expressway the setback for a detached accessory building constructed
after September 1, 1995 is 35 feet or if abutting a primary arterial or standard arterial, the setback is 25 feet if constructed after September 1,
1995.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
C - 11
General Industrial (M-1) district
Description: This district is intended to accommodate industrial, manufacturing, and storage where most of the
activities are conducted within an enclosed building. Compatible community and civic uses are also allowed.
Dimensional Standards:
Lot Standards
Additional
Details
Illustration
Symbol
Lot area, minimum s. 11.06.102 A 40,000 square feet
Lot width, minimum s. 11.06.103 B 150 feet
Street frontage, minimum s. 11.06.104 C 100 feet
Water frontage, minimum s. 11.06.105 - none
Building Setbacks
Front yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 D 25 feet
Side yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 E 15 feet if adjacent to non-residential, 25 feet if adjacent to residential
Rear yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 F 25 feet
Building Standards
Building height, maximum s. 11.06.108 - 45 feet; 65 feet as approved as a special exception
Building coverage, maximum s. 11.06.109 G 70 percent
Impervious surface, maximum s. 11.06.110 H 90 percent
Other
Distance between driveway and
property boundary line, minimum
- I 3 feet
Distance between parking lot and
property boundary line, minimum
- J 5 feet if adjacent to non-residential; 10 feet if adjacent to residential
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
C - 12
Heavy Industrial (M-2) district
Description: This district is intended to accommodate industrial, manufacturing, and storage uses where some or
all the activities are conducted outside of an enclosed building. Compatible community and civic uses may also
be allowed.
Dimensional Standards:
Lot Standards
Additional
Details
Illustration
Symbol
Lot area, minimum s. 11.06.102 A 40,000 square feet
Lot width, minimum s. 11.06.103 B 150 feet
Street frontage, minimum s. 11.06.104 C 100 feet
Water frontage, minimum s. 11.06.105 - none
Building Setbacks
Front yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 D 50 feet
Side yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 E 25 feet
Rear yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 F 25 feet
Building Standards
Building height, maximum s. 11.06.108 - 45 feet; 65 feet as approved as a special exception
Building coverage, maximum s. 11.06.109 G 70 percent
Impervious surface, maximum s. 11.06.110 H 90 percent
Other
Distance between driveway and
property boundary line, minimum
- I 3 feet
Distance between parking lot and
property boundary line, minimum
- J 5 feet if adjacent to non-residential; 10 feet if adjacent to residential
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
C - 13
Conservancy (C-1) district
Description: The C-1 conservancy district is intended to include those lands considered wetlands, marshlands,
swamps, 100-year floodplains, and other environmentally sensitive areas. Given the various development
constraints associated with these lands, development is restricted to land uses compatible with these constraints.
Dimensional Standards:
Lot Standards
Additional
Details
Lot area, minimum s. 11.06.102 none
Lot width, minimum s. 11.06.103 none
Street frontage, minimum s. 11.06.104 none
Water frontage, minimum s. 11.06.105 none
Building Setbacks
Front yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 50 feet
Side yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 25 feet
Rear yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 25 feet
Building Standards
Building height, maximum s. 11.06.108 35 feet for principal building; 15 feet for detached accessory building
Building coverage, maximum s. 11.06.109 15 percent
Impervious surface, maximum s. 11.06.110 25 percent
Other
Distance between driveway and
property boundary line, minimum
- 3 feet
Distance between parking lot and
property boundary line, minimum
- 5 feet if adjacent to non-residential; 10 feet if adjacent to residential
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
C - 14
Institutional (I-1) district
Description: This district is intended to accommodate institutional uses, whether maintained by the City, another
governmental body, or a private business, that are deemed to be a permanent use. This district is located in and
adjoining residential areas of the City where such uses are consistent with existing and planned residential uses.
Dimensional Standards:
Lot Standards
Additional
Details
Illustration
Symbol
Lot area, minimum s. 11.06.102 A 30,000 square feet
Lot width, minimum s. 11.06.103 B 90 feet
Street frontage, minimum s. 11.06.104 C 50 feet
Water frontage, minimum s. 11.06.105 - none
Building Setbacks
Front yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 D 25 feet for principal building and detached accessory building [1,2,3]
Side yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 E 30 feet for principal building; 10 feet for detached accessory building
Rear yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 F 30 feet for principal building; 10 feet for detached accessory building
Building Standards
Building height, maximum s. 11.06.108 - 45 feet for principal; 15 feet for detached accessory building
Building coverage, maximum s. 11.06.109 G 45 percent
Impervious surface, maximum s. 11.06.110 H 65 percent
Other
Distance between driveway and
property boundary line, minimum
- I 5 feet
Distance between parking lot and
property boundary line, minimum
- J 5 feet if adjacent to non-residential; 10 feet if adjacent to residential
Notes:
1. The minimum front yard setback may be less than or more than what is stated if setback averaging applies, but not less than 15 feet.
2. If a lot is 1.0 acres or larger and abuts the right-of-way line of an expressway, primary arterial, or standard arterial, the front yard setback for
a principal building constructed after September 1, 1995 is 75 feet.
3. If a lot is 1.0 acres or larger and abuts the right-of-way line of an expressway the setback for a detached accessory building constructed
after September 1, 1995 is 35 feet or if abutting a primary arterial or standard arterial, the setback is 25 feet if construc ted after September 1,
1995.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
C - 15
Park and Recreation (P-1) district
Description: Park and Recreation (P-1) district. This district is intended to accommodate outdoor recreation,
whether maintained by the City, another governmental body, or a private business, that are deemed to be a
permanent use. This district is located in and adjoining residential areas of the City where such uses are consistent
with existing and planned residential uses.
Dimensional Standards:
Lot Standards
Additional
Details
Illustration
Symbol
Lot area, minimum s. 11.06.102 - none
Lot width, minimum s. 11.06.103 - none
Street frontage, minimum s. 11.06.104 - none
Water frontage, minimum s. 11.06.105 - none
Building Setbacks
Front yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 - 50 feet
Side yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 - 25 feet
Rear yard setback, minimum s. 11.06.106 - 25 feet
Building Standards
Building height, maximum s. 11.06.108 - 45 feet for principal; 15 feet for detached accessory building
Building coverage, maximum s. 11.06.109 - 45 percent
Impervious surface, maximum s. 11.06.110 - 65 percent
Other
Distance between driveway and
property boundary line, minimum
- - 5 feet
Distance between parking lot and
property boundary line, minimum
- - 5 feet if adjacent to non-residential; 10 feet if adjacent to residential
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
D - 1
Appendix D
Building Type Illustrations
Single-Family Dwelling
Building Setbacks
Illustration
Symbol
Front yard setback A Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Side yard setback B Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Rear yard setback C Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building Height
Principal building D Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Accessory building E Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Coverage
Building coverage, principal F Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building coverage, accessory F Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building Elements
Entrance to dwelling unit G The front entrance to the building must face the street.
Allowable projections in a
required setback area
H Various building features may extend into required setback areas as set forth in s. 11.06.106.
Garage - A two-car garage containing at least 400 square feet must be built at the same time the
dwelling unit is being constructed. Such garage may be attached or detached.
Roof - The roof must have a minimum pitch of 4 to 12, except when a flat roof is integral to the
architectural style of the dwelling. An overhang must extend at least 12 inches beyond the
face of the exterior wall, except when integral to the architectural style of the dwelling (e.g.,
saltbox).
Materials - The roof must be covered with slate, concrete, clay, or ceramic tiles; wood shingles or shakes;
or metal, fiberglass, or asphalt shingles; or standing seam panels. Exterior wall surfaces must
be covered with stucco, wood siding, cement-fiber siding, vinyl siding, metal horizontal lap
siding, wood shingles, or a masonry veneer. The Planning Commission may approve a special
exception authorizing the use of an exterior material not specifically allowed.
Foundation - The building must be set on and anchored to a continuous permanent foundation that
extends around its perimeter.
Living area - Minimum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Driveways and Parking
Distance between driveway and
adjoining property boundary line
- Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Notes:
1. Also see Appendix B for any supplemental requirements related to this specific building type.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
D - 2
Two-Family Dwelling
Building Setbacks
Illustration
Symbol
Front yard setback A Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Side yard setback B Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Rear yard setback C Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building Height
Principal building D Maximum height set by zoning district in Appendix C
Accessory building E Maximum height set by zoning district in Appendix C
Coverage
Building coverage, principal F Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building coverage, accessory F Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building Elements
Entrance to dwelling unit G The front entrance to the building must face the street. If the building consists of two or more
floors, the entrance to the second floor must be integral to the building's design. An exterior
staircase is not acceptable.
Allowable projections in a
required setback area
H Various building features may extend into required setback areas as set forth in s. 11.06.106.
Garage I A two-car garage containing at least 400 square feet must be built for each unit at the same
time the dwelling units are being constructed. Such garage may be attached or detached.
Roof - The roof must have a minimum pitch of 4 to 12, except when a flat roof is integral to the
architectural style of the dwelling. An overhang must extend at least 12 inches beyond the
face of the exterior wall, except when integral to the architectural style of the dwelling (e.g.,
saltbox).
Materials - The roof must be covered with slate, concrete, clay, or ceramic tiles; wood shingles or shakes;
or metal, fiberglass, or asphalt shingles; or standing seam panels. Exterior wall surfaces must
be covered with stucco, wood siding, cement-fiber siding, vinyl siding, metal horizontal lap
siding, wood shingles, or a masonry veneer. The Planning Commission may approve a special
exception authorizing the use of an exterior material not specifically allowed.
Foundation - The building must be set on and anchored to a continuous permanent foundation that
extends around its perimeter.
Driveways and Parking
Distance between driveway and
adjoining property boundary line
- Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Distance between parking lot and
adjoining property boundary line
- Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Notes:
1. Also see Appendix B for any supplemental requirements related to this specific building type.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
D - 3
Twin Home
Building Setbacks
Illustration
Symbol
Front yard setback A Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Side yard setback B Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Rear yard setback C Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building Height
Principal building D Maximum height set by zoning district in Appendix C
Accessory building E Maximum height set by zoning district in Appendix C
Coverage
Building coverage, principal F Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building coverage, accessory F Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building Elements
Entrance to dwelling unit G The front entrance to the building must face the street.
Allowable projections in a
required setback area
H Various building features may extend into required setback areas as set forth in s. 11.06.106.
Garage - A two-car garage containing at least 400 square feet must be built at the same time the
dwelling unit is being constructed. Such garage may be attached or detached.
Roof - The roof must have a minimum pitch of 4 to 12, except when a flat roof is integral to the
architectural style of the dwelling. An overhang must extend at least 12 inches beyond the
face of the exterior wall, except when integral to the architectural style of the dwelling (e.g.,
saltbox).
Materials - The roof must be covered with slate, concrete, clay, or ceramic tiles; wood shingles or shakes;
or metal, fiberglass, or asphalt shingles; or standing seam panels. Exterior wall surfaces must
be covered with stucco, wood siding, cement-fiber siding, vinyl siding, metal horizontal lap
siding, wood shingles, or a masonry veneer. The Planning Commission may approve a special
exception authorizing the use of an exterior material not specifically allowed.
Foundation - The building must be set on and anchored to a continuous permanent foundation that
extends around its perimeter.
Driveways and Parking
Distance between driveway and
adjoining property boundary line
- Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Distance between parking lot and
adjoining property boundary line
- Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Notes:
1. Also see Appendix B for any supplemental requirements related to this specific building type.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
D - 4
Townhouse
Building Setbacks
Illustration
Symbol
Front yard setback A Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Side yard setback B Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Rear yard setback C Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building Height
Principal building D Maximum height set by zoning district in Appendix C
Accessory building E Maximum height set by zoning district in Appendix C
Coverage
Building coverage, principal F Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building coverage, accessory F Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building Elements
Entrance to dwelling unit G The front entrance to each dwelling unit must face the street or a courtyard of sufficient size.
Such entrances must be accentuated by a porch or other architectural feature.
Allowable projections in a
required setback area
H Various building features may extend into required setback areas as set forth in s. 11.06.106.
Garage - A two-car garage containing at least 400 square feet must be built for each dwelling unit at
the same time the townhouse is being constructed. Such garage may be attached or
detached.
Vertical off-sets - When a building includes 5 or more dwelling units, there must be a vertical offset of at least 2
feet between each adjoining dwelling unit.
Driveways and Parking
Distance between driveway and
adjoining property boundary line
- Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Distance between parking lot and
adjoining property boundary line
- Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Notes:
1. Also see Appendix B for any supplemental requirements related to this specific building type.
2. Also see Division 6 and 7 in Article 6 for general site design principles and architectural standards that may apply.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
D - 5
Multi-Family
Building Setbacks
Illustration
Symbol
Front yard setback A Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Side yard setback B Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Rear yard setback C Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building Height
Principal building D Maximum height set by zoning district in Appendix C
Accessory buildings E Maximum height set by zoning district in Appendix C
Coverage
Building coverage - Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Impervious surface - Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building Elements
Entrance to dwelling unit F The front entrance to each dwelling unit must face the street or a courtyard of sufficient size.
Such entrances must be accentuated by a porch or other architectural feature.
Allowable projections in a
required setback area
G Various building features may extend into required setback areas as set forth in s. 11.06.106.
Driveways and Parking
Distance between driveway and
adjoining property boundary line
- Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Distance between parking lot and
adjoining property boundary line
- Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Other
FHA compliance - The developer is responsible for complying with all applicable standards in the Fair Housing
Act, including accessibility requirements.
Notes:
1. Also see Appendix B for any supplemental requirements related to this specific building type.
2. Also see Division 6 and 7 in Article 6 for general site design principles and architectural standards that may apply.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
D - 6
Institutional
Building Setbacks
Illustration
Symbol
Front yard setback A Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Side yard setback B Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Rear yard setback C Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building Height
Principal building D Maximum height set by zoning district in Appendix C
Accessory buildings - Maximum height set by zoning district in Appendix C
Coverage
Building coverage - Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Impervious surface - Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building Elements
Entrance to building E The front entrance must face the street or a courtyard of sufficient size. Such entrances must
be accentuated by an architectural feature.
Allowable projections in a
required setback area
F Various building features may extend into required setback areas as set forth in s. 11.06.106.
Driveways and Parking
Distance between driveway and
adjoining property boundary line
G Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Distance between parking lot and
adjoining property boundary line
H Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Notes:
1. Also see Division 6 and 7 in Article 6 for general site design principles and architectural standards that may apply.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
D - 7
Commercial
Building Setbacks
Illustration
Symbol
Front yard setback A Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Side yard setback B Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Rear yard setback C Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building Height
Principal building D Maximum height set by zoning district in Appendix C
Accessory buildings E Maximum height set by zoning district in Appendix C
Coverage
Building coverage F Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Impervious surface G Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building Elements
Entrance to building H If the front entrance of the building faces the parking area on the side, the building facade
facing the street must incorporate windows and architectural features. The front entrance
must be accentuated by an architectural feature.
Allowable projections in a
required setback area
- Various building features may extend into required setback areas as set forth in s. 11.06.106.
Driveways and Parking
Distance between driveway and
adjoining property boundary line
I Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Distance between parking lot and
adjoining property boundary line
J Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Notes:
1. Also see Division 6 and 7 in Article 6 for general site design principles and architectural standards that may apply.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
D - 8
Work/live
Building Setbacks
Illustration
Symbol
Front yard setback A Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Side yard setback B Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Rear yard setback C Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building Height
Principal building D Maximum height set by zoning district in Appendix C
Accessory buildings E Maximum height set by zoning district in Appendix C
Coverage
Building coverage F Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Impervious surface G Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building Elements
Entrance to building H The front entrance of the business must face the street or a courtyard of sufficient size. Such
entrances must be accentuated by an architectural feature. The entrance to the dwelling
area may be located in the side or back of the building.
Allowable projections in a
required setback area
I Various building features may extend into required setback areas as set forth in s. 11.06.106.
Garage - When located in a business zoning district, except the B-1 district, a two-car garage
containing at least 400 square feet must be built for each dwelling unit at the same time the
work/live project is being constructed. Such garage may be attached or detached.
Vertical off-sets - When a building includes 5 or more units, there must be a vertical offset of at least 2 feet
between each adjoining unit.
Driveways and Parking
Distance between driveway and
adjoining property boundary line
J Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Distance between parking lot and
adjoining property boundary line
K Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Notes:
1. Also see Appendix B for any supplemental requirements related to this specific building type.
2. Also see Division 6 and 7 in Article 6 for general site design principles and architectural standards that may apply.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
D - 9
Industrial
Building Setbacks
Illustration
Symbol
Front yard setback A Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Side yard setback B Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Rear yard setback C Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building Height
Principal building D Maximum height set by zoning district in Appendix C
Accessory buildings - Maximum height set by zoning district in Appendix C
Coverage
Building coverage - Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Impervious surface - Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building Elements
Allowable projections in a
required setback area
E Various building features may extend into required setback areas as set forth in s. 11.06.106.
Driveways and Parking
Distance between driveway and
adjoining property boundary line
F Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Distance between parking lot and
adjoining property boundary line
G Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Notes:
1. Also see Division 6 and 7 in Article 6 for general site design principles and architectural standards that may apply.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
D - 10
Parking Structure
Building Setbacks
Illustration
Symbol
Front yard setback A Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Side yard setback B Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Rear yard setback C Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building Height
Principal building D Maximum height set by zoning district in Appendix C
Coverage
Building coverage - Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Impervious surface - Maximum amount set by zoning district in Appendix C
Building Elements
Integration of liner businesses and
similar uses at street level
E The Planning Commission may require liner businesses and/or other similar businesses along
major streets when necessary to continue the pedestrian feel. The minimum width of such
units is 16 feet.
Upper floor treatments F The Planning Commission may require treatments on the exterior to mask the appearance of
any side.
Vehicle entrances G Vehicle entrances must be designed and located to minimize interference with pedestrian
movement.
Driveways and Parking
Distance between driveway and
property boundary line
- Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Distance between parking lot and
property boundary line
- Minimum distance set by zoning district in Appendix C
Notes:
1. Also see Division 6 and 7 in Article 6 for general site design principles and architectural standards that may apply.
E - 1
Appendix E
General Definitions
A
(1) A Zone Those areas shown on the official floodplain zoning map which would be inundated by the regional flood. These
areas may be numbered or unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on
the availability of data for a given area.
(2) Abutting Having a common property line.
(3) Accessory building See building, accessory
(4) Accessory use See land use, accessory
(5) Acre A unit for measuring surface area. One acre is equal to 43,560 square feet.
(6) Adult arcade An establishment wherein coin, slug, electronically, or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion
picture machines, projectors, computers, or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(7) Adult bath house An establishment that provides a bath as a service, including all forms and methods of hydrotherapy, that
is not operated by a medical practitioner or a professional physical therapist licensed by the state of Wisconsin and which
provides to its patrons an opportunity for engaging in specified sexual activities.
(8) Adult body painting studio An establishment wherein patrons are afforded an opportunity to be painted or to paint images
on specified anatomical areas. The term does not include a tattoo parlor.
(9) Adult book/video store An establishment having as its stock in trade the sale, rental, or lease for any form of
consideration, any one or more of the following: (a) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed or electronic matter,
photographs, films, motion pictures, recordings, video cassettes, DVDs, video reproductions, slides, closed-circuit
transmission, cable/satellite transmission, subscriber programming, or other visual representations or physical medium
which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on any actual of simulated specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, the removal of articles of clothing, or partial or totally nude appearance; (b) Instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities; (c) Facilities or premises to which
public patrons or members are invited or admitted for the presentation or viewing of adult entertainment as defined herein,
including, but not limited to, adult-oriented films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video reproductions, slides, closed-circuit
transmission, cable/satellite transmission, subscriber programming or other visual representation or physical medium that
allows an image to be displayed or transmitted; and/or any live performance, display, or dance of any type.
(10) Adult cabaret An establishment, such as a nightclub, dance hall, bar, restaurant, or similar establishment, that regularly
features (a) persons who appear nude or semi-nude; (b) live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or (c) film, motion pictures, video cassettes, streaming videos,
DVDs, slides or other photographic or video reproductions or closed-circuit transmission, cable/satellite transmission,
subscriber programming, or other visual representation or physical medium, which are characterized by the exhibition or
display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(11) Adult entertainment Any exhibition of any motion picture, video cassette or recording, photographic reproduction, closedcircuit
transmission, cable/satellite transmission, subscriber programming, or other physical medium that allows an image to
be displayed or transmitted; live performance, display or dance of any type, which has as its dominant theme, or is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on any one or more of the following: (a) specified anatomical areas as
defined in this section, (b) specified sexual activities as defined in this section, or (c) removal of articles of clothing or partial
or total nude appearance.
(12) Adult massage parlor An establishment with or without sleeping accommodations that provides the service of massage or
body manipulation, including exercise, heat, and light treatment of the body, and any form or method of physiotherapy, not
operated by a medical practitioner or professional physical therapist licensed by the state of Wisconsin and which also
provides its patrons with the opportunity to engage in specified sexual activities.
E - 2
(13) Adult modeling studio An establishment that provides the services of modeling for the purpose of reproducing the human
body wholly or partially in the nude by means of photography, painting, sketching, drawing, or other means.
(14) Adult motel An establishment that (a) offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons
with closed-circuit television transmissions, film, motion pictures, video cassettes, video reproductions, slides, cable/satellite
transmission, subscriber programming, or other visual representation or physical medium characterized by depicting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which
advertises the availability of this type of adult entertainment; (b) offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is
less than 10 hours; or (c) allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sublet the room for a period of time that is less
than 10 hours.
(15) Adult theater An enclosed building such as a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or other similar business establishment
which is used for presenting adult entertainment.
(16) AH Zone See area of shallow flooding
(17) Alley An accessway providing vehicular access to the back or side of one or
more lots which also front on a street.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(18) Alteration When used in the context of floodplain regulations, an enhancement, upgrading, or substantial change or
modifications other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and
other systems within a structure.
(19) Animal unit A unit of measure used to regulate the number of various types of livestock and other farm animals by type. In
Wisconsin, one animal unit is equivalent to one beef cow or steer (600 lbs. or more) or any combination of other animals
based on assigned animal unit factors.
(20) Animal unit equivalent factor A numeric value assigned to various types of livestock and other farm animals in relation to
one beef cow or steer (600 lbs. to market) as listed below.
Animal Animal unit factor
Large animals including cows, horses, llamas, mules, donkeys, bison, and other
similar animals 1.0
Sheep
0.3
Goat
0.3
Poultry, including chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, and guineafowl
0.1
Rabbit
0.1
Note: The animals included in this table are illustrative; not all may be allowed in the city.
(21) Annexation The process as authorized by state law by which land is removed from a town and added to a city or village.
(In contrast see detachment)
(22) Antenna Communications equipment that transmits and receives electromagnetic radio signals and is used in the provision
of mobile services.
Note: This definition is based on the corresponding definition in s. 66.0404, Wis. Stats.
E - 3
(23) AO Zone See area of shallow flooding
(24) Appeal A process initiated by an aggrieved party to review a decision made pursuant to this chapter or an alleged failure to
act as required by this chapter.
(25) Applicant A person that submits an application as required by this chapter.
(26) Aquifer A saturated, permeable geologic formation that contains and will yield significant quantities of water.
(27) Arbor A structure over a walkway or other open area often supporting vines or
other plants.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(28) Area of shallow flooding A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map
(FIRM) with a 1 percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flood may be evident. Such flooding
is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
(29) Areaway An excavated area next to a building that provides access, light, or
both, to a door or one or more windows in an exterior basement wall.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(30) Arterial street A public street so designated on the zoning map or map supplement. (In contrast see collector street)
(31) Assessed value The dollar amount assigned to taxable real and personal property by the assessor for the purpose of
taxation.
(32) Auto title loan business Any person licensed pursuant to s. 139.09, Wis. Stats., who makes a loan that is secured by an
interest, other than a purchase money security interest, in the borrower's motor vehicle.
(33)
B
(34)
Awning A sloped, roof-like feature that projects beyond the face of an exterior
wall. An awning is typically placed above a door or window to provide protection
from the sun and precipitation. An awning can be constructed of various
materials, including metal, fabric, or plastic. An awning may be non-retractable or
retractable so as to fold up against the building when not in use. (Also see
canopy and marquee)
Balcony A floor area that projects beyond the exterior wall of an upper story, is
enclosed by a half wall or railing, and is only accessible from the building's
interior. A balcony can be supported by columns or brackets or be cantilevered.
Copyright © Civic Webware
Copyright © Civic Webware
E - 4
(35) Base district See zoning district, base
(36) Base flood The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as part of a flood insurance study (FIS) and depicted on a flood insurance
rate map (FIRM).
(37) Basement An enclosed area of a building having its floor sub-grade (i.e., below ground level, on all sides).
(38) Basement That portion of any structure located partly below the average adjoining lot grade.
(39)
(40)
Berm A mound or embankment of earth typically installed to provide screening
or for aesthetic effect.
Bioswale A feature that is specifically designed to collect stormwater from
parking lots and streets and to infiltrate and filter the collected water. Bioswales
are generally landscaped and include features to handle large stormwater flows.
Copyright © Civic Webware
Copyright © Civic Webware
(41) Block A group of contiguous lots within a well-defined area and bounded by fixed boundaries such as streets, public land,
and waterways. A block is usually assigned a number, letter, or other designation that is commonly used as part of a lot's
legal description (e.g., Lot 1 of Block 2 of Fairway View subdivision).
(42) Board of appeals See Zoning Board of Appeals
(43) Body piercer An individual who performs body piercing on another upon his or her request.
Note: This definition is derived from s. DHS 173.03, Wis. Admin. Code.
(44) Body piercing The perforating of any human body part or tissue, except an ear, and placing a foreign object in the
perforation to prevent the perforation from closing.
Note: This definition is derived from s. DHS 173.03, Wis. Admin. Code.
(45)
(46)
Breezeway A roofed structure without sides that connects two buildings.
Bufferyard A linear strip of undeveloped land, along with landscaping and/or a
fence, that is located between two different zoning districts that have potentially
incompatible characteristics. Bufferyards are intended to create separation
between the incompatible land uses and eliminate or lessen the impacts (e.g.,
noise, dust, glare of lights, outdoor activities) of the more intrusive land use on
the other.
Copyright © Civic Webware
Copyright © Civic Webware
E - 5
(47) Building A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls that is used or intended for the shelter or enclosure of
E - 5
people, animals, equipment, or property of any kind. A building may be enclosed with walls or be open without walls.
(48) Building codes Those regulations adopted by a municipality or the state of Wisconsin that regulate the construction, repair,
alteration, and maintenance of buildings.
(49) Building coverage The area of a lot, expressed as a percent, that is occupied
by those buildings and structures specified in this chapter. Depending on the
context, the term may refer to the actual or proposed amount, or the maximum
amount that is permitted in a particular zoning district. (In contrast see
impervious coverage)
Note: See s. 11.06.109 that describes how building coverage is
measured.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(50) Building height The vertical height of a building from the mean elevation of the finished grade along the front of the
building to the highest point of all roofs. Depending on the context, the term may refer to the height of an existing, proposed,
or permitted building.
Note: See s. 11.06.108 that describes how building height is measured.
(51) Building inspector The individual so designated by the City of Wisconsin Rapids. (In contrast see zoning administrator)
(52) Building permit A permit issued prior to the construction of, or addition to, a structure. (In contrast see zoning permit)
(53) Building scale The relationship between the mass of a building and its surroundings; including streets, open spaces, and
surrounding buildings. Mass is the three-dimensional bulk of a structure: height, width, and depth.
(54) Building, accessory A building or portion of a building used for a purpose customarily incidental to the permitted use of the
lot and located on the same lot as the principal use.
(55) Building, principal The building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is located is conducted.
(56) Bulkhead line A geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and
approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources pursuant to s. 30.11, Wis. Stats., and which allows limited
filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high-water mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the
floodway provisions.
(57) Burden of proof The obligation of a party to establish a fact by evidence.
C
(58) Caliper The diameter of a tree, measured at a point 6 inches above the ground
line if the resulting measurement is not more than 4 inches. If the resulting
measurement is more than 4 inches, the measurement is taken 12 inches above
the ground line.
Note: The plant nursery trade uses this measurement standard, while the
timber industry uses diameter breast height (DBH).
Copyright © Civic Webware
(59) Campground space A designated portion of a campground that is rented for the exclusive use of its occupants. A
campground space may include a parking area, fire ring, table, and other amenities.
(60) Camping unit When used in the context of the floodplain regulations, a portable device, no more than 400 square feet in
area, used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pickup truck, or tent
that is fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway use.
(61) Canopy A permanent, roof-like feature above a driveway or a sidewalk to provide protection from the elements.
(62) Certificate of appropriateness A certificate issued by the Common Council, pursuant to Chapter 31of the municipal code,
approving the alteration, rehabilitation, construction, or demolition of a historic structure, historic site, or any improvement in
a historic district.
(63) Certificate of compliance A certification that the construction and the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the
lowest floor of a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this ordinance.
E - 6
(64) CFR An abbreviation for Code of Federal Regulations
(65) Channel A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct normal flow of water.
(66) City The City of Wisconsin Rapids, Wood County, state of Wisconsin.
(67) Clear vision triangle See vision triangle
(68) Collector street A public street so designated on the zoning map or map supplement. (In contrast see arterial street)
(69) Co-location The location of multiple antennas of more than one commercial wireless communication service provider or
governmental entity on a single tower or alternative tower structure.
(70) Commercial zoning district A base zoning district so designated in s. 11.06.02. (See also industrial zoning district,
residential zoning district, and special zoning district)
(71) Common Council The City of Wisconsin Rapids Common Council, state of Wisconsin.
(72) Compost bin A structure built to house compost which aids in the decomposition of organic matter through aeration and
water retention.
(73) Comprehensive plan The document adopted by the Common Council consistent with s. 66.1001, Wis. Stats.
(74) Conditional use See land use, conditional
(75) Conditional use order A written decision issued by the Plan Commission authorizing the zoning administrator to issue a
conditional use permit provided those conditions imposed by the commission precedent to the issuance of the permit have
been satisfied.
(76) Conditional use permit A permit issued by the zoning administrator authorizing establishment of a conditional use
consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
(77) Condominium A form of property ownership under ch. 703, Wis. Stats., where multiple owners individually own specified
portions of a building along with any common elements.
(78) Cone of depression The area around a well, in which the water level has been lowered at least one-tenth of a foot by
pumping of the well. (current zoning code)
(79) Conversion order A written decision authorizing the property owner to convert an existing nonconforming use to a different
nonconforming use that is determined to be of the same or lesser degree of nonconformity.
(80) Corner lot See lot, corner
(81) Cottage housing development A residential project characterized by comparatively small housing units that front on a
common area. (In contrast see traditional neighborhood development)
(82) Courtyard An uncovered area that is completely or partially enclosed by walls
or buildings.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(83) Crawl space An enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building, generally less than 5 feet in height, used for access
to plumbing and electrical utilities. (In contrast see basement)
(84) Curb The barrier used to separate a street and other vehicle use areas from the surrounding environs.
(85) Cutoff luminaire See luminaire, cutoff
D
(86) Deck A structure characterized by a flat, unroofed, horizontal surface or platform
suspended above the grade of the land it covers and which may be supported by
posts, beams, cantilever, or other similar methods. A deck must have a
permeable surface to allow the infiltration of precipitation. (In contrast see stoop)
Copyright © Civic Webware
E - 7
(87) Detachment The process as authorized by state law by which land is removed from a city or village and added to a town.
(In contrast see annexation)
(88) Development An activity that must comply with, or is anyway regulated by, this chapter.
(89) Development agreement A contract between a developer and a municipality that describes the obligations of one or both
parties regarding a private development project.
(90) Dimensional variance See variance, dimensional
(91) Disability A mental or physical impairment that substantially limits one or more life activity.
(92) District See zoning district
(93) Dog enclosure Any outdoor structure or enclosure used to restrict dogs to a contained yard area.
(94) Double frontage lot See lot, through
(95) Drainage system When used in the context of shoreland-wetland zoning regulations, one or more artificial ditches, tile
drains, or similar devices which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey it to a point of discharge.
(96) Drip line A line on the ground established by a vertical plane extending from a
tree's outermost branch tips down to the ground.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(97) Driveway A private route of ingress and egress from a private or public right-of-way, which provides access to a residential
dwelling, business, or properties.
(98) Dryland access A vehicular access route which is above the regional flood
elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the
floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood elevation and
wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(99) Dwelling unit A building, or portion thereof, that provides complete, independent living facilities for one household unit,
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
E
(100) Easement A non-possessory legal interest a person has in the property of another for a specific use. An easement may
apply to the entire property or a portion thereof and may be perpetual or temporary, expiring after a period of time or after a
certain event occurs.
(101) Electric vehicle (EV) charging station An appartus mounted on a wall or on a
pedestal that is used to charge the battery in an electric vehicle.
Copyright © Civic Webware
E - 8
(102) Encroachment Any fill, structure, equipment, use, or development in the floodway.
(103) Environmental control facility When used in the context of shoreland-wetland zoning regulations, a temporary or
permanent facility that is reasonably expected to abate, reduce, or aid in the prevention, measurement, control, or
monitoring of noise, air, or water pollutants, solid waste and thermal, radiation or other pollutants, including facilities installed
principally to supplement or to replace existing property or equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting acceptable
pollution control standards or which are to be supplemented or replaced by other pollution control facilities.
(104) Equipment compound When used in the context of telecommunication
facilities, the area surrounding or adjacent to the base of an existing support
structure within which is located mobile service facilities.
Note: Definition derived from s. 66.0404(1), Wis. Stats.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(105) Established road grade The elevation of the finished road at the centerline as fixed by the city engineer or building
inspector.
F
(106) FAA An abbreviation for Federal Aviation Administration
(107) Facade The exterior face of a building including projections from and attachments to the building's face. Projections and
attachments include balconies, decks, porches, awnings, and chimneys.
(108) Fall zone When used in the context of telecommunication facilities, the area over which a mobile support structure is
designed to collapse.
Note: Definition taken from s. 66.0404(1), Wis. Stats.
(109) Family See household unit
(110) Farm drainage ditch An artificial channel that drains water from lands currently used for agricultural purposes.
Note: This term is used in the definition for navigable water.
(111) FCC An abbreviation for Federal Communications Commission
(112) Federal Communications Commission (FCC) A federal agency established by the Communications Act of 1934 to
regulate broadcast communications (e.g., wire, radio, and television) in the United States.
(113) Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) A federal agency created in 1979 with a mission to reduce loss of life
and property and protect our nation's critical infrastructure from all types of hazards through a comprehensive, risk-based
emergency management program of mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery. It administers the National Flood
Insurance Program among others.
(114) FEMA An acronym for Federal Emergency Management Agency
(115) Financial guarantee A written guarantee, such as a letter of credit, that a developer submits to the City to ensure the
completion of an obligation relating to a development project.
(116) Fire lane A hard surfaced travelway extending along one or more sides of a building or other structure that provides access
exclusively for fire fighters.
(117) FIRM An acronym for flood insurance rate map
(118) FIS An abbreviation for flood insurance study
E - 9
(119) Five-year time of travel The 5-year time of travel is the recharge area upgradient of the cone of depression, the outer
boundary of which it is determined or estimated that groundwater will take five years to reach a pumping well.
(120) Fixed houseboat A structure not actually used for navigation which extends beyond the ordinary high-water mark of a
navigable waterway and is retained in place either by cables to the shoreline or by anchors or spudpoles attached to the bed
of the waterway.
Note: This definition based on corresponding definition in s. 30.121(1), Wis. Stats.
(121) Flag lot See lot, flag
(122) Flood A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by (1) the
overflow or rise of inland waters; (2) the rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; (3) the inundation
caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake
Superior; or (4) the sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event.
(123) Flood frequency The probability of a flood occurrence, which is determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a
particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in a specified number of years or as a percent
(%) chance of occurring in any given year.
(124) Flood hazard boundary map A map designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as
unnumbered A-Zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for both the
regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a flood insurance
study and a flood insurance rate map.
(125) Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) A map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the floodplain and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
(126) Flood insurance study (FIS) A technical engineering examination, evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard
areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones
and base flood elevations and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and
unnumbered A-Zones. Flood insurance rate maps that accompany the flood insurance study form the basis for both the
regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program.
(127) Flood profile A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to
locations of land surface elevations along a stream or river.
(128) Flood protection elevation An elevation of 2 feet of freeboard above the water surface profile elevation designated for the
regional flood. (Also see freeboard)
(129) Flood storage Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account during analysis in
reducing the regional flood discharge.
(130) Floodfringe That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway that is covered by flood waters during the regional flood
and associated with standing water rather than flowing water. (In contrast see floodway)
(131) Floodplain Land that has been or may be covered by flood water during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the
floodfringe, and may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes. (Also see regional flood)
(132) Floodplain island A natural geologic land formation within the floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater
during the regional flood.
(133) Floodplain management Policies and procedures to ensure wise use of floodplains, including mapping and engineering,
mitigation, education, and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations.
(134) Floodproofing Any combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures, water and
sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage.
(135) Floodway The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the
regional flood discharge. In contrast see floodfringe)
(136) Floor area The maximum horizontal projected area of a building measured at each level from outside wall to outside wall.
(137) Footcandle (FC) The unit of measure expressing the quantity of light received on a surface. One footcandle is the
illuminance produced by a candle on a surface one foot square from a distance of one foot.
(138) Freeboard A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard
E - 10
compensates for any factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice jams, debris accumulation,
wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage
areas due to development and aggregation of the river or stream bed.
(139) Front yard See yard, front
(140) Frontage The portion of a lot abutting a public street measured along the street line. On corner lots, this shall be interpreted
as the portion of the public street by which the structure is addressed. In all commercial and industrial zones, the front yard
dimension must be taken from the right-of-way line of the principal street, as determined by the engineering department.
(current zoning code)
(141) Fugitive dust Solid airborne particulate matter resulting from any activity conducted on a parcel.
G
(142) Glare The stray unshielded light striking the eye that may result in (i) nuisance or annoyance glare such as the light shining
into a window; (ii) discomfort glare such as bright light causing squinting of the eyes; or (iii) disabling glare such as bright
light reducing the ability of the eyes to see into shadows or reduction of visual performance.
(143) Groundwater Technical Review Committee The body created pursuant to Article 3.
H
(144) Habitable structure A structure or portion thereof used or designed for human habitation.
(145) Hazard A condition, whether manmade or natural, that presents a tangible danger to the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
(146) Hazardous substance A material regulated by the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986, 42
USC 1101-11050, as may be amended.
(147) Hazardous waste A waste or combination of wastes that because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or
infectious characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious
irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of or otherwise managed.
(148) Height of building See building height
(149) High flood damage potential Damage that could result from flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any
significant economic loss to a structure or building and its contents.
(150) Highest adjacent grade The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed
walls of a structure.
(151) Highway width map A map adopted by Wood County pursuant to s. 66.1031, Wis. Stats.
(152) Historic site Any parcel of land so designated by the Common Council pursuant to the procedures and requirements in
Chapter 31 of the municipal code.
(153) Historic structure When used in the context of floodplain regulations, a structure that is (i) listed individually in the National
Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register; (ii) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary
to qualify as a registered historic district; (iii) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (iv) individually listed on a local
inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an
approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(154) Holiday lighting A string of individual low-wattage lamps temporarily installed in connection with a holiday or religious
observance and removed after such observance.
(155) Household unit An individual living alone in a dwelling unit, or 2 or more individuals living together in a dwelling unit who
are related by blood, marriage, adoption, or other legal means, or a group of not more than 4 individuals who are not so
E - 11
related who live together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. A single housekeeping entity infers the use in
common of all spaces, household services, and utilities with a single source of food preparation for all occupants.
I
(156) Impervious coverage The area of a lot that substantially reduces or prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground.
Depending on the context, impervious coverage could refer to the actual or proposed amount, or the maximum amount that
is permitted in a zoning district. (In contrast see building coverage)
Note: See s. 11.06.110 that describes how impervious coverage is measured.
(157)
(158)
Increase in regional flood height A calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevation greater than 0.01 foot, based on
a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions, which is directly attributable to development in the floodplain
but not attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction
coefficients, and discharge.
Industrial zoning district A base zoning district so designated in s. 11.06.02. (See also commercial zoning district,
(159)
residential zoning district, and special zoning district)
Interior lot See lot, interior
L
(160) Lamp The component of a luminaire that produces the actual light.
(161) Land The earth, water, and air, above, below, or on the surface.
(162) Land use As the context indicates, (i) the development that has occurred on the land, (ii) development that is proposed for
(163)
the land, or (iii) the use permitted for the land under this chapter.
Land use, accessory A land use that is subordinate to and customarily incidental to the permitted principal use of the
(164)
property or buildings and located upon the same lot as the principal use.
Land use, conditional A land use, which by its nature, character, or circumstance, is so unique or so dependent upon
(165)
specific conditions that permissibility by right is not practical, but which may be permitted subject to certain conditions and
requirements as determined by the reviewing authority.
Land use, permitted by right A land use that is allowed throughout a specified zoning district. Land uses permitted by right
(166)
may be reviewed to ensure that all provisions of local, state, and federal regulations are met.
Land use, principal The main or primary use of a property as may be allowed under this chapter.
(167)
Note: In some situations, a parcel of land can have more than one principal land use.
Land use, temporary A land use which is on a parcel of land for a limited and specified period of time.
(168) Landscape island An area reserved for landscaping within a parking lot or
other paved or improved area.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(169) Landscape plan A drawing of a subject property that shows existing and/or proposed landscaping elements and other
features as required by this chapter. Depending on the nature of the development project, the content of a landscaping plan
can be shown on a site plan. (Also see site plan)
(170) Legal nonconforming building See nonconforming building
(171) Legal nonconforming lot See nonconforming lot
(172) Legal nonconforming structure See nonconforming structure
(173) Legal nonconforming use See nonconforming use
(174) Light fixture See luminaire
(175) Light pollution Any adverse effect of artificial light including, glare, light trespass, sky glow, energy waste, compromised
E - 12
safety and security, and impacts on the nocturnal environment.
(176) Light trespass Light that falls beyond the property it is intended to illuminate.
(177) Livestock Any of the following animals: bovine animals, equine animals, goats, poultry, sheep, swine, farm-raised deer,
farm-raised game birds, camelids (e.g., alpacas, lamas, camels), and ratites (e.g., emus, ostriches).
(178) Loading area A designated place on a parcel of land that is used for the loading
or unloading of freight carriers.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(179) Lot A land area having a definable location based on a survey or similar legal instrument recorded by the Wood County
register of deeds. Where a navigable stream, navigable body of water, mil tax road, or public right-of-way divides a single
described parcel into two or more parts, such severed portions shall be considered separate individual lots provided they
meet the use, building location, and area regulations of the zoning district in which they are located. Where such separate
parcels do not meet such use, building, location, and area regulations they, in combination, shall be considered to be a
single lot for regulatory purposes, computation of area requirements, and other locational provisions of this chapter.
(180) Lot area As the context indicates, the minimum required area of a lot, actual area of a lot, or proposed area.
Note: See s. 11.06.102 that describes how lot area is measured.
(181) Lot line A line dividing one parcel of land from another.
(182) Lot line, front The lot line described for each of the following types of lots. (1) For an interior lot, the property boundary line
abutting a road right-of-way. (2) For a corner lot, the line abutting a street providing physical access (i.e., driveway) to the
property. (3) For a through lot, the property boundary line abutting the road providing the primary access to the lot. (4) For a
flag lot, the interior lot line most parallel to and nearest the road from which physical access is obtained.
(183) Lot line, rear A lot line that does not intersect a front lot line and that is most distant from and most closely parallel to the
front lot line.
(184) Lot line, side A lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.
(185) Lot width The width of a parcel of land measured at the front of the specified street yard. Depending on the context, the
term can refer to the required width of a lot, actual width, or proposed width.
Note: See s. 11.06.103 that describes how lot width is measured.
(186)
(187)
(188)
Lot, corner A lot situated at the junction of and fronting on two or more streets.
A lot abutting on a curved street is considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn
from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot meet
at an interior angle of 135 degrees or less.
Lot, double frontage An interior lot having street frontage on the front and the
rear of the lot.
Lot, flag A lot which has a narrow strip of land that extends from street to the
Copyright © Civic Webware
Copyright © Civic Webware
Copyright © Civic Webware
E - 13
main part of the lot where a building could be lawfully constructed.
(189) Lot, interior A lot that abuts only one street and has lots along both of its sides.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(190) Lot, through A lot having a frontage on two streets that are more or less parallel to one another. On a through lot, both
street lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
(191) Lowest adjacent grade The elevation of the lowest ground surface that touches any of the exterior walls of a building.
(192) Lowest floor The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure,
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a
building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable
non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
(193) Low-impact stormwater design A design approach to stormwater management intended to mimic the predevelopment
hydrology of a site. Initial site design strategies include minimizing impervious surfaces and the integration of existing
wetlands, riparian areas, and other environmentally sensitive natural resources into the overall site design. Manmade
features, generally distributed throughout the site, are also used to store, infiltrate, evaporate, and detain stormwater runoff.
Examples of such features include bioswales, rain gardens, and pervious surfaces. This term is sometimes referred to as
low impact development (LID).
(194) Lumen A unit of measure used to quantify the amount of light produced by a lamp or emitted from a luminaire.
Note: The lumen output of a lamp is typically listed on the packaging. A 60-watt incandescent lamp produces 950
lumens and a 55-watt low-pressure sodium lamp produces 8,000 lumens.
(195) Luminaire A complete lighting unit, consisting of one or more lamps and ballast(s), if any, together with the parts designed
to distribute the light (e.g., reflector, lens, diffuser), to position and protect the lamps, and to connect the lamps to the power
supply.
(196) Luminaire, cutoff A luminaire that is designed and installed so that the luminous intensity at or above an angle of 90
degrees above nadir (as measured directly below the lamp to the ground) does not exceed 2.5 percent of the luminous flux
of the lamp or lamps in the luminaire, and the luminous intensity at or above a vertical angle of 80 degrees above nadir does
not exceed 10 percent of the luminous flux of the lamp or lamps in the luminaire.
(197) Luminaire, shielded A luminaire that is designed and installed so that light rays emitted by the fixture, either directly from
the lamp or indirectly from the fixture, are projected below a horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture
where light is emitted.
M
(198) Maintenance and repair See ordinary maintenance and repair
(199) Manufactured home A dwelling unit that is constructed in an off-site facility in
conformance with the federal construction and safety standards established by
the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended.
Copyright © Civic Webware
E - 14
Note: A manufactured home bears a red insignia which certifies that it
meets all applicable federal construction and safety standards.
(200) Marquee A flat, roof-like feature that projects beyond the face of an exterior
wall. A marquee is typically placed above a door or window to provide protection
from the sun and precipitation. (Also see awning)
Copyright © Civic Webware
(201) Mausoleum An above-ground structure that is used or intended to be used for the burial of human remains.
(202) Mausoleum, private A mausoleum designed to hold no more than 10 human remains and no spaces are offered for sale to
the general public.
(203) Mausoleum, public A mausoleum designed to hold more than 10 human remains or a mausoleum in which at least one
mausoleum space is offered for sale to the general public.
(204) Mitigate To take an action designed to offset or rectify a negative effect.
(205) Mobile home A dwelling unit that was originally constructed prior to June 15, 1976, and that is (i) constructed off-site, (ii)
equipped with the necessary utility service connections, (iii) made to be readily movable as a unit or units on its (their) own
running gear, and (iv) designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation.
Note: After June 15, 1976 no mobile homes have been constructed.
(206) Mobile home space A designated area of a mobile home park that is designed to accommodate either one manufactured
home or one mobile home for exclusive use of the occupants.
(207) Mobile service A radio communication service carried on between mobile stations or receivers and land stations, and by
mobile stations communicating among themselves, and includes (i) both one-way and two-way radio communication
services; (ii) a mobile service which provides a regularly interacting group of base, mobile, portable, and associated control
and relay stations (whether licensed on an individual, cooperative, or multiple basis) for private one-way or two-way land
mobile radio communications by eligible users over designated areas of operation; and (iii) any service for which a license is
required in a personal communications service established pursuant to the proceeding entitled "Amendment to the
Commission's Rules to Establish New Personal Communications Services" (GEN Docket No. 90-314; ET Docket No. 92-
100), or any successor proceeding.
Note: This definition is based on the corresponding definition in s. 66.0404, Wis. Stats.
(208) Mobile service facility The set of equipment and network components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base
stations, power supplies, cabling, and associated equipment, that is necessary to provide mobile service to a discrete
geographic area, but does not include the underlying support structure.
Note: This definition is based on the corresponding definition in s. 66.0404, Wis. Stats.
(209) Mobile service provider A person who provides mobile service.
Note: This definition is based on the corresponding definition in s. 66.0404, Wis. Stats.
(210) Model, corrected effective A hydraulic engineering model that corrects any errors that occur in the Duplicate Effective
Model, adds any additional cross sections to the Duplicate Effective Model, or incorporates more detailed topographic
information than that used in the current effective model.
(211) Model, duplicate effective A copy of the hydraulic analysis used in the effective flood insurance study and referred to as
the effective model.
(212) Model, effective The hydraulic engineering model that was used to produce the current effective flood insurance study.
E - 15
(213) Model, existing (pre-project) A modification of the Duplicate Effective Model or Corrected Effective Model to reflect any
man-made modifications that have occurred within the floodplain since the date of the effective model but prior to the
construction of the project for which the revision is being requested. If no modification has occurred since the date of the
effective model, then this model would be identical to the Corrected Effective Model or Duplicate Effective Model.
(214) Model, revised (post-project) A modification of the Existing or Pre-Project Conditions Model, Duplicate Effective Model or
Corrected Effective Model to reflect revised or post-project conditions.
(215) Modular home A dwelling unit that meets local building codes and which was constructed off site in a factory as separate
modules which are joined together and set on a permanent foundation.
(216) Mulch A nonliving organic or inorganic material customarily used in landscape design to retard erosion, retain soil moisture,
maintain even soil temperature, control weeds, and/or enrich the soil. Examples of materials often used include tree bark,
wood chips, and decorative stones.
(217) Municipal code The compilation of laws as adopted by the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
(218) Municipal water supply The municipal water supply of the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
N
(219) Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) A federal agency created in 1935 within the U.S. Department of
Agriculture to work with private land owners and managers to conserve their soil, water, and other natural resources by
providing technical and financial assistance. From 1935 to 1994, it was known as the Soil Conservation Service (SCS).
(220) NAVD (North American Vertical Datum) Elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment.
(221) Navigable waterway Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, natural inland lakes, streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages, and other
waters, including the Wisconsin portion of boundary waters, which are navigable under the laws of this state. The term does
not include farm drainage ditches if (i) such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river, (ii) those parts of
such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not navigable streams before ditching, and (iii) such lands are
maintained in nonstructural agricultural use. (Also see farm drainage ditch)
Note: In Wisconsin, a navigable body of water is capable of floating the lightest boat or skiff used for recreation or
any other purpose on a regularly recurring basis. See DeGayner & Co., Inc. v. DNR, 70 Wis. 2d 936 (1975) and
Village of Menomonee Falls v. DNR, 140 Wis. 2d 579 (Ct. App. 1987).
(222)
(223)
New construction For floodplain management purposes, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or
after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it includes any structures for which
the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever
is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NGVD (National Geodetic Vertical Datum) Elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
(224) Nonconforming building A building that at the time of construction conformed to the then existing regulations including
(225)
size, height, location, and other dimensional standards, but is now inconsistent with this chapter.
Nonconforming lot A lot that at the time of creation conformed to the then existing regulations including lot size,
(226)
dimensions, lot configuration, and other dimensional and design standards, but is now inconsistent with this chapter.
Nonconforming structure A structure that at the time of construction or placement conformed to the then existing
(227)
regulations including size, location, and other dimensional standards, but is now inconsistent with this chapter.
Nonconforming use A use of land that at the time of establishment conformed to the then existing regulations, but is now
(228)
inconsistent with this chapter.
NRCS An abbreviation for Natural Resources Conservation Service
O
(229) Obstruction to flow Any development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that this development alone or
(230)
together with any future development will cause an increase in regional flood height.
Official floodplain zoning map That map, adopted and made part of this chapter, as described in s. 11.09.21, which has
been approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency
E - 16
(FEMA).
(231) Offset See setback
(232) Operating standards Regulations in this chapter that control the ongoing operation of a land use, including related
business practices.
(233) Ordinary high-water mark (OHWM) The point on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a
distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized
characteristic. Where the bank or shore of any particular place is of such
character that it is difficult or impossible to ascertain where the point of ordinary
high-water mark is, recourse may be had to the opposite bank of a stream or to
other places on the shore of a lake or flowage to determine whether a given
stage of water is above or below the ordinary high-water mark.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(234) Ordinary maintenance and repair Those activities related to the general day-to-day maintenance of a building or other
similar structure including interior remodeling; painting, decorating, paneling, plumbing, insulation, the repair of cracks in a
foundation wall, the application of waterproof coatings to a foundation wall, and the replacement of windows, doors, electric
wiring, siding, roofing materials, and other nonstructural components. (In contrast see structural alteration)
(235) Overlay district See zoning district, overlay
P
(236) Panelized home A dwelling unit that meets local building codes and which was constructed off site in a factory generally as
flat panels (e.g., walls, roof, and floor) which are joined together and set on a permanent foundation.
(237)
(238)
Parking space An area permanently reserved and maintained for the parking of
one motor vehicle that meets the dimensional and access standards of this
chapter.
Patio An at-grade surfaced area intended for outdoor living that may be next to
a building or separated from a building.
Copyright © Civic Webware
Copyright © Civic Webware
(239) Payday loan business Any person licensed pursuant to s. 218.05, Wis. Stats., or a person licensed pursuant to s. 139.09,
Wis. Stats., who accepts a check, holds the check for a period of time before negotiating or presenting the check for
payment, and pays to the issuer an agreed-upon amount of cash, or who refinances or consolidates such a transaction.
(240) PDD An abbreviation for planned development district
(241) Permanent foundation A foundation wall under the entire perimeter of a building.
(242) Permitted use See land use, permitted by right
(243) Person An individual, corporation, governmental agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, two or more
persons having a joint or common interest, or any other legal entity.
(244) Pier A structure extending into navigable waters from the shore with water on both sides, that is built or maintained for the
E - 17
purpose of
providing
a berth for
Copyright © Civic Webware
E - 17
watercraft or for loading or unloading cargo or passengers onto or from
watercraft. Such a structure may include a boat shelter which is removed
seasonally. Such a structure may include a boat hoist or boat lift, and the hoist or
lift may be permanent or may be removed seasonally. (Also see wharf)
(245) Plan of operation A document describing the operation of a particular enterprise and other related matters as may be
required by this chapter. (Also see site plan)
(246) Planned development district (PDD) A base zoning district established pursuant to this chapter that has "PDD" followed
by a number as its abbreviation (e.g., PDD-01).
(247) Planning Commission The commission established by the Common Council to make recommendations and decisions
relating to planning and land use issues as authorized by this chapter and Wisconsin Statutes.
(248) Playhouse An accessory building, either at ground level or elevated, or supported by a tree, characteristically used by
children for play.
(249) Porch A part of a building with a roof of its own that covers an entrance.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(250) Pre-cut home A dwelling unit that meets local building codes and which was largely constructed off site in a factory and
then disassembled and transported to the site where it is reassembled and set on a permanent foundation.
(251) Principal building The primary building on a lot housing a principal use.
(252) Principal land use See land use, principal
(253) Principal use See land use, principal
(254) Private sewage system A sewage treatment and disposal system serving one structure with a septic tank and soil
absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage system approved by the
Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field,
a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system located on a different parcel than the structure.
(255) Property boundary line See lot line
(256) Public notice The means that a governmental body uses, or is required to use, to formally notify people and other
interested entities of a pending governmental hearing or proposed action.
(257) Public utilities When used in context of the floodplain regulations, those utilities using underground or overhead
transmission lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary
sewer and storm sewer.
(258) Public utility A public utility as defined in s. 196.01, Wis. Stats.
Note: This definition is based on the corresponding definition in s. 66.0404, Wis. Stats.
R
(259) Rain garden A planted area that is designed, with respect to placement and plant selection, to filter and temporarily store
stormwater runoff from impervious surfaces.
(260) Rear yard See yard, rear
(261) Reasonably safe from flooding Base flood waters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the
floodplain and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings.
(262) Recharge area The area which encompasses all areas or features that, by surface infiltration of water that reaches the
E - 18
zone of saturation of an aquifer, supplies groundwater to a well.
(263) Recreational vehicle (RV) A motorized vehicle that has a cabin for living accommodations and is commonly used for
recreational travel and touring. Vehicles included in this category come in several forms including travel trailers, tent trailers
and camping trailers, all of which must be towed by another vehicle; and truck campers, motor homes, and camper vehicles,
all of which have a motor within the body of the vehicle and are self-propelled.
(264) Regional flood A flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional
flood is a flood with a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the flood
insurance rate maps (FIRM), the regional flood elevations is equivalent to the base flood elevation (BFE).
(265) Repair and maintenance See ordinary maintenance and repair
(266) Residential zoning district A base zoning district so designated in s. 11.06.02. (See also commercial zoning district,
industrial zoning district, and special zoning district)
(267) Reviewing authority As the context indicates, the zoning administrator, Planning Commission, Common Council, or Zoning
Board of Appeals.
(268) Rezoning See zoning map amendment
(269) Right-of-way A strip of land dedicated to or acquired by the City of Wisconsin Rapids, Wood County, or the state of
Wisconsin for public use. (In contrast see easement)
S
(270) Screen A feature, such as a wall, fence, hedge, berm, or similar feature used to shield or obscure elements of a
development from adjacent sites.
(271) Search ring When used in the context of telecommunication facilities, a shape drawn on a map to indicate the general area
within which a mobile service support structure should be located to meet radio frequency engineering requirements, taking
into account other factors including topography and the demographics of the service area.
Note: Definition taken from s. 66.0404(1), Wis. Stats.
(272) Setback As the context indicates, the minimum required distance between a building and one or more lot lines, the actual
distance, or the proposed distance.
Note: See s. 11.06.106 that describes how setbacks are measured.
(273) Setback averaging An approach to determining the minimum required setback when the subject property is in an area of
previously developed lots and the actual setbacks on those lots are less than the required setback for the district in which
the subject property is located.
(274) Shared driveway A driveway that serves two adjoining parcels and that is
generally centered on the shared lot line.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(275) Shared parking One or more parking spaces that partially or entirely meet the parking requirements of two or more land
uses.
(276) Shielded luminaire See luminaire, shielded
(277) Shoreline buffer zone An area extending from the ordinary high-water mark of navigable water bodies landward for a
horizontal distance of 35 feet.
(278) Shoreline setback A building setback requirement extending from the ordinary high-water mark of navigable waterbodies
landward for a horizontal distance of 50 feet.
(279) Side yard See yard, side
(280) Sight triangle See vision triangle
(281) Site plan A drawing of a subject property that shows existing and proposed conditions and other features required by this
E - 19
chapter. (Also see plan of operation and landscaping plan)
(282) Site visit A walking tour of a property that is subject to a pending application. Participants may include members of the
review authority, city staff, the applicant and his/her agents, and members of the public. A site visit must be conducted in
compliance with Wisconsin's open meeting requirements, other state and federal requirements, and this chapter.
(283) Site-built home A dwelling unit that meets the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code standards and which was largely
constructed on site. Also known as a "conventional home" or "stick-built home."
(284) Sky glow The brightening of the nighttime sky that results from scattering and reflection of artificial light by moisture and
dust particles in the atmosphere. Sky glow is caused by light directed or reflected upwards or sideways and reduces one's
ability to view the night sky.
(285) Slope An incline from the horizontal expressed in an arithmetic ratio of horizontal magnitude to vertical magnitude. For
example, a 3:1 slope is 3 feet horizontal and 1 foot vertical.
(286) Special exception An approval that may be granted by the Planning Commission to deviate from otherwise applicable
provisions of this chapter when certain circumstances apply. (In contrast see variance)
(287) Special purpose zoning district A base zoning district so designated in s. 11.06.02. (See also commercial zoning district,
industrial zoning district, and residential zoning district)
(288) Sport court A hard-surfaced area located out of doors used exclusively for
basketball, tennis, or other similar sports-related activity. This term does not
include any portion of a private driveway that is also used for a sport-related use.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(289) Start of construction When used in the context of floodplain regulations, the date the building permit was issued, provided
the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 calendar days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond initial
excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
(290) State The state of Wisconsin.
(291)
(292)
Steeple A tower that rises above the building of which it is part and which is
capped with a tall roof form tapering to a point.
Stoop A raised platform in front of an entrance to a building with one or more
steps. (In contrast see deck, which is intended for outdoor living.)
Copyright © Civic Webware
Copyright © Civic Webware
E - 20
(293) Stormwater Water from a rainfall event or melting snow or ice.
(294) Story That portion of a building, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if
there is not floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
(295) Stream A natural body of running water flowing continuously or intermittently in a channel on or below the surface of the
ground.
(296) Street A hard-surfaced travelway, generally within a public right-of-way or an easement, that is open to the public for
vehicular travel.
(297) Street terrace The area between the back of a curb or the edge of pavement where there is no curb and the closest
property boundary line.
(298) Street yard See yard, front
(299) Street, private A street not maintained by the City of Wisconsin Rapids, Wood County, the state of Wisconsin, or the
federal government.
(300) Street, public A street maintained by the City of Wisconsin Rapids, Wood County, the state of Wisconsin, or the federal
government.
(301) Structural alteration Any change in a supporting member of a building such as foundation, exterior wall, column, beam, or
girder or any substantial change in the roof structure. (In contrast see ordinary maintenance and repair)
(302) Structure A manmade object with form, shape, and utility that is either permanently or temporarily placed on or into the
ground, a stream bed, or a lake bed, or on another structure. Examples include buildings, decks, patios, stoops, play
structures, swimming pools, hot tubs, tents, bridges, storage tanks, fences, towers, flag poles, utility poles, pipelines,
transmission lines, smokestacks, and signs.
(303) Subdivision Has the meaning given in s. 236.02(12), Wis. Stats.
(304) Substandard lot See nonconforming lot
(305) Substantial damage Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, where the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
(306) Substantial evidence Facts and information, other than merely personal preferences or speculation, directly pertaining to
the requirements and conditions an applicant must meet to obtain a conditional use permit and that reasonable persons
would accept in support of a conclusion.
Note: This definition is based on the definition in s. 62.23(7)(de), Wis. Stats.
(307) Substantial improvement Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a building or structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the improvement or
repair is started. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement
regardless of the work preformed. The term does not, however, include either any project for the improvement of a building
required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
(308) Substantial modification When used in the context of telecommunication facilities, the modification of a mobile service
support structure, including the mounting of an antenna on such a structure, that does any of the following:
(a) For structures with an overall height of 200 feet or less, increases the overall height of the structure by more than 20 feet,
except as provided below.
(b) For structures with an overall height of more than 200 feet, increases the overall height of the structure by 10 percent or
E - 21
more, except as provided below.
(c) Measured at the level of the appurtenance added to the structure as a result of the modification, increases the width of
the support structure by 20 feet or more, unless a larger area is necessary for collocation, except as provided below.
(d) Increases the square footage of an existing equipment compound to a total area of more than 2,500 square feet. An
activity is not a substantial modification under subs. (a) and (b) above, if a greater height is necessary to avoid interference
with an existing antenna. Furthermore, an activity is not a substantial modification under sub. (c) above, if a greater
protrusion is necessary to shelter the antenna from inclement weather or to connect the antenna to the existing structure by
cable.
Note: Definition derived from s. 66.0404, Wis. Stats.
(309) Sunshade A fixture, consisting of fixed panels or louvers, that is permanently
mounted to the exterior of a building to shade a window.
Copyright © Civic Webware
(310) Support structure An existing or new structure that supports or can support a mobile service facility, including a mobile
service support structure, utility pole, water tower, building, or other structure.
Note: Definition taken from s. 66.0404(1), Wis. Stats.
T
(311) Tattoo To insert pigment under the surface of the skin of an individual by pricking with a needle or other instrument or
technique so as to produce an indelible mark or figure through the skin.
Note: Definition derived from s. DHS 173.03, Wis. Admin. Code.
(312) Tattooist An individual who tattoos another upon his or her request.
Note: Definition derived from s. DHS 173.03, Wis. Admin. Code.
(313) Temporary use See land use, temporary
(314) Thirty-day time of travel The recharge area upgradient of a well, or its cone of depression, the outer boundary of which it
(315)
is determined or estimated that groundwater will take 30 days to reach a pumping well.
Through lot See lot, through
(316) TND An abbreviation for traditional neighborhood development
(317) Tourist or transient A person who travels to a location away from his or her permanent address for a period of less than 30
(318)
consecutive calendar days for vacation, pleasure, recreation, culture, business, or employment.
Traditional neighborhood development (TND) A development that is characterized by grid street pattern with alleys,
(319)
buildings oriented to the street, front porches on houses, a focus on pedestrian facilities, a mix of compatible land uses, and
village squares or greens. (In contrast see cottage housing development)
Trellis A structure consisting of lattice with supporting posts and rails often supporting vines or other plants and used for
aesthetic purposes or as a visual screen or barrier, or both.
U
(320) Use variance See variance, use
(321) Utility pole When used in the context of telecommunication facilities, a structure owned or operated by an alternative
telecommunications utility, as defined in s. 196.01(1d), Wis. Stats.; public utility, as defined in s. 196.01(5), Wis. Stats.;
telecommunications utility, as defined in s. 196.01(10), Wis. Stats.; political subdivision; or cooperative association organized
under ch. 185, Wis. Stats.; and that is designed specifically for and used to carry lines, cables, or wires for
telecommunications service, as defined in s. 182.017(1g)(cq), Wis. Stats.; for video service, as defined in s. 66.0420(2)(y),
Wis. Stats.; for electricity; or to provide light.
E - 22
Note: Definition taken from s. 66.0404(1), Wis. Stats.
V
(322) Variance A grant of relief, as approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals, from the strict application of a rule or regulation
that would permit development in a manner otherwise prohibited. (In contrast see special exception)
(323) Variance, area A variance that modifies a dimensional, physical, or locational requirement such as a setback, frontage,
height, bulk, or density restriction for a structure.
Note: This definition is based on the definition in s. 62.23(7)(e)(7)a., Wis. Stats.
(324) Variance, dimensional A variance that allows a use of land that is not otherwise allowed or is specifically prohibited by this
chapter.
Note: This definition is based on the definition in s. 62.23(7)(e)(7)a., Wis. Stats.
(325) Vision triangle The area in the shape of a triangle located at the intersection of two roads or at the intersection of a road
and a driveway or other travelway within which the type and placement of structures and vegetation are controlled to ensure
adequate sight distances for pedestrians and motorists. The configuration and size of this area is based on standards
included in this chapter.
W
(326) Water surface profile A graphical representation showing the elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each
position along a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of the regional flood is used in
regulating floodplain areas.
(327) Watercraft Any device used and designed for navigation on water.
(328) Watt A measure of power consumption.
(329) Well An excavated opening in the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving, or other method to obtain groundwater
regardless of its intended use.
(330) Well field A piece of land used primarily for the purpose of locating wells to supply a municipal water system.
(331) Wetland Those areas where water is at, near or above the land surface long enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic
vegetation and which have soils indicative of wet conditions.
(332) Wetland alteration Any filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization
measures, or dike and dam construction in a wetland area.
(333) Wetland inventory map A map prepared by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources that shows wetlands as
defined by the department.
(334) Wetland vegetation Plants of all types typically growing in and associated with a wetland.
(335) Wharf A structure in navigable waters extending along the shore and generally connected with the uplands throughout its
length, built or maintained for the purpose of providing a berth for watercraft or for loading or unloading cargo or passengers
onto or from watercraft. Such a structure may include a boat hoist or boat lift, and the hoist or lift may be permanent or may
be removed. (Also see pier)
(336) Woody vegetation Perennial plants having hard lignified tissues or woody parts, especially stems.
(337) Written or in writing Any representation of words, letters, drawings, graphics, or pictures.
Y
(338) Yard The area of a lot that is required to be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except by trees,
shrubbery, or as otherwise provided in this chapter.
(339) Yard, front A yard as described for each of the following types of lots. (1) For an
interior lot, that area that extends across the front of a lot between the side lot
lines from the front lot line to the front of the principal building. (2) For a corner
lot, that area that extends across the front of a lot between the side lot lines from
the front lot line to the front of the principal building and that area that extends
Copyright © Civic Webware
E - 23
(340)
(341)
Z
between the rear lot line to the front lot line from the side lot line to the side of the
building. (3) For a double frontage lot, that area that extends across the front of a
lot between the side lot lines from the front lot line to the front of the principal
building and also that area that extends across the rear of a lot between the side
lot lines from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal building.
Yard, rear A yard as described for each of the following types of lots. (1) For an
interior lot, that area that extends across the rear of a lot between the side lot
lines from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal building. (2) For a corner lot,
that area that extends between the front yard abutting the street right-of-way and
the opposing side lot line from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal building.
Yard, side A yard as described for each of the following types of lots. (1) For an
interior lot, the area that extends between the front yard and rear yard from the
side lot line to the side of the principal building. (2) For a corner lot, that area that
extends between the front yard and the rear yard from the side lot line to the side
of the principal building. (3) For a double frontage lot, that area that extends
between the front yard from the side lot line to the side of the principal building.
Copyright © Civic Webware
Copyright © Civic Webware
(342) Zone of saturation The saturated zone is the area of unconsolidated, fractured or porous material that is saturated with
water and constitutes groundwater.
(343) Zoning administrator The individual so designated pursuant to this chapter. (In contrast see building inspector)
(344) Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) A board created by the Common Council to render decisions relating to variances and
administrative appeals and other matters enumerated in this chapter and in state law.
(345) Zoning district An area on the zoning map within which the zoning code is uniformly applied to all properties. Zoning
districts can be classified as base zoning districts or overlay zoning districts.
(346) Zoning district, base A type of zoning district that establishes uniform regulations for the use and development of land.
(347) Zoning district, overlay A type of zoning district that is superimposed over one or more base districts, or parts of districts,
and that modifies the requirements of the base district or imposes additional requirements, or both.
(348) Zoning map amendment An amendment to the zoning map adopted as part of this chapter.
(349) Zoning permit A written permit issued by the zoning administrator for a specified parcel of land that certifies that a
proposed use is consistent with the requirements of the zoning district in which it is to be located.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
F - 1
Appendix F
Mapping Requirements
The following information should be provided for each type of application to the extent applicable to the project.
Project Maps
Type of Information
Site plan
General
development
plan [1]
Precise
implementation
plan [1]
Conditional
use
Zoning map
amendment
Special
exception and
variance
Background Project Information
Project name X X X X X X
Applicant name X X X X X X
Preparation date X X X X X X
Name of preparer - X X - - -
Survey Information
North arrow and graphic scale X X X X X X
Address of subject property or legal description X X X X X X
Property boundaries X X X X X X
Acreage of subject property X X X X X X
Project Development Information
Land use summary table by density/intensity
and acreage
- X X - - -
Easements/rights-of-ways (location, width,
purpose, ownership)
X X X X - X
Common areas/conservancy areas (location,
purpose, ownership)
X X X X - -
Land to be dedicated to the public
(boundaries, area, purpose)
- X X - - -
Setting
Property boundaries within feet of the subject
property
50 ft. 150 ft. 150 ft. 150 ft. 150 ft. 50 ft.
Land uses within __ feet of the subject property 50 ft. 150 ft. 150 ft. 150 ft. 150 ft. 50 ft.
Zoning district boundaries within feet of the
subject property
50 ft. 150 ft. - 150 ft. 150 ft. 50 ft.
Municipal boundaries within feet of the
subject property
50 ft. 150 ft. 150 ft. 150 ft. 150 ft. 50 ft.
Site Features (existing and proposed)
Ground contours when slopes exceed
percent
8% 8% 8% 8% - 8% [2]
Wetlands X X X X - X
Woodlands X X X X - X
Wildlife habitat, including critical wildlife habitat X X X X - X
Environmentally sensitive features X X X X - X
Water resources (rivers, ponds, etc.) and
ordinary high-water mark for navigable waters
X X X X - X
Floodplain boundaries and elevations of the
same
X X X X - X
Environmental and manmade development
constraints and hazards including brownfields,
contaminated sites, unstable soils, high
groundwater, bedrock, and high-pressure
natural gas lines
X X X X - X
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
F - 2
Type of Information
Site plan
General
development
plan [1]
Precise
implementation
plan [1]
Conditional
use
Project Maps
Zoning map
amendment
Special
exception and
variance
Buildings and Outdoor Storage/Activity Areas
Existing and proposed X X X X X X
Existing within feet of subject property 50 ft. 150 ft. 150 ft. 150 ft. 150 ft. 50 ft.
Required Setbacks
Yard setbacks (front, side, rear and shore) X - X X - X
On-site septic systems X - - X - X
On-site wells and off-site wells within 10 feet of
the perimeter of the subject property
X - - X - X
Landscaping Features (existing and proposed)
Fences, buffers, and berms X - - X - -
Pervious and impervious surfaces by type X - - - - -
Site amenities (benches, fountains, etc.) X - - - - -
Existing trees and other prominent vegetation X - - - - -
Trees / shrubs to be planted, including a plant
list and specs.
X - - - - -
Trees / shrubs to be retained X - - - - -
Outdoor Lighting (existing and proposed)
Location X - X - - -
Fixture specifications X - X - - -
Stormwater Facilities (existing and proposed)
Location X - X - - -
Specifications for each facility X - X - - -
Utilities (existing and proposed)
Location X X X - - X
Type (sewer, telephone, etc) (buried or
overhead, if applicable)
X
X
X
-
-
X
Size/capacity, if applicable - X X - - -
Transportation Facilities (existing and proposed)
Streets X X X X - X
Driveways and road access onto public and
private roads
X X X X - X
Sidewalks and trails X - X X - X
Fire lanes (i.e., fire apparatus access) X - - - - X
Clear visibility triangles (location and
dimensions)
X - X
-
-
X
On-Site Parking (existing and proposed)
Access aisles and parking spaces by size X - X - - -
Location of accessible parking spaces X - X - - -
Location and specifications/dimensions for
accessibility ramps
X - X - - -
Type and location of on-site parking signs and
traffic control signs
X - X - - -
Surface materials for parking lot (e.g., concrete,
bituminous concrete, pavers)
X - X - - -
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
F - 3
Project Maps
Type of Information
Site plan
General
development
plan [1]
Precise
implementation
plan [1]
Conditional
use
Zoning map
amendment
Special
exception and
variance
Snow storage areas X - X - - -
Areas designated for queuing of vehicles for
drive-through facilities (e.g., car washes, driveup
service windows, etc.
X - X - - -
Pedestrian walks between the parking lot and
the building
X - X - - -
Designated areas of a parking area for
pedestrian walks
X - X - - -
Loading lanes and loading docks X - X - - -
Stormwater drainage X - X - - -
Distance between parking areas and adjoining
properties if less than 20 feet
X - X - - -
Areas designated for bicycle parking X - X - - -
Signs (existing and proposed)
Location X optional optional - - -
Specifications for each sign including type,
height, dimensions, lighting, and other factors
considered during the review process
X optional optional
- - -
Notes:
1. A general development plan and precise implementation plan are similar, except a precise implementation plan is more refined and
detailed.
2. For variance applications, the slope of the property must be depicted when the petitioner is claiming that the slope of a property is a
hardship or a unique property limitation.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
Appendix G
History of Amendment
(Since January 1, 2011)
Type
Ordinance
Number
Date
Adopted
Effective
Date
General Description
Text
Map
MC #1157 03-15-2011 03-15-2011 PLAN-11-0067; insert a Traditional Neighborhood Development section into the
City Zoning Ordinance
X
MC #1119 08-16-2011 08-16-2011 PLAN-11-0474; include a requirement that lighted signs in residential districts to
be turned off from 10 pm to 6 am
X
-- 04-17-2012 04-17-2012 PLAN-12-0124; rezone from R-2 to B-2
X
-- 08-21-2012 08-21-2012 PLAN-12-0465; amend Planned Development for select lots within the
Rosewood Estates Subdivision
X
-- 08-21-2012 08-21-2012 PLAN-12-0520; rezone from Ag to M-2
X
-- 10-16-2012 10-16-2012 PLAN-12-0646; rezone from R-2 to R-3
X
-- 10-16-2012 10-16-2012 PLAN-12-0647; establish a Planned Development district X
-- 12-18-2012 12-18-2012 PLAN-12-0898; rezone from R-3 to B-2
X
-- 03-19-2013 03-19-2013 PLAN-12-0903; rezone from R-2 to R-3
X
MC #1155 01-15-2013 01-15-2013 PLAN-12-0969; remove sign regulations from the zoning code X
-- 01-15-2013 01-15-2013 PLAN-12-0981; amendment of a Planned Development district X
-- 02-19-2013 02-19-2013 PLAN-13-0021; rezone from R-2 to B-2
X
-- 03-19-2013 03-19-2013 PLAN-13-0062; rezone from M-1 to B-2
X
-- 07-16-2013 07-16-2013 PLAN-13-0362; establish a Planned Development district X
-- 09-17-2013 09-17-2013 PLAN-13-0534; rezone from R-2 to R-3
X
-- 01-21-2014 01-21-2014 PLAN-13-0802; rezone newly annexed land
X
-- 07-15-2014 07-15-2014 PLAN-14-0356; rezone from R-2 to B-3
X
-- 09-16-2014 09-16-2014 PLAN-14-0464; rezone from R-2 to B-5
X
-- 08-19-2014 08-19-2014 PLAN-14-0476; amend Planned Development district X
-- 09-16-2014 09-16-2014 PLAN-14-0601; rezone from R-2 to B-2
X
-- 12-16-2014 12-16-2014 PLAN-14-2569; rezone from R-2 to B-5
X
-- 03-17-2015 03-17-2015 PLAN-15-0097; rezone from B-5 to R-2
X
-- 04-21-2015 04-21-2015 PLAN-15-0160; rezone from R-2 to B-3
X
MC #1200 05-19-2015 05-19-2015 PLAN-15-0508; amendment related to cell towers X
-- 10-20-2015 10-20-2015 PLAN-15-1545; rezone from R-2 to B-3
X
-- 06-21- 2016 06-21-2016 PLAN-16-0206; rezone from R-2 to B-2 and M-1 to B-2
X
MC #1212 06-21- 2016 07-19-2016 PLAN-16-1037; revisions related to portable storage containers X
-- 11-15- 2016 11-15-2016 PLAN-16-0900; rezone from B-4 to B-2
X
-- 06-20-2017 06-20-2017 PLAN-17-0191; rezone from A-1 to M-1
X
Resolution #32
(2017)
11-21-2017 11-21-2017 Planned Unit Development to allow the redevelopment of the Rapids Mall for
YMCA/Boys & Girls Club.
X
MC #1233 11-21-2017 11-21-2017 Revisions related to solar power systems X
Resolution #1
(2018)
1-16-2018
Planned Unit Development Amendment for Aspirus Riverview Hospital to allow
an ambulance garage
MC #1243 07-17-20187 08-01-2018 Repeal and recreate Chapter 11
G - 1
- 1 -
Chapter 12 Subdivisions and Platting of Land
12.01 Purpose
12.02 General Regulations
12.03 Definitions
12.04 Procedure
12.05 General Requirements and Design Standards
12.06 Public Sites and Open Spaces
12.07 Required Improvements
12.08 Plats and Data
12.09 Land Divisions other than Subdivision
12.10 Subdivisions Created by Successive Divisions
12.11 Variances
12.12 Final Plat
12.13 Electronic copy required
12.01 Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the community and these
regulations are designed to lessen congestion in the streets and highways; to further the orderly layout and use of land;
to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of
land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, parks, playgrounds and other public requirements; to facilitate the further re-subdivision of larger tracts into
smaller parcels of land. These regulations are made with reasonable consideration, among other things, of the
character of the city with a view of conserving the value of the buildings placed upon land, providing the best possible
environment habitation, and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. (187)
12.02 GENERAL REGULATIONS
(1) Any division of land within the city or its extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction which results in a subdivision
as defined herein shall be, and any other division shall be, surveyed and a plat, thereof approved and recorded
as required by this ordinance and Chapter 236, Wisconsin Statutes. (MC#1000)
(2) Any division of land other than a subdivision within the city or its extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction, or
which a plat has not been approved and recorded, shall be surveyed and a certified survey map of such
division approved and recorded as required by Section 12.09 of this Municipal Code and the Wood County
Land Subdivision Ordinance and Chapter 236, Wisconsin Statutes. (MC#1000)
(3) The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to:
(a) Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order.
(b) Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages or easements.
(c) Combining of two or more adjacent, previously surveyed parcels of land, under the same ownership,
placed under one parcel number, for tax assessment purposes only. (MC#1000)
(4) Conformance with Official Map. No land subdivision plat or certified survey map shall be approved unless such
plat or map conforms to the Official Map. (MC#1201).
12.03 DEFINITIONS
(1) Subdivision is a division of a lot, parcel or tract of land by the owner thereof or his agent for the purpose of sale
or of building development, where:
(a) The act of division creates five or more parcels of building sites of 1-1/2 acres each or less in area; or
(b) Five or more parcels or building sites of 1-1/2 acres each or less in area are created by successive
division within a period of five years.
(2) Extraterritorial Plat Approval Jurisdiction is the unincorporated area within three miles of the corporate limits of
the city.
(3) Street means a way for vehicular traffic, other than an alley.
(4) Major Streets and Highways are those which are used primarily for fast or heavy traffic.
(5) Collector Streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the system of major streets and highways,
including the principal entrance of streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a
development.
- 2 -
(6) Minor Streets are those which are used primarily for access to the abutting properties.
(7) Marginal Access Streets are minor streets which are parallel to and adjacent to major streets and highways;
and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
(8) Certified Survey Maps are maps of a parcel(s) of land prepared in accordance with Section 236.34, Wisconsin
Statutes and the provisions of this ordinance. (MC#1000)
(9) Official Map is the official map of the City of Wisconsin Rapids, showing the location and width of streets,
highways and parkways as laid out, adopted and established in accordance with Chapter 13 of the Municipal
Code. (MC#1201).
12.04 PROCEDURE
(1) Preliminary Consultation. Previous to filing a preliminary plat the subdivider may consult the planning
commission and its staff for advice and assistance.
(2) Preliminary Plat.
(a) Before submitting a final plat for approval, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat and such
copies thereof as shall be required to the city clerk who shall forthwith forward the plat to the planning
commission and shall forward copies thereof to the appropriate state agencies as required by Chapter
236 of the Wisconsin Statutes. (MC#1000)
(b) After review of the preliminary plat and negotiations with the subdivider on charges deemed advisable
and the kind and extent of public improvements which will be required, the planning commission shall,
within 40 days of its submission, approve, approve conditionally, or reject the plat. The subdivider
shall be notified in writing of any conditions of approval or the reasons for rejection.
(c) Approval of the preliminary plat shall entitle the subdivider to final approval of the layout shown by
such plat if the final plat conforms substantially to such layout and conditions of approval have been
met.
(3) Final Plat.
(a) The final plat and five copies thereof shall be required to be submitted to the city clerk within six
months of approval of the preliminary plat. However, if approval of the preliminary plat must be
obtained from another approving authority subsequent to approval by the planning commission, the
final plat shall be submitted within six months of such approval. The planning commission may waive
failure to comply with this requirement.
(b) The city clerk shall forthwith forward the plat to the planning commission and shall forward copies of
the plat to the appropriate state agencies as required by Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The
planning commission shall refer the final plat with its recommendations to the common council within
60 days of it submission to the City Clerk, unless the time is extended by agreement with the
subdivider. Reasons for rejection shall be stated in the minutes of the council meeting and a copy
thereof or a written statement of such reasons shall be supplied the subdivider. (MC#1000)
(c) If the original of the final plat has been filed with another approving authority, the subdivider may file a
true copy of such plat in lieu of the original. However, before approval of the Council will be inscribed
on the original of the final plat, the surveyor or the subscriber shall certify the respects in which the
original of the final plat differs from the true copy, and all modifications must be first approved.
12.05 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS
(1) General. The proposed subdivision shall conform to:
(a) The provisions of Chapter 236, Wisconsin Statutes;
(b) All applicable ordinances of the city;
(c) The rules of the State Board of Health relating to lot size and lot elevation if the subdivision is not
served by a public sewer and provision for such service has not been made;
(d) The rules of the State Highway Commission relating to safety of access and the preservation of the
public interest and investment in the streets if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts on a
state trunk highway or connecting street.
(2) Streets.
(a) General Considerations. The streets shall be designed and located in relation to existing and planned
streets, to topographical conditions and natural terrain features such as streams and existing tree
growth, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed used of the
land to be served by such streets.
(b) Arrangement.
(1) Major streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of major
streets and highways.
(2) Collector Streets shall be properly related to special traffic generating from facilities such as
schools, churches and shopping centers, to population densities, and to the major streets in
which they feed.
- 3 -
(3) Minor streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to topography, to discourage
use by through traffic, to permit efficient drainage and sewer systems, to require the
minimum amount of street necessary to provide convenient safe access to property.
(4) Railroad Right-of-way or Limited Access Highway. Where a subdivision borders on or contains
a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the plan commission may
require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance
suitable for the appropriate use of intervening land as for park purposes in residential
districts or for commercial or industrial purposes in other districts.
(5) Major Streets. Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed major
street, the plan commission may require that marginal access streets be provided, that the
backs of lots abut the major streets and be provided with screen planting contained in a
non-access reservation along the rear property line, that deep lots with rear service alleys be
provided or that other provisions be made for the adequate protection of residential
properties and the separation of through and local traffic.
(c) Width. The right-of-way roadway of all streets shall normally be not less than the width specified below:
Right-of-way Roadway
(1) Expressway 132 feet 70 feet (MC#1201).
(2) Major Streets 100 feet primary arterial 70 feet
80 feet standard arterial 52 feet, 40-48 feet
80 feet minor arterial 48 feet (MC#1201).
(3) Collector Streets 70 feet standard arterial 44 feet
66 feet 40 feet
(4) Local, minor and marginal access streets shall have a right-of-way width of 60 feet and
Roadway of 36 feet width, except that such streets of 50 feet right-of-way may, in particular
conditions of hardship be approved by the common council, upon recommendation of the
planning commission and public works committee. (MC#1000)
(d) Grades. The grade of major and collector streets shall not exceed six percent and the grade of all other
streets shall not normally exceed 10 percent. The minimum grade of all streets shall be .3%.
(e) Horizontal curves. A minimum sight distance with clear visibility, measured along the center line, shall
be provided of at least 300 feet on major streets, 200 feet for collector streets and 100 feet on minor
streets.
(f) Vertical Curves. All changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length
equivalent to 15 times the algebraic difference in the rate of grade for major streets and collector
streets and 1/2 of the minimum length for all other streets.
(g) Tangents. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on major and
collector streets.
(h) Street Names. New street names shall not duplicate the names of existing streets, but streets that are
continuations of others already in existence and named shall bear the name of the existing streets.
(i) Cul-de-sac or Dead End Streets. Streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall not
exceed 500 feet in length and shall terminate with a turnaround of not less than 120 feet in diameter
of right-of-way and a roadway turn-around of 100 feet in diameter (MC#1201).
(j) Reserve Strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their
control is definitely placed in city under conditions approved by the plan commission.
(k) Half-streets. Where a half-street is adjacent to the subdivision, the other half of the street shall be
dedicated by the subdivider.
(3) Intersections.
(a) Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and no more than two streets shall
intersect at one point unless approved by the plan commission.
(b) Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 125 feet shall normally be avoided. Where streets
intersect major streets, their alignment shall be continuous.
(4) Alleys.
(a) Alleys shall be provided in all commercial and industrial districts except that the plan commission may
waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access such as
off-street loading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
(b) Alleys shall not be approved in residential areas unless necessary because of topography or other
exceptional circumstances.
(c) The width of alleys shall not be less than 18 feet.
- 4 -
(d) Dead end alleys are prohibited except under very unusual circumstances, and crooked and "T" alleys
shall be discouraged. Where dead end alleys are unavoidable they shall be provided with adequate
turnaround facilities at the dead end.
(5) Easements.
(a) Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where
required by the plan commission and shall be at least 10 feet wide.
(b) Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel, or stream, there shall be
provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of
such water course, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the
purpose. Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open channel with
landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow.
(6) Blocks.
(a) The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be such as are appropriate for the locality and the type
of development contemplated but block lengths in residential area shall not normally exceed 1,254
feet nor be less than 264 feet between street lines.
(b) Pedestrian crosswalks, not less than 10 feet wide, may be required by the plan commission through
the center of blocks more than 900 feet long where deemed essential to provide circulation or access
to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities.
(7) Lots.
(a) In General. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the
subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated.
(b) Access to Public Street. Every lot shall front or abut on a public street. Lots with an access only to
private drives or streets shall be permitted only with plan commission approval.
(c) Lots at Right Angles. Lots at right angles to each other should be avoided wherever possible,
especially in residential areas.
(d) Lot Lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
(e) Large Lots. In case a tract is subdivided into parcels containing one or more acres, such parcels shall
be arranged to allow the re-subdivision of any parcels into normal lots in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance.
(f) Municipal Boundaries. Lots shall follow municipal boundary lines whenever practicable, rather than
cross them.
(g) Double Frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide
separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography and orientation.
12.06 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES
(1) In the design of the plat, due consideration shall be given by subdivider and the planning commission to the
reservation of suitable sites of adequate area for future schools, parks, playgrounds and other public
purposes.
(2) Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and
shall be at least 10 feet wide on each side of the lot line. (MC#15)
(3) Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a
storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such water course
and including necessary additional width for maintenance or construction. (MC#15)
(4) Where a subdivision contains land unsuitable for development because of poor drainage, flood conditions, soil
conditions or for any other reasons, such land shall be dedicated to the City of Wisconsin Rapids or town in
which it is situated, or if the land is to be developed the subdivider shall at its expense prepare and submit for
the commission's approval, engineering plans which will insure the public health, safety, and general welfare,
and carry out the plans or provide a performance bond to insure that the plans will be completed within a
specified time. (MC#15)
12.07 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
(1) The subdivisions shall be monumented as required by Wisconsin Statutes Section 236.15, which is hereby
adopted by reference.
(2) Streets and Utilities
(a) The preliminary plat shall be drawn with black ink on a scale of not more than 100 feet to an
inch and shall show directly on its face.
- 5 -
(b) Streets graded to full width and the roadway graded to subgrade. The planning commission may
require the delay of this work until after installation of water and sewer facilities providing a
performance bond is filed insuring that the facility will be installed within the time required by the
planning commission.
(c) Adequate facilities to provide surface water drainage.
(3) (a) The adequacy of such facilities shall be subject to approval of the city engineer. (MC#1000)
(b) The affidavits and certificates required by Chapter 236 shall be black ink on the final plat.
on the final plat (MC#1201).
12.08 PLATS AND DATA
(1) Preliminary Consultation Data. The following information shall be provided at the time of the preliminary
consultation or upon filing the preliminary plat if no preliminary consultation is held:
(a) Information including data on existing covenants, land characteristics and available community
facilities and utilities; and information describing the subdivision proposal such as number of
residential lots, typical lot width and depth, price range, business areas, playgrounds, park area, and
other public areas, tree planting proposed protective covenants and proposed utilities and street
improvements.
(b) A location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing community facilities
which serve or influence it. Include development name and location; main traffic arteries; public
schools; parks and playgrounds; principal places of employment; other community features such as
railroad stations, airports, hospitals and churches; title; scale; north arrow; and date.
(c) A sketch plan showing a simple sketch from the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in
relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a free hand pencil sketch but should be made
directly on a print of topographic survey.
(2) Preliminary Plat.
(a) The preliminary plat shall be drawn with waterproof non-fading black ink or legibly drawn with pencil
on tracing cloth, or tracing paper of good quality on a scale of not more than 100 feet to an inch and
shall show directly on its face:
(b) Date, scale and north point.
(c) The proposed subdivision name, which shall not duplicate the name of any plat previously recorded in
Wood County.
(d) The name and address of the owner, the subdivider and the engineer or surveyor preparing the plat.
(e) Location of the subdivision by government lot, quarter-quarter section, township, range and county.
(f) A small scale drawing of the section or government subdivision of the section in which the subdivision
lies with the location of the subdivision indicated thereon.
(g) The exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision.
(h) Location and names of adjacent subdivisions and the owners of adjoining parcels of un-subdivided
land.
(i) Zoning on and adjacent to the subdivision.
(j) Location, widths and names of all existing and platted streets, alleys or other public ways and
easements, railroad and utility right-of-ways, parks, cemeteries, water courses, drainage ditches,
permanent buildings, bridges, and other pertinent data as determined by the plan commission.
(k) The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of the survey and the approximate high
and low water elevations of such lakes or streams. All elevations shall be referred to established
datum plane of the city of Wisconsin Rapids.
(l) If the subdivision borders a lake or stream, the distances and bearings of a meander line established
not less than 20 feet back from the ordinary high water mark of the lake or stream.
(m) Layout, width and approximate grades of all new streets and right-of-ways, such as alleys, highways,
easements for sewers, water mains, and other public utilities.
(n) Direction and distance to nearest water and sewer mains.
(o) Approximate dimensions of and areas of lots.
(p) Proposed building lines.
(q) Approximate radii of all curves and length of tangents.
(r) Approximate location and area of property proposed to be dedicated for public use or to be reserved
by deed covenant for use of all property owners in the subdivision with the conditions, if any, of such
dedication or reservation.
(s) Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet or at more frequent intervals if required by the
plan commission for land or unusual topography.
(3) Final plat.
(a) A final plat of subdivided land shall comply with the requirements of Section 236.20 which is hereby
adopted by reference.
- 6 -
(b) The affidavits and certificates required by Chapter 236 shall be lettered or printed legibly with black,
durable ink or typed legibly with dark ribbon on the final plat.
(c) When the street is on a circular curve, all deflection angles and chord lengths to lot corners must be
shown on an adjoining table.
12.09 LAND DIVISIONS OTHER THAN SUBDIVISIONS
(1) Procedure. The divider shall file a certified survey map with the planning commission, which shall within 40
days approve, approve conditionally, or reject the map. The divider shall be notified in writing of any conditions
of approval or the reasons for rejection.
(2) Requirements. (MC#1000)
(a) When it is proposed to divide land into two or more parcels, lots, outlots or building sites, or any
combination thereof (not requiring a subdivision plat) any of which is five acres or less in size, or when
it is proposed to divide a block, lot or outlot into more than two parcels or building sites within a
recorded plat, or when it is proposed to combine previously surveyed and recorded parcels with other
surveyed or unsurveyed parcels, the subdivider shall utilize a Certified Survey Map prepared in
accordance with Section 236.34, Wisconsin Statutes, and this ordinance. In cases where lots are
being created from a large tract of land, tracts over twenty acres in size need not be mapped.
However, tracts of lands of five acres or less in size shall not be left as unplatted lands. Creation of
land-locked parcels shall not be allowed.
(b) To the extent reasonably practicable the division shall comply with the provisions of this ordinance
relating to general requirements and design standards and required improvements.
(c) The survey shall be performed and the map prepared by a qualified surveyor.
(d) All corners shall be monumented in accordance with Section 236.15(1)(c) and (d).
(e) The map shall be prepared in accordance with Section 236.20(2)(a), (b), (c), (e), (f), (g), (h), (I), (j), (k),
and (l) and on durable white paper 8-1/2 inches wide by 14 inches long. All lines shall be made with
non-fading black ink on a scale of not more than 500 feet to an inch.
(f) After a special assessment has been levied against a parcel of land, the parcel shall not be divided
into two or more lots any of which have less than 270 feet of frontage on any street unless all
outstanding special assessments have been paid on the lots having less than 270 feet frontage.
(MC#52)
(3) Certificates and Affidavits.
(a) The map shall include the affidavit of the surveyor who surveyed and mapped the parcel, typed,
lettered or reproduced legibly with non-fading ink, giving a clear and concise description of the land
surveyed by bearings and distances, commencing with some corner marked and established in the
U.S. Public Land Survey or some corner providing reference to a corner marked and established in the
U.S. Public Land Survey. Such affidavit shall include the statement of the surveyor to the effect that he
has fully complied with the requirements of this section.
(b) The certificate of approval of the plan commission shall be on the face of the map. (MC#1000)
(4) The map shall be filed by the divider for record with the register of deeds.
12.10 SUBDIVISIONS CREATED BY SUCCESSIVE DIVISIONS
(1) Successive Divisions
(a) Where it is not practicable to require that a final plat of a subdivision created by successive divisions
be filed in accordance with this ordinance, the common council may in lieu thereof order an assessor's
plat to be made under Section 70.27 of the Wisconsin Statutes and may assess the cost thereof as
provided in such section, or to the subdivider.
(b) Regardless of the type of plat filed, any such subdivision shall comply with all provisions of this
ordinance to the extent that they may reasonably be applied.
12.11 VARIANCES
When in the judgment of the planning commission or the common council it would be inappropriate to apply literally a
provision of this ordinance because the subdivision is located outside the corporate limits or because extraordinary
hardship would result, it may waive or vary such provisions so that substantial justice may be done and the public
interest secured, provided that in no event shall the requirement of filing and recording the plat or survey map be
waived. (187)
12.12 FINAL PLAT
(1) Whenever any owner, subdivider, or his agent, has divided land into five or more lots of 1-1/2 acres each or
less in area or shall in any calendar year divide any tract of land into five or more parts on 1-1/2 acres each or
less in area, for the purpose of sale, such owner, subdivider, or his agent, shall cause to be recorded in the
- 7 -
office of the register of deeds of Wood county, a final plat thereof in all respects in full compliance with this
ordinance.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any subdivider, or any other person to contract for sale, to sell, or offer to sell any such
subdivision or part thereof, until a final plat thereof in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance has
been duly recorded in the office of the register of deeds of Wood County.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, contract to sell, or offer for sale any such subdivision, or any part
thereof, by reference to any map or plat, unless such map or plat has been recorded as provided in this
ordinance. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to bar any remedy to which any aggrieved municipality
other political subdivision, or person may otherwise be entitled. Any sale, or contract to sell, contrary to the
provisions of this ordinance shall be voidable at the option of the buyer or person contracting to purchase, his
heirs, personal representatives or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy within one year after execution of the
document of sale or contract but such document shall be binding upon the vendor, his assignee, heir or
devisee. (103).
12.13 ELECTRONIC COPY REQUIRED
All preliminary plats, final plats and certified survey maps submitted to the City shall be in an electronic format
suitable for reproduction and review (MC#1201).
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
137
ARTICLE 13
WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
Sections
11.13.01 Legislative findings
11.13.02 Boundary of district
11.13.03 Permitted land uses and activities
11.13.04 Nonconforming uses
11.13.05 Responsibility for contamination cleanup
11.13.01 Legislative findings
The Common Council makes the following legislative findings relating to the wellhead protection overlay district:
(1) The residents of the City of Wisconsin Rapids depend exclusively on groundwater for a safe drinking
water supply.
(2) Certain land use practices and activities can seriously threaten or degrade groundwater quality.
(3) The City has the authority to adopt regulations relating to wellhead protection under s. 62.23(7)(a) and
(c), Wis. Stats.
(4) Regulations in this chapter relating to wellhead protection are adopted to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare of city residents.
11.13.02 Boundary of district
The boundary of the wellhead protection overlay district extends from the center of a public wellhead for a
distance of 1,200 feet in all directions. Such boundary is based on the wellhead protection plan dated October
10, 1996, and as amended January 3, 2008.
11.13.03 Permitted land uses and activities
(a) Generally. The land uses/activities listed in Exhibit 13-1 are permitted provided the various restrictions are
maintained and the use/activity is otherwise allowed in the base zoning district under this code. All other uses are
prohibited.
(b) Amendment of this section. Land uses that are prohibited pose a high risk of polluting the groundwater
based upon the combined pollution experience of many individual uses, and the technology generally
employed. As the technology of these prohibited uses change to low or non-risk materials or methods, the above
list of permitted uses may be amended consistent with the procedures and requirements in Article 5. It is the
intention to continue a prohibition on such uses until the technology of the use removes reliance upon the
pollutant materials or processes deemed to be a groundwater hazard.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
138
Exhibit 13-1. Permitted land uses and activities
Minimum separation
between well and
land use /activity [1] Permitted land use/activity
none Biking, hiking, skiing, nature, equestrian, and fitness trails
none Public and private parks, playgrounds, beaches, provided such use is connected to a municipal sanitary sewer service if
sanitary service is provided (holding tanks and on-site systems are not permitted)
none Wildlife management, open space, and similar uses
none Routine tillage, planting, and field management operations related to crop production provided (1) herbicides and
pesticides are not applied to the ground surface, (2) animal waste is not applied to the ground surface, and (3) the
combination of all other nutrient sources applied or available do not exceed those thresholds established or
recommended by the Wood County Land & Water Conservation Department, or alternatively the Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS).
none Multi-family dwelling units provided such use is connected to a municipal sanitary sewer service
none Single-family dwelling on a lot consisting of 20,000 square feet or more and is connected to a private on-site sewage
treatment system
none Single-family dwelling on municipal sewer.
none Above-ground liquid propane gas tanks for heating with a maximum capacity of 1,000 gallons
200 feet Single-family residential fuel oil tank
50 feet Storm sewer main
200 feet Sanitary sewer main, sanitary sewer manhole, and sanitary lift station. A lesser separation distance may be allowed for
sanitary sewer mains if the sanitary sewer main is constructed of water main materials and joints and pressure tested in
place to meet current American Waterworks Association (AWWA) C600 specifications. In no case may the separation
distance between a well and sanitary sewer main be less than 50 feet.
400 feet Septic tank or soil adsorption unit receiving less than 8,000 gallons per day provides such system complies with all local
and state requirements for on-site sewage treatment systems
1,000 feet Septic tank or soil adsorption unit receiving more than 8,000 gallons per day provides such system complies with all local
and state requirements for on-site sewage treatment systems
400 feet Storm water drainage pond or conveyance facility
600 feet Gasoline or fuel oil storage tank installation that has received written approval from the Wisconsin Department of Safety
and Professional Services or its designated agent under s. Comm 10.10, Wis. Admin. Code.
none Institutional, commercial, and industrial land uses provided such use is connected to a municipal sanitary sewer service,
except that the following are strictly prohibited: motor vehicle fuel stations, vehicle repair establishments, auto body
repair, printing and duplicating businesses, facilities involving manufacturing or industrial processes, bus or truck terminals,
repair shops of all types, solid waste disposal or handing facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, spray wastewater
facilities, junk yards or auto salvage yards, bulk fertilizer and/or pesticide facilities, asphalt products manufacturing, dry
cleaning businesses, salt storage, electroplating facilities, exterminating businesses, paint and coating manufacturing,
hazardous and/or toxic materials storage, hazardous and/or toxic waste facilities, radioactive waste facilities, recycling
facilities, cemeteries, underground storage tanks of any size, and any other use determined by the zoning administrator
to pose a high-risk of polluting the groundwater.
Notes:
1. See s. NR 811.12, Wis. Admin. Code
11.13.04 Nonconforming uses
Land uses that were legally established, but do not comply with the regulations in this article are nonconforming
and are subject to the requirements set forth in Article 19. In addition, the operator of a nonconforming use shall
(1) provide copies of all current, revised or new federal, state and local facility operation approvals, permits or
certificates; operational safety plans; and on-going environmental monitoring results to the City; (2) provide
additional environmental or safety structures/monitoring as deemed necessary by the Common Council, which
may include but is not limited to stormwater runoff management and monitoring; (3) replace equipment or
expand in a manner that improves the existing environmental and safety technologies already in existence; and
(4) prepare and submit a contingency plan satisfactory to the zoning administrator for the immediate notification
of city officials in the event of an emergency.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
139
11.13.05 Responsibility for contamination cleanup
An individual and/or facility that releases a contaminant in the wellhead protection overlay district that has the
potential of endangering the municipal water supply shall immediately stop the release and clean up the
contaminant to the satisfaction of the Common Council and other state and federal regulatory agencies. The
individual/facility shall be responsible for all costs of cleanup, including those incurred by the City, which may
include:
(1) consultant fees at the invoice amount plus administrative costs for oversight, review, and
documentation;
(2) the cost of city employees’ time associated in any way with cleanup based on the hourly rate paid to
the employee multiplied by a factor determined by the city administrator representing the city’s cost for
expenses, benefits, insurance, sick leave, holidays, overtime, vacation, and similar benefits;
(3) the cost of city equipment used in the response and cleanup; and
(4) the cost of mileage reimbursed to city employees attributed to the cleanup.
The Common Council may require the responsible party to establish a monitoring program based on the nature of
the contamination and the risk posed to the municipal water supply. In addition, the Common Council may
require the responsible party to provide a financial security in such amount and type it deems necessary to
safeguard the municipal water supply.
The remainder of this page intentionally left blank.
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code Chapter 11 – Zoning
140
This page intentionally left blank.
1
Chapter 14 Building Code
14.01 Title
14.02 Purpose
14.03 Scope
14.04 Building Inspector
14.05 Building Permits and Inspection
14.06 Construction and Renovation of Buildings; State Codes Adopted
14.07 Garages
14.08 Private Swimming Pools
14.09 Radiant Heating Units
14.10 New Methods and Materials
14.11 Unsafe Buildings
14.12 Moving Buildings
14.13 Application of State
14.14 Disclaimer on Inspections
14.15 Stop Work Order
14.16 Penalties and Violations
14.17 Records
14.18 Appeals
14.19 Occupancy Permits
14.20 Razing, Scrapping, Salvaging, and Recycling
14.01 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known as the "Building Code of the City of Wisconsin Rapids" and will be referred to in this chapter
as "this code".
14.02 PURPOSE.
This code provides certain minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for safe and stable design, methods of
construction and uses of materials in buildings and/or structures hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered,
repaired, moved, converted to other uses or demolished, and regulates the equipment, maintenance, use and
occupancy of all such buildings and/or structures. Its purpose is to protect and foster the health, safety, and well being
of persons occupying or using such buildings, and the general public.
14.03 SCOPE.
New buildings or structures hereafter erected in, or any building or structure hereafter moved within or into the City
shall conform to all the requirements of this code except as they are herein specifically exempted from part or all of its
provisions. Any alteration, enlargement or demolition of an existing building and any installation therein of electrical,
gas, heating, plumbing or ventilating equipment which affects the health or safety of the users thereof or any other
persons, is a "new building" to the extent of such change. Any existing building shall be considered a "new building" for
the purposes of this code whenever it is used for dwelling, commercial or industrial purposes unless it was being used
for such purpose at the time this code was enacted. The provisions of this code supplement the laws of the State of
Wisconsin pertaining to construction and use and the Zoning Code of the City and amendments thereto to the date this
chapter was adopted and in no way supersede or nullify such laws and the said Zoning Code.
14.04 BUILDING INSPECTOR.
(1) General Powers and Duties. The building inspector shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and of all other
ordinances and the laws and orders of the State of Wisconsin which relate to building construction, plumbing
and electrical installations and for these purposes may at all reasonable times enter buildings and premises.
He/She may pass upon any questions arising under the provisions of this chapter relating to buildings, subject
to conditions contained in this chapter. No person shall interfere with the Inspector while in the performance of
the duties prescribed in this chapter. He/She shall direct the activities of the plumbing inspector and the
electrical inspector.
(2) Qualifications.
2
(a) The building inspector shall have the necessary qualifications required by the State of Wisconsin to
determine compliance with applicable State and local building codes relating to the construction of
buildings.
(b) The building inspector shall be certified by the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional
Services to administer and enforce all the provisions of the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code and the
Wisconsin Commercial Code. (MC #1145)
14.05 BUILDING PERMITS AND INSPECTION.
(1) Permit Required. No building or structure of any kind shall be moved within or into the City and no new building
or structure, or any part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, or ground broken for the same, or enlarged,
altered, moved, demolished or used within the City, except as herein provided, until a permit has been
obtained by the owner, or his authorized agent, from the building inspector. (MC#1145)
(2) Application. Application for a building permit shall be made in writing upon a form furnished by the building
inspector and shall state the name and address of the owner of the land and also the owner of the building if
different, the legal description of the land upon which the building is to be located, the name and address of
the designer, the use to which said building is to be put, and such other information as the building inspector
may require. In the event the building inspector determines that the estimated cost of the project will be less
than $500.00, a building permit shall not be required; however, all structural work, fences, accessory
structures, signs and temporary structures require a permit regardless of the cost. (MC#1145)
(3) Utilities Required. No final inspection shall be completed for the construction of any residential building until
sewer and water is installed and grading and graveling of the street necessary to service the property for which
the permit is required is completed.
(4) Plans. With such application there shall be submitted a complete set of plans and specifications, including a
plot plan showing the location of the proposed building with respect to adjoining roads, highways, streets,
alleys, lot lines and buildings. Plans for buildings involving the Commercial State Building Code shall bear the
stamp of conditionally approved by the State Department of Safety and Professional Services Division of Safety
and Buildings if required by SPS 361. One plan shall be submitted which shall remain on file in the office of the
building inspector. When required by SPS 361 plans and calculations shall be signed and sealed by the
licensed designer. Plans for all new one- and two-family dwellings shall comply with the provisions of Wisconsin
Administrative Code SPS 320.09. An electronic copy of the plans shall be provided in the pdf format. If unable
to provide an electronic file the Engineering Department will scan the plans into an electronic file. There will be
charge as set by Engineering for the labor, equipment and administrative costs to scan the plans. (MC#1145)
(5) Approval of Plans. If the building inspector determines that the building will comply with all ordinances and
orders of the City and all applicable laws and orders of the State of Wisconsin, he/she shall issue a building
permit which shall state the use to which said building is to be put, which shall be kept and displayed at the
site of the proposed building. After being approved, the plans and specifications shall not be altered in any
respect which involves any of the above mentioned ordinances, laws or orders, or which involves the safety of
the building or the occupants, except with the submittal and approval of revised plans. In case adequate plans
are presented for part of the building only, the building inspector, at his/her discretion, may issue a permit for
that part of the building before receiving the plans and specifications for the entire building.
(6) Waiver of Plans. If the building inspector finds that the character of the work is sufficiently described in the
application, he/she may waive the filing of plans for alterations, repairs or moving.
(7) Fees for Building Permits and Inspections. At the time the application for a building permit or other designated
permit is filed, the applicant shall pay the appropriate fees set by the Director of Planning and Economic
Development, with the concurrence of the Common Council. (MC#1145)
(8) Minor Repairs and Alterations. The building inspector may authorize minor repairs or alterations which do not
change the occupancy area, structural strength, fire protection, exits, light or ventilation of the building without
requiring an additional building permit to be issued.
(9) Inspection of Work. The permittee or an authorized representative shall, in writing or orally, request inspections
by the building inspector at appropriate times required for the enforcement of this code. The building inspector
shall perform the requested inspection within 48 hours after notification. Construction may not proceed
beyond the point of inspection until the inspection has been completed, except if the inspection has not taken
place within 48 hours of notification, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, unless otherwise agreed
upon between the permittee and the building inspector. Failure to notify the inspector for an inspection will
result in the permit holder removing materials to expose concealed work or at the discretion of the inspector
result in penalties as outlined in the adopted fee schedule for the first offense and second offense. Repeated
violations will result in a citation being issued. (MC#1145)
(10) Permit Lapses. A building permit shall lapse and be void unless building operations are commenced within 6
months. If construction has started within the six month time frame, permits for residential alterations,
garages, sheds, and decks shall be valid for 12 months and permits for new principal buildings, commercial
3
alterations and additions shall be valid for 24 months from date of issuance. Permits may be renewed at the
discretion of the Building Inspector at a cost of ½ of the normal permit price. (MC#1145)
(11) Revocation. If the building, plumbing, or electrical inspector shall find at any time that applicable ordinances,
laws, orders, plans and specifications are not being complied with, and that the holder of the permit refused to
conform after written warning or instruction has been issued to him, he/she shall revoke the building, electrical
or plumbing permit by written notice posted at the site of the work. When any such permit is revoked, it shall
be unlawful to do any further work thereunder until the permit is reissued, except such work as the building,
electrical, or plumbing inspector may order to be done as a condition precedent to the re-issuance of the
permit or as he/she may require for the preservation of human life and safety.
(12) Report of Violations. The police, fire, or other city officers shall report at once to the building inspector any
construction which is being carried on without a permit as required by this chapter.
14.06 CONSTRUCTION AND RENOVATION OF BUILDINGS, STATE CODES ADOPTED.
(1) Wisconsin Administrative Code IHLR a.k.a. COMM Chapters 50-69 are hereby adopted by reference and made
a part of this chapter with respect to those classes of buildings to which said Chapters 50-69 specifically apply.
Any future amendments, revisions and modifications of said Chapters 50-69 incorporated herein are intended
to be made a part of this code. A copy of said Chapters 50-69 and amendments thereto shall be kept on file in
the office of the building inspector.
(a) Terms. The building terms used in this chapter shall have the meaning given them by the State
Building Code.
(b) Dwelling. The term "dwelling" includes every building occupied exclusively as a residence by not more
than 2 families.
(2) Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code Adopted. (MC#1145)
(a) Wisconsin Administrative Code SPS Chapters 320 to 325 are hereby adopted by reference and made
a part of this chapter and shall apply to all new one- and two-family dwellings and all additions to
existing and new one- and two-family dwellings. Any future amendments, revisions and modifications
of said Chapters 320 to 325 incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this code. A copy
of said Chapters 320 to 325 and amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the office of the building
inspector.
(b) Wisconsin Administrative Code SPS Chapters 320 to 325 are hereby adopted by reference and made
a part of this chapter and shall pertain to all remodeling or alterations in existing one- and two-family
dwellings. Any future amendments, revisions and modifications of said Chapters 320 to 325
incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this code. A copy of said Chapters 320 to 325
and amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector.
14.07 GARAGES.
Residential Accessory Buildings. Residential accessory buildings over 200 square feet shall be built in accordance with
the general construction standards established in the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code SPS 320-325. Accessory
buildings shall be located as allowed by the Zoning Ordinance. If a greater distance is required by some other section of
this code or by some other ordinance or regulation, the most rigid requirement shall be applicable. Residential
membrane canopy structures that are intended to provide shelter to vehicles or personal property are not permitted.
(MC#1145)
14.08 PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS.
No person shall construct, install or enlarge a residential swimming pool not enclosed in a permanent building in the
city except in accordance with the following regulations.
(1) Definition. "Swimming pool" means any depression in the ground, either temporary or permanent, or a
container of water, either temporary or permanent and either above or below the ground, in which water more
than 18 inches deep is contained and which is used primarily for the purpose of bathing or swimming.
(2) Permit.
(a) Required. No person shall construct, install, enlarge or alter any private swimming pool unless a
permit has first been obtained from the building inspector. (MC#1145)
(b) Application. Application shall be on forms provided by the building inspector and shall be accompanied
by plans drawn to scale showing the following:
(1) Location of pool on lot, distance from lot lines and distance from structure.
(2) Location of water and sewer lines.
(3) Pool dimensions and volume of water in gallons.
(4) Existing overhead wiring relative to proposed pool.
(3) Construction Requirements.
4
(a) No pool shall be located, erected, constructed or maintained closer to any side or rear lot line than
allowed by Chapter 11 of this code for permitted accessory building uses, and the waterline of any
pool shall not be less than 5 feet from any lot line or building.
(b) No connection shall be made to the sanitary sewer.
(d) No above-ground pool shall be less than 5 feet from any sewer line.
(e) All pools, hot tubs and spas containing water more than 18 inches deep shall have an enclosure that
is in compliance with MC 36.303. (MC#1145)
(4) Electrical Requirements.
(a) To comply with Electrical Codes. All electrical installations shall require separate permits and shall be
governed by the City or State Electrical Code.
(b) Pool Lights. If overhead flood or other artificial lights are used to illuminate the pool at night, such
lights shall be shielded to direct light only on the pool.
(5) Use of Pool. No pool shall be so operated as to create a nuisance, a hazard or an eyesore or otherwise to result
in a substantial adverse effect on neighboring properties.
14.09 RADIANT HEATING UNITS.
(1) Definition. "Radiant heating unit" is a room heater, stove or free standing fireplace used to heat a room or
rooms using the combustion of such solid fuels as wood or coal as a source of heat.
(2) Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to install or cause to be installed any radiant heating unit
in the city without first having obtained a permit from the building inspector.
(3) Application for Permit. Application for a permit shall be made on a form provided by the building inspector. The
following data shall be submitted with the application:
(a) The manufacturer's installation, maintenance, operations manual, and listing information.
(b) Type and size of chimney.
(c) The proposed chimney flue or new chimney flue size.
(d) The number and size of existing vent connections to the chimney flue.
(e) The clearance distance from any wall or ceiling; if less than 36 inches from any wall or ceiling, the
description of fire resistant material to cover such wall or ceiling.
(f) The type of floor on which unit will be mounted; if the floor is combustible, the type and size of fire
resistant covering to be used.
(g) Any other information required by the building inspector relating to the safety and operation of the
unit.
(4) Issuance of Permit. Upon examination of the application and accompanying data by the building inspector, the
inspector shall determine whether or not the installation of the radiant heating unit complies with the
requirements of this section and, if so, issue the permit; if not, the building inspector shall state, in writing,
his/her reasons for not issuing the permit.
(5) Inspection. No person may operate or permit the operation of a radiant heating unit until the building inspector
has inspected and approved the installation thereof.
14.10 NEW METHODS AND MATERIALS.
All materials, methods of construction and devices designed for use in buildings or structures covered by this code and
not specifically mentioned in or permitted by this code shall not be so used until approved in writing by the State Safety
and Buildings division. Such materials, methods of construction and devices, when approved, must be installed or used
in strict compliance with the manufacturer's specifications and any rules or conditions of use established by the State
Safety and Buildings division. The date, tests and other evidence necessary to prove the merits of such material,
method of construction or device shall be determined by the State Safety and Buildings division.
14.11 UNSAFE BUILDINGS.
Whenever the building inspector finds any building or part thereof within the City to be, in his/her judgment, so old,
dilapidated or so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use, and so that it would be unreasonable to repair the same, he/she shall order the owner to raze and
remove it at the owner's expense. Such order and proceedings shall be carried out in the manner prescribed for the
razing of buildings in Sec 66.05, Wisconsin Statutes. Where the public safety requires immediate action, the building
inspector shall enter upon the premises with such assistance as may be necessary, and cause the building or structure
to be made safe or to be removed, and the expenses of such work may be recovered by the City in an action against the
owner or tenant.
14.12 REGULATIONS FOR MOVING BUILDINGS (MC#1083)
(1) Moving buildings.
5
(a) Subject to Section 14.12(1)(b) herein, no person shall move any building or structure upon any of the
public ways of the municipality without first obtaining a moving permit from the building inspector.
(b) The following buildings and structures are not required to receive a moving permit: mobile homes in
mobile home courts and mobile home subdivisions, new manufactured homes, and new
manufactured residential accessory buildings under 12 feet wide when hauled by the manufacturer to
a site in the City on a properly licensed vehicle. However, all applicable traffic and vehicle codes as
specified in chapters 347 and 348 Wis. Stats. shall apply. In addition, all other appropriate permits,
such as building, electrical, HVAC, and plumbing are still required.
(2) Plan and permit requirements for moving buildings.
(a) Application for a permit to move a building shall be made upon proper forms furnished by the
Department of Planning and Economic Development. Application for a moving permit for a dwelling,
nonresidential structure, or any other structure that requires a public hearing and Common Council
approval, shall be made at least 45 days prior to the proposed moving date. Application for a moving
permit for residential garages, residential accessory buildings, or any other structure that does not
require a public hearing and Common Council approval, shall be made at least 10 days prior to the
proposed moving date.
(b) The application for a permit required for moving buildings shall be accompanied by:
(1) A dimensioned plot plan showing the location of the structure on the parcel of land to which it
is proposed to be moved.
(2) Construction plans showing any exterior or interior structural, electrical, plumbing, heating or
ventilating changes, alterations or additions if any such are required or intended.
(3) A statement of any exterior work that will be done which would affect the appearance of the
structure.
(4) A map showing the proposed moving route and stating the proposed moving date.
(c) Payment of Fees. Before receiving a permit, the owner or his/her agent shall pay all appropriate fees
to the appropriate departments at a rate in accordance with the most recently Common Council
adopted fee schedule. The permit fee for a moving permit does not include any fees associated with
the fee for a building permit to rebuild or alter the building upon its new location.
(3) Conformance with Code. No permit shall be issued to move a building within or into the municipality and to
establish it upon a location within the said municipality until the Building Inspector has made an investigation
of such building at the location from which it is to be moved, and is satisfied from such investigation that said
building is in a sound and stable condition and of such construction that it will meet the requirements of this
Code.
(a) A complete plan of all further repairs, improvements, and remodeling with reference to such building
shall be submitted to the Building Inspector, and he/she shall make a finding of fact to the effect that
all such repairs, improvements, and remodeling are in conformity with the requirements of this Code,
and that when same are completed, the building as such will so comply with said Code.
(b) In the event a building is to be moved from the municipality to some point outside the boundaries
thereof, the provisions with respect to the furnishing of plans and specifications for proposed
alterations to such building may be disregarded.
(c) Each building that is moved into the City shall have its electrical service upgraded to conform with the
City’s Electrical Code.
(d) Each moved building shall be fully completed including all painting, siding, lawn, or other repairs
needed and ready for occupancy within 180 days of the date of move. An extension of the time limits
of this ordinance may be given at the discretion of the Director of Planning and Economic
Development, provided continuous and reasonable efforts are being made to complete the building
towards occupancy.
(4) Moving of Damaged Buildings. No building shall be repaired, altered, or moved within or into the municipality
that has deteriorated or has been damaged by any cause, (including such moving and separation from its
foundation and service connections in case of moved buildings) fifty (50) percent or more of its equalized
value, and no permit shall be granted to repair, alter, or move such building within or into the municipality.
Exceptions for historical buildings will be reviewed by the Planning Commission and final approval shall be
made by the Common Council.
(5) Continuous Movement. The movement of buildings shall be a continuous operation during all the hours of the
day until such movement is fully completed. All of such operations shall be performed with the least possible
obstruction to thoroughfares. No building shall be allowed to remain overnight upon any street crossing or
intersection, or so near thereto as to prevent easy access to any fire hydrant or any other public facility.
(6) Security required for moving buildings. Before a moving permit is issued there shall be deposited to the City the
sum of not less than $2,000 or 10% of the assessed value, whichever is greater, in the form of a performance
bond, certified check, or bank cashier's check made payable to the City. Such cash or certified check shall
6
guarantee to the city that the structure will be in its new location in accordance with the provisions of Section
14.12(2) of this Code within 6 months after the date such permit is issued. The deposit for a residential
accessory building shall be $500, and, in either case, the deposit shall be returned after completion of the
project. Before the deposit is returned, the applicant shall provide the Department of Planning and Economic
Development a letter stating that the project is complete and is ready for inspection. Upon successful
completion of the final inspection, settlement of all such damage claims, and the payment of all fees, the
deposit will be returned, if any.
(7) Insurance required for moving buildings. The Building Inspector shall require sufficient proof that the person
actually moving the building will use equipment which will not damage such streets, sidewalks, alleys or public
ways or grounds, and shall further require proper proof that such mover is insured by a reputable insurance
company for public liability in an amount not less than $250,000/$500,000, and for property damage in the
amount of not less than $50,000. The Building Inspector shall require a certificate of insurance from the
company insuring such mover, which certificate shall be filed with the Building Inspector before any permit
shall be issued, and which certificate shall state the mover's insurance policy is then in full force and effect,
and shall further state that upon cancellation of such policy, the company shall give to the city at least ten
days' written notice thereof.
(8) Planning Commission action and final Common Council approval.
(a) Subject to Section 14.12(8)(a)(1), 14.12(8)(a)(2), 14.12(8)(a)(3) and 14.12(8)(a)(4), no building or
other structure shall be moved to or from any location within the City, until all requirements of Section
14.12 are complied with, and not until a public hearing is held, and the Common Council has granted
permission for the moving of the building or structure. Before issuing such permit, the Building
Inspector shall file a report with the Planning Commission or the Common Council containing the
following data concerning the unit proposed to be moved:
(1) A statement from the Building Inspector that he/she has inspected the said building, and that
it complies with applicable building codes, or can be made to comply.
(2) A statement from the Zoning Administrator that it complies or can be made to comply with all
of the applicable provisions of the Zoning Code.
(3) A statement from the Plumbing Inspector that it complies or can be made to comply with all of
the applicable provisions of the Plumbing Code.
(4) A statement from the Electrical Inspector that he/she has inspected it and that it complies or
can be made to comply with all of the applicable provisions of the Electrical Code.
(b) A public hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission or Common Council on the proposed
relocation of a building. A notice of the public hearing shall be published as a class I display
advertisement in the official class I newspaper a minimum of one week before the Planning
Commission or Common Council meeting at which the hearing is scheduled. The notice shall state the
type of structure proposed to be moved, its present location, the location to which it is proposed to be
moved, and the date and time of the hearing. No hearing shall be held until the costs of such hearing
have been paid for in advance by the person requesting the relocation.
(1) No public hearing or Common Council permission shall be required for the moving of
residential accessory buildings. However, all other requirements of Section 14.12 and all
applicable traffic and vehicle codes as specified in Chapters 347 and 348, Wisconsin
Statutes, shall apply.
(2) No public hearing or Common Council permission shall be required for the moving of nonresidential
accessory buildings. However, all other requirements of Section 14.12 and all
applicable traffic and vehicle codes as specified in Chapters 347 and 348, Wisconsin
Statutes, shall apply.
(3) No public hearing or Common Council permission shall be required for any moving of a
building outside the City. However, all other requirements of Section 14.12 and all applicable
traffic and vehicle codes as specified in Chapters 347 and 348, Wisconsin Statutes, shall
apply.
(c) After an examination of the application for the permit and after a view of the building proposed to be
moved, and of the site at which it is to be located, that the exterior architectural appeal and functional
plan of the building to be moved or moved and altered, will not be so at variance with either the
exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of the buildings already constructed or in the course
of construction in the immediate neighborhood, or the character of applicable district established by
the zoning ordinances of the municipality, or any ordinance amendatory thereof or supplementary
thereto, as to cause a substantial depreciation in the property values of said neighborhood within said
applicable district. In case the applicant proposes to alter the exterior of said building after moving the
same, he/she shall submit with his/her application papers, complete plans and specifications for the
proposed alterations.
7
(9) Notification of utilities and departments for the moving of buildings.
(a) The applicant shall immediately notify any public utility whose lines or poles may be interfered with of
the application. Such utility shall take any steps necessary to permit the building to be moved without
damage to its lines and poles.
(b) At minimum, the Department of Planning and Economic Development will send notice to the following
departments to determine if any further requirements for the moving of the building are required:
(1) Police Department. A written statement from the Police Department saying that a police
escort is, or is not required, must be provided to the Building Inspector before the moving
permit can be issued.
(2) Streets Department.
(3) Parks and Recreation Department. Upon completion of the moving, the Streets Department
shall inspect the route and report to the Building Inspector any damage caused to the abovedescribed
property, and the estimated cost of repairing the property. All claims shall be
submitted to the mover's insurance company for payment. No deposit as required in Section
14.12(6) shall be returned to the mover or applicant until all insurance claims are satisfied.
Upon settlement of all such damage claims, the Building Inspector shall release the balance
of the deposit, if any. The applicant shall be liable for any such costs or damages exceeding
the deposit.
14.13 APPLICATION OF STATE CODES.
Wisconsin Administrative Code SPS Chapter 305, Chapters 320 through 325, Chapters 360-367; the State Electrical
Code SPS 316; the State Plumbing Code SPS 381-387, 390, 391; the State Flammable Liquids Code SPS 310; and the
Well Construction and Pump Installation NR 812 are hereby adopted by reference and the building inspector and/or
his/her designee shall enforce the provisions thereof. Any violation of said codes or amendments thereto shall
constitute a violation of this code, whether unlawful building alteration, installation, moving or construction involved is
specifically covered by other provisions of this code or not, and shall render the violator liable to the penalties
contained herein. (MC#1145)
14.14 DISCLAIMER ON INSPECTIONS.
The purpose of the inspections under this code is to improve the quality of housing in the City. The inspections and the
reports and findings issued after the inspections are not intended as, nor are they to be construed, as a guarantee. In
order to so advise owners and other interested persons, a disclaimer shall be included in each inspection report as
follows: "The findings of inspection contained herein are intended to report conditions of noncompliance with code
standards that are readily apparent at the time of inspection. The inspection does not involve a detailed examination of
the mechanical systems or the closed structural and nonstructural elements of the building and premises. No warranty
of the operation, use or durability of equipment and materials not specifically cited herein is expressed or implied."
14.15 STOP WORK ORDER.
Whenever the provisions of this code or of the plans approved thereunder are not complied with, a stop work order
shall be served on the owner or his/her representatives and a copy thereof shall be posted at the site of the
construction. Such stop work order shall not be removed except by the written notice of the building inspector after
satisfactory evidence has been supplied that the violation has been corrected.
14.16 PENALTIES AND VIOLATIONS.
Any building or structure hereafter erected, enlarged, altered, repaired or moved, or any use hereafter established, in
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an unlawful building, structure or use. The building inspector
shall promptly report all such violations to the city attorney, who shall bring an action to enjoin the erection,
enlargement, alteration, repair or moving of such building or structure of the establishment of such use, or to cause
such building, structure or use to be removed and may also be subject to a penalty as provided in sec. 1.07 of this
Code. In any such action, the fact that a permit was issued shall not constitute a defense, nor shall any error, oversight
or dereliction of duty on the part of the building inspector constitute a defense. Compliance with the provisions of this
chapter may also be enforced by injunctional order at the suit of the owner or owners of any real estate within the
jurisdiction of this chapter. (MC#1145)
Should the building inspector feel that remedy by local citation is the best remedy he/she and/or his/her designee shall
cause such citation to be issued and file such citation and supporting documents that he/she feels are necessary with
the municipal court clerk for action in such court. Each day that a violation exists may be considered a separate
violation. (MC#1145)
14.17 RECORDS.
8
The building inspector or his/her designee shall keep a record of all applications for building permits in a file and/or
data base and regularly number each permit in the order of issuance. he/she shall keep a record showing the number,
description and size of all buildings erected during his/her term of office, indicating the kind of materials used, the cost
of each building and the aggregate cost of all buildings of the various classes. he/she shall keep a record of all
inspections made and of all removal and condemnation of buildings. he/she shall make a monthly report to the
common council and mayor on the above matters.
14.18 APPEALS.
Any person feeling himself aggrieved by any order or ruling of the building inspector may within 20 days thereafter
appeal from such order or ruling to the Building Board of Appeals, such an appeal to be in writing.
14.19 OCCUPANCY PERMITS.
An occupancy permit must be issued before any new commercial building, commercial addition, commercial tenant
build out or new residential building is occupied. At the discretion of the building inspector a temporary occupancy
permit may be issued. Failure to obtain an occupancy permit may results in penalties outlined in 14.16. (MC#1145)
14.20 RAZING, SCRAPPING, SALVAGING, AND RECYCLING
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate the removal of scrap and salvageable
equipment and materials from vacated buildings without immediate functional replacement
thereof. The phrase “immediate functional replacement thereof” does not include
replacement that occurs as part of a remodeling project in conjunction with valid building,
heating, plumbing or electrical permits, nor the removal of industrial equipment where
industrial operations of the same or similar kind will continue after removal. The City Council
finds that such removal may result in the complete abandonment of property and reduce the
chance that such property will in the future be devoted to any productive or enjoyable public
or private use, and therefore cause conditions which will create health and safety hazards
and aggravate blight, interfere with the enjoyment of and reduce the value of private property,
and interfere with the safety and welfare of the public.
(2) Definitions.
(a) Code Official shall mean: The Building Inspector, Fire Marshall, County Health Officer
or Police Chief.
(b) Commercial Building shall mean: Any multi-family dwelling, retail business,
government or non-profit service or sales building, and any appurtenant structure
more than 300 square feet in area measured at the ground level.
(c) Industrial Building shall mean: Any building or appurtenant structures whether
currently used or previously used for manufacturing, warehousing, shipping,
receiving, parking, vehicle, trailer or transport storage, inventory storage,
administration, and any other use ancillary to a manufacturing process or supply
business located on a site that is more than 1 acre in area.
(d) Razing shall mean: The wrecking or disassembly of a structure more than 300
square feet in area measured at the ground level.
(e) Razing, Scrapping, Salvage or Recycling shall not mean: the sale and purchase of
residential, commercial, or industrial structures or facilities for the purpose of
continuing a previous or similar use.
(f) Residential Property shall mean: any single or two unit dwelling structure or
appurtenant structure more than 300 square feet in area measured at the ground
level.
(g) Salvageable Materials shall mean: Real or tangible personal property that is manmade;
is affixed to real property; is detachable from real property; and may have a
resale value, either for re-use or as scrap or recycling purposes. Such materials shall
not include any structural materials or components.
(h) Scrapping, Salvaging, or Recycling shall mean: The removal of fixtures, equipment, or
building materials from a residential, commercial or industrial structures or facilities
following cessation of residential use or business operations.
(i) Vacated Building shall mean: A building or structure that had a principal nonresidential
use as its most recent use allowed by law, which principal use has
ceased.
(3) Permits Required.
9
(a) The razing, scrapping, salvaging or recycling of any building, structure or facility
located within the City shall require a permit obtained in accordance with this
Section.
(b) A Class 1 Permit shall be required for the razing, scrapping, salvaging, or recycling of
any vacated residential property.
(1) The application for a Permit shall be submitted to the Building Inspector,
along with a proposed plan that will identify the following:
(a) Date of razing, scrapping, salvaging, or recycling.
(b) Names, addresses, and contact information for contractors engaged
to carry out the activity.
(c) Proposed disposition of salvageable materials, fixtures, and
personal property.
(d) Identification of contacts made to utilities for disconnection of
water, sewer, power, and other utilities.
(e) Abandonment of any private water well, dry well, or septic tank or
system on the property.
(f) Plan for disposition or recycling of building materials.
(g) Plan for removing foundation, backfilling, topsoil restoration,
regarding, landscaping, and continuing maintenance.
(h) Plan for tree protection.
(i) Plan for protection or restoration of sidewalk, curb, gutter and
infrastructure.
(2) The fee for a Class 1 Permit shall be in accordance with the fee schedule
adopted by the City Council.
(3) The City may require the applicant or the property owner to post an
irrevocable letter of credit or other acceptable surety in an amount sufficient
to cover the costs of repairs to the streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and
infrastructure that may be caused by the activity. Said surety shall be
effective for a period of one year after the completion of the restoration of
the site.
(c) A Class 2 Permit shall be required for the razing, scrapping, or recycling of any
vacated commercial building.
(1) The application for the Permit shall be submitted to the Building Inspector,
along with a proposed plan that will identify the following:
(a) Date of razing, scrapping, salvaging, or recycling.
(b) Identification and location of any hazardous materials or waste and
plans for its disposition.
(c) Identification and quantification of any know chemical, material,
substance, or waste which is now or hereafter defined as or
included in the definition of a “hazardous substance”, “hazardous
material”, “hazardous waste”, “solid waste”, “toxic substance”,
“pollutant”, “contaminant”, or words of similar import under any
applicable Wisconsin or Federal law.
(d) Names, addresses, and contact information for contractors engaged
to carry out the activity.
(e) Removal or abandonment of any private water well, dry well, storage
tanks, or septic tank or system on the property.
(f) Proposed disposition of salvageable materials, fixtures, and
personal property.
(g) Identification of contacts made to utilities for disconnection of
water, sewer, power, and other utilities.
(h) Plan for removing foundation, backfilling, topsoil restoration,
regarding, landscaping, and continuing maintenance.
(i) Plan for disposing or recycling building materials.
(2) The fee for a Class 2 Permit shall be in accordance with the fee schedule
adopted by the City Council.
(3) The City may require the applicant or the property owner to post an
irrevocable letter of credit or other acceptable surety in an amount sufficient
to cover the costs of repairs to the streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and
infrastructure that may be caused by the activity. Said surety shall be
10
effective for a period of one year after the completion of the restoration of
the site.
(d) A Class 3 Permit shall be required for the razing, scrapping, salvaging, or recycling of
any vacated industrial building. A vacated industrial building located on a campus of
less than 1 acre shall comply with the Class 2 Permit requirements.
(1) The application for the permit shall be submitted to the City Council, along
with a proposed plan that will identify the following:
(a) Date of razing, scrapping, salvaging, or recycling.
(b) Identification of facilities to be razed, scrapped, salvaged, or
recycled.
(c) Identification and location of all utilities to be terminated.
(d) Identification and quantification of any know chemical, material,
substance, or waste which is now or hereafter defined as or
included in the definition of a “hazardous substance”, “hazardous
material”, “hazardous waste”, “solid waste”, “toxic substance”,
“pollutant”, “contaminant”, or words of similar import under any
applicable Wisconsin or Federal law.
(e) Names, addresses, and contact information for contractors engaged
to carry out the activity.
(f) Removal or abandonment of any private water well, dry well, storage
tanks, or septic tank or system on the property.
(g) Disposition of salvageable building materials.
(h) Identification of contacts made to utilities for disconnection of
water, sewer, power, and other utilities.
(i) Plan for removing foundation, backfilling, topsoil restoration,
regarding, landscaping, and continuing maintenance.
(j) Plan for recycling building and industrial materials and equipment.
(k) Plan for building removal.
(l) Plan for removing, remediating, capping or containing any
contamination.
(m) Plan for future use.
(2) The fee for a Class 3 Permit shall be in accordance with the fee schedule
adopted by the City Council.
(3) The City may require the applicant or the property owner to post an
irrevocable letter of credit or other acceptable surety in an amount sufficient
to cover the costs of repairs to the streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and
infrastructure that may be caused by the activity. Said surety shall be
effective for a period of one year after the completion of the restoration of
the site.
(4) Permit Validity. A Class 1 Permit shall be valid for a period of 60 days following the date of
issuance. A Class 2 Permit shall be valid for a period of 90 days following the date of
issuance. A Class 3 Permit shall be valid for a period of one year following the date of
issuance. Any permit may be extended for a period of up to 90 days due to weather or
unforeseeable circumstances. The terms of the plan filed with the City shall become the
enforceable obligation of the permittee and a continuing condition of the permit issuance.
(5) Failure to Obtain Permit. Failure to file the required application and securing a permit prior to
beginning razing, scrapping, salvaging, or recycling operations following cessation of
residential occupation or commercial or industrial business activities, or continuation of
demolition or removal operations following revocation of a permit shall be a violation of this
ordinance and shall be punishable in accordance with Section 14.16 of this Chapter.
(6) Application.
(a) The application shall be submitted to the Building Inspector with the appropriate fee
no less than 15 days prior to the proposed date of commencement. The application
shall include all supporting information required by this section.
(b) Code Officials may require additional information of a specific applicant. Upon the
filing of a Class 3 Permit application, the owner and the City may agree to extend the
review period for an additional 45 days.
(7) Irrevocable Letter of Credit.
(a) When required as a condition of a permit, the permittee shall post an Irrevocable
Letter of Credit in an amount required by the City and in a form acceptable to the City
11
Attorney. The Irrevocable Letter of Credit must be issued by a financial institution
certified by the State to conduct such business, allowing for direct draw by the City on
demand without court action and without approval by permittee, to complete work or
repair damage which was the obligation of the permittee. The Irrevocable Letter of
Credit shall contain a provision that it remain as an obligation to the City for no less
than one year after the completion of the last act by the permittee of razing the
vacated building, or after the expiration of a permit issued under this section to the
permittee, whichever is later.
(b) In setting the value of the Irrevocable Letter of Credit, the City Council shall consider
the recommendation, if any, of the Code Officials; the expertise of the applicant; the
longevity of the applicant; the capitalization of the applicant; the scope of the
proposed project; the possible environmental hazards that could be created; the
effect of the proposed operation on the surrounding neighborhood; and the cost of
remediation to the City if the permittee fails to complete its obligations.
(8) Abatement of Asbestos. The applicant shall provide proof of notification to the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources in compliance with Wisconsin Administrative Code, ch. 447
or its successor concerning examination for and presence of regulated asbestos-containing
materials in the structure.
(9) General Operating Requirements. The following regulations shall apply to all permit holders in
accordance with the provisions of this section:
(a) Permit issued pursuant to this section shall be plainly displayed on the premises
upon with the building is located.
(b) The building and premises shall, at all times, be maintained in as clean, neat, and
sanitary condition as the premises will reasonably permit.
(c) No garbage, refuse or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract vermin shall
be kept on the premises, except for domestic garbage kept in rodent-proof covered
containers which are removed from the premises as often as necessary to provide a
sanitary environment.
(d) Work done under this Permit shall be subject to inspection by the Code Officials.
(e) An applicant for a Permit shall maintain proof of insurance policies, naming the City
as additional insured, during the life of the Permit in the following minimum amounts:
(1) Automobile Liability (owned, non-owned, leased)
(a) Bodily Injury: $2,000,000 each occurrence.
(b) Property Damage: $2,000,000 each occurrence.
(2) Pollution Legal Liability: $5,000,000 each loss where asbestos removal,
environmental process, abatement, remediation, or dumping/disposal in a
Federal or State regulated facility is required.
(3) Worker’s Compensation: Statutory limits.
(4) Employer’s Liability: $500,000 each accident; $500,000 disease, each
employee; and $1,000,000 disease, policy limit.
(5) Umbrella Liability: $2,000,000 over the primary insurance coverages listed
above.
(f) No scrap salvage or debris which is temporarily stored on the premises shall be
allowed to rest on or protrude over any public street, walkway or curb, or become
scattered about or blown off the premises.
(g) No mechanized process whatsoever shall be utilized on the premises to reduce
salvageable materials or debris in volume unless approved by the Council in
conjunction with a specific Permit. Such prohibited mechanized processes include,
but are not limited to, crushers or shredders.
(h) There shall be strict compliance with the City Municipal Code related to noise control.
(i) No premises or building subject to a Permit shall be allowed to become a public
nuisance or be operated in such a manner as to adversely affect the public health,
safety or welfare.
(j) There shall be full compliance with the City Building, Fire and Health Codes and with
all other City, County, State and Federal laws, rules or regulations which may be
applicable.
(k) The Permit holder shall, during the salvage process, maintain the work site in a safe
and secure condition.
(l) The Permit holder shall dispose of building debris in a licensed landfill, excepted for
salvaged/recyclable materials. At any time, the Permit holder shall produce to the
12
Code Officials receipts and/or an itemized list of debris disposed of by dumping,
salvage, or recycling.
(m) The Permit holder shall be responsible for disconnections of utilities necessary for
the salvaging process, including plumbing, electrical and natural gas. Evidence that
the necessary disconnections have been accomplished shall be submitted to the
Building Inspector.
(n) The Permit holder shall comply with all orders of the Code Officials imposed at the
granting of the Permit or at any other time.
(o) The Irrevocable Letter of Credit and required insurance imposed is a continuing
condition of issuance and validity of the Permit.
(p) The Permit holder is responsible for any damage to City streets, curb and gutter,
sidewalks, signage, lighting fixtures, or other City infrastructure caused by or arising
out of demolition operations or transport within City limits.
(q) The Permit may restrict outdoor operations during nighttime hours of 10 p.m. to 7
a.m.
(r) The Permit holder shall comply with all soil and erosion control requirements found
within the State Uniform Dwelling Code and the City storm water regulations found
within the Municipal Code.
(s) The Building Inspector is authorized to inspect and render final approval of
completed razing, scrapping, salvaging, or recycling activities.
(10) Backfill and Grounds Restoration. If the submitted plan does not provide for new or other
construction on the site to be commenced within 180 days following completion of demolition
described in the plan, the plan shall provide for the following site restorations:
(a) Foundations. Whenever a building has been razed, any foundation shall be leveled
to at least one foot below grade and filled with ninety-five percent noncombustible
granular fill material with the top two feet of fill material being dirt or sand. No solid
fill or combustible material may be placed in said foundation.
(b) Driveway Approaches, Sidewalks and Slabs. Remaining driveway approaches shall
be removed and replaced with curb and gutter; damaged public sidewalks shall be
replaced; and driveway aprons, remaining slabs and private sidewalks shall be
removed from the site prior to final approval.
(c) Site Grading. Whenever a building has been razed, the site shall be graded with a
minimum of three inches of topsoil, with seed and mulch or sod applied to cover the
entire disturbed area.
(d) Environmental Work. If capping of a contaminated site is contemplated with the
approval of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources or other environmental
protection agency, a copy of the approved order shall be provided to the City.
(11) Inspections. Permit holders and property owners shall permit Code Officials to inspect the
premises proposed to be permitted, with or without advanced notice, as often as may be
required to permit the performance of their duties and assure compliance with this Section.
Inspections shall be made during normal business hours in the absence of emergency
circumstances which require prompt attention to protect the public health, safety, and welfare
or to preserve evidence of noncompliance with this Section. The unreasonable failure to
permit inspections shall be grounds for permit denial or the suspension or revocation of
same.
(12) Suspension and Revocation of Permit. If, in the opinion of the Code Officials, the public is
subject to imminent danger due to violation by the Permit holder or anyone involved in the
operation, the Code Officials shall issue an order to the Permit holder requiring immediate
cessation of those operations creating the imminent danger. Pursuant to such order, the
Permit holder shall cause such operations to cease as directed by the Code Officials. The
Permit holder may appeal any such order to the Board of Zoning Appeals, in writing, setting
forth the basis for any appeal. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a hearing regarding
any such appeal and provide at least ten days’ notice of the hearing to the Permit holder and
the Code Officials.
1
Chapter 15 Plumbing Code
15.01 Inspector
15.02 Inspections
15.03 Notice for Inspection
15.04 Definitions
15.05 Permits and Fees
15.06 Bonding - Plumbers and Excavators (Repealed by MC#1146)
15.07 Connection and Excavation Permits
15.08 Excavating Fees (Repealed by MC#1005)
15.09 Excavating Regulations (Repealed by MC#1062)
15.10 Record of Sewers
15.11 Construction of Sewers
15.12 Roots in Drains
15.13 Cesspools, Privy Vaults
15.14 Installation of Water Supply
15.15 Duties
15.16 Sale and Use of Fixtures
15.17 Plumbing Affidavit
15.18 Cross Connection Control
15.19 Well Abandonment
15.20 Sampling Manholes and Grease Traps Reports
15.21 State Codes Adopted (MC#1146)
15.22 Penalties and Violations (MC#1146)
15.01 INSPECTOR
(1) Duties. The plumbing inspector, hereinafter called the inspector, shall have control of the supervision and
inspection of plumbing and sewage work within or in connection with all buildings within the City of Wisconsin
Rapids. He/she shall make or cause to be made all inspections of house sewers from the main sewer, or other
disposal terminals to the buildings. It shall be the duty of said inspector to see that the construction,
reconstruction, and alteration of all plumbing, sewers, water and plumbing ventilation in all buildings in the City
of Wisconsin Rapids shall conform to the laws of the State of Wisconsin and the rules and regulations made by
the Department of Safety and Professional Development as set forth but not limited to the rules and
regulations of Chapter SPS 382 entitled "Design, Construction, Installation, Supervision, and Inspection of
Plumbing" and Chapter SPS 383 entitled "Private Onsite Wastewater Treatment Systems" and the ordinances
of the City of Wisconsin Rapids, and that work is done by licensed plumbers as provided by those respective
regulations. (MC#1146)
(2) Authority.
(a) He is hereby authorized and empowered to exercise in the best interests of the general public such
supervision over all plumbing and sewer installations as may be necessary to adequately enforce
and administer the provisions of this ordinance, state law and code, to make plumbing safe and
sanitary and to promote public welfare in all classes of buildings, private and public.
(b) The inspector is hereby authorized to cause any necessary changes to be made to bring any sewer
and water supply work up to prescribed standards. Failure to do so when so directed shall be
sufficient cause for action to remove a master or journeyman plumber's license as is provided for by
Wisconsin Statutes.
(3) Access to Premises. The inspector having reasonable cause to believe a violation exists of his/her authorized
agent, upon written order from said inspector shall have free and unobstructed access to any part of a private
home or premises where a house sewer, drain, plumbing or appliances in connection therewith have been
installed, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and free access at any time to any building under
construction or any public building for the purpose of inspection.
(4) Records. The inspector shall prepare suitable records and applications for the permits required, and keep in
his/her office a proper daily record of all transactions of the office. (MC#1146)
2
(5) Inspector's Superior. The inspector shall work with and report to the Director of Planning and Economic
Development. (MC#1146)
15.02 INSPECTIONS
Inspections and tests shall be made as provided for in the State Code and this ordinance, and shall include:
(1) Inspection of the entire house sewer, water service, and drain from the main sewer or other disposal terminal
to the building, including connections at the point of discharge.
(2) The soil, waste, vent, and water distribution piping, known as roughing in, shall be inspected under test
before it is enclosed or covered.
(3) Final inspection of the plumbing installation after fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances have been tested
and completed, and the installation is ready for use. When practicable the final inspection shall be made with
the water supply serving said plumbing system turned on for such test purposes.
(4) The inspector shall furnish the owner or the plumber with a certificate of such inspection indicating whether
the installation has been approved or disapproved and giving the reasons for disapproval in writing. This
approval shall also be noted on the certificate of occupancy.
15.03 NOTICE FOR INSPECTION
(1) Whenever any work is ready for inspection the inspector shall be notified during office hours by the person in
charge, specifying the location by street number or land description.
(2) The plumber or person in charge shall make such arrangements as will enable the inspector to reach all
parts of the building readily, and shall have present the proper apparatus and appliances for making the
tests, and shall furnish all materials and perform all labor in making such tests as required for proper
inspection.
(3) Failure to notify the inspector for an inspection will result in the permit holder removing materials to expose
concealed work or, at the discretion of the inspector, result in penalties as outlined in the adopted fee
schedule for the first offense and second offense. Third and subsequent violations will result in a citation being
issued. (MC#1146)
15.04 DEFINITIONS
(1) Plumbing. In this ordinance plumbing means and includes:
(a) All piping, fixtures, appliances, and appurtenances in connection with the water supply and drainage
system within a building. (MC#1146)
(b) The construction and connection of any drain or waste pipe carrying domestic sewage from the
foundation walls of any building, and the connection to any sewer service lateral at the curb or other
disposal terminal, including private domestic sewage treatment and disposal systems and alteration
of any such system, drain or waste pipe, except minor repairs to faucets, valves, pipes, appliances,
and the removal of stoppages. (MC#1146)
(c) The water service piping from the building to the curb box at the street curb, alley, or other terminal,
and the connection of domestic hot water storage tanks, water softeners, and water heaters with the
water supply system.
(d) Water supply and plumbing appliances, including water pressure systems other than the City system,
and water mains and appurtenances in connection therewith.
(e) The construction of all storm water drains from outside of the foundation wall of any building to the
storm sewer at the curb or other disposal terminal. The construction and connection of all piping and
appurtenances in connection with the storm water drains within a building and to a point three to five
feet outside the building. (MC#1146)
(f) A plumbing and drainage system so designed and vent piping so installed as to keep the air within
the system in free circulation and movement, and to prevent with a margin of safety unequal air
pressure of such force as might blow, siphon, or affect trap seals or retard the discharge from
plumbing fixtures, or to permit sewer air to escape into the building. A water piping system so
designed and installed in a manner to permit a continuous ample flow of water to all plumbing
fixtures at a given time and to prevent the possibility of contamination of the pure water supply from
any source whatever except as provided for in Chapter 144 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) Plumbers. Master and journeyman plumbers are any persons duly licensed by the Department of Safety and
Professional Services. (MC#1146)
(3) Apprentice. An apprentice is a person other than a master or journeyman plumber, registered as such with
the Department of Industry, Labor, and Human Relations in compliance with the rules and regulations
governing apprentices.
3
(3) Apprentice. An apprentice is a person other than a master or journeyman plumber, registered as such with the
Department of Safety and Professional Services in compliance with the rules and regulations governing
apprentices. (MC#1146)
(4) Sewer Service Lateral. The sewer service lateral is defined to be that part of the drainage system extending
from the curb to the connection with the main sewer.
(5) House Sanitary Sewer. The house sanitary sewer is defined to be that part of the sanitary drainage system
extending from the sewer service lateral or other disposal terminal to the foundation wall of any building.
(MC#1146)
(6) House Sanitary Drain. A house sanitary drain is defined to be all underground piping inside the building
designed to convey sanitary sewage to the house sanitary sewer. (MC#1146)
(7) House Storm Drain. A house storm drain is defined to be all underground piping inside the building and to a
point three to five feet outside of the building designed to convey the discharge of all roof leaders,
refrigerator drains, and all other clear water drains to the house storm sewer.
(7) House Storm Drain. A house storm drain is defined to be all underground piping inside the building designed to
convey the discharge of all roof leaders, refrigerator drains, and all other clear water drains to the house storm
sewer. (MC#1146)
(8) House Storm Sewer. A house storm sewer is defined to be all underground piping designed to convey the
discharge of the house storm drain, surface drains, yard drains, cistern overflows, and all other clear water
drains to the storm sewer service lateral at the curb or other disposal terminal.
(9) Storm Sewer Service Lateral. The storm sewer service lateral is defined to be that part of the storm water
drainage system extending from the curb to the main street.
15.05 PERMITS AND FEES (MC#595)
(1) Application.
(a) All persons shall, before doing any plumbing work in a building, or making any extension with any
building sewer drain, or water service, make application to the office of the inspector for a plumbing
permit covering such work.
(b) The inspector shall approve the application and issue a statement showing the fees to be paid for
such permit. Said permit may be issued by a person authorized to act for the inspector.
(c) Plumbing contractors doing work within the City of Wisconsin Rapids shall have proof of liability on
file with the plumbing inspector.
(2) Facilities In. This permit shall not be issued until the inspector has proof that adequate water is available and
that sewage can be disposed of. SPS 382 and 383 and Chapter #65 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code
must be complied with and covers individual lots as well as subdivisions. (MC#1146)
(3) Plans and Specifications. When deemed advisable by the inspector, plans and specifications showing the
kind and size of pipes, size and kind of traps, and number and kind of fixtures shall be filed with the
inspector.
(4) Schedule of Fees. Fees for plumbing permits and inspections shall be assessed according to the schedule set
by the Director of Planning and Economic Development with the concurrence of the Common Council.
(MC#1146)
(5) Schedule Application. This schedule shall apply to the following list of fixtures; sinks, water closets, baths
(any description), wash basins, laundry tubs, urinals, bar and soda fountains, sanitary bubblers, catch basins
or similar receptacles, machine waste connections, acid tanks, sumps and ejectors, rain water cistern
connections, air conditioning units, water heaters, low pressure boilers, private water pumps, water softeners
and purifiers, garbage disposal units, dish washers, automatic washers, ice cube machines, dental cuspidors,
water cooled refrigeration. This list is not intended to be exclusive.
(6) Permit Restrictions. No permit will be issued to anyone not licensed, except those covered by (8). (MC#1146)
(7) Expiration of Permits. All permits are issued for a continuous performance of the work named thereon;
permits will automatically expire when work ceases for a period of six (6) months without good and
reasonable cause for same; but automatically expire on completion of work for which it was issued.
(8) Owner's Privilege. A property owner may personally install sewer and water facilities inside his/her own
single family residence owned and occupied by him as a residence, provided that the owner shall:
(a) Apply for and secure a permit in accordance with succeeding sections.
(b) Sign an affidavit as provided by inspector.
(c) Do the work himself in accordance with this code.
(d) Apply for inspections as provided.
(e) Obtain the approval of the inspector.
(f) Have exterior connections to the city system made by a licensed plumber.
15.07 CONNECTION PERMITS (MC#1062)
4
(1) Permit to Connect with Public Sewer Systems. No person, firm, or corporation shall open any street, alley, or
other public place for the purpose of connecting to a sewer lateral or other terminal without first obtaining from
the inspector (or his/her authorized agent) and the city engineer (or his/her authorized agent) a written permit
to open such street, alley, or public place. No person, firm, or corporation shall connect to any sewer lateral or
other disposal terminal, lay any sanitary or storm sewer, or make any attachment or extension to any drain or
sewer, public or private, inside or outside any building without first obtaining from the inspector or his
authorized agent a written permit for such work involved. (MC#1146)
(2) Permit; How Granted. Such permit shall be granted only upon application by a licensed master plumber,
authorized by the agent or owner of the premises desiring to make such connection, extension, or alteration.
He/she shall state the name of the owner and that he/she and the owner will be bound by and subject to all
rules and regulations prescribed in this ordinance, and giving the exact location of the premises, stating the
purpose for which such connection, extension, or alteration is to be used and the time when the work is to be
done, and all other particulars with respect thereto.
15.08 EXCAVATING FEES - REPEALED by MC#1005
15.09 EXCAVATING REGULATIONS - REPEALED by MC#1062
15.10 RECORD OF SEWERS
(1) Records Kept. The inspector with the cooperation of the city engineer (or his/her authorized agent) and the
sewer crew superintendent shall keep a proper sewer and water connection record in a book, card index, or
plat provided for that purpose showing the location of the lot, the name of the owner of the premises desiring
to make such connection, and the plumber proposing to lay the sewer or drain, and the exact location with the
public sewer of each drain, sewer, or water so laid. (MC#1146)
(2) Depth of Sewer and Location of Junction. Information concerning the sizes, location, and depth of public and
private sewers or drains and the position of the branch, junction and appurtenances will be furnished by the
city engineer (or his/her authorized agent) and sewer crew superintendent upon request. All reasonable care
will be taken to insure the correctness of such information, but such correctness will not be guaranteed under
any circumstances. When in accordance with the measurements furnished, the junction is not found, such
connection shall be made under the direction of the inspector. (MC#1146)
15.11 CONSTRUCTION OF SEWERS
(1) Every house or building must be separately and independently connected with the street sewer, except in
cases where a house or building stands in the rear of another on an interior lot. (See also State Plumbing
Code.)
(2) All house sanitary and storm sewer piping extending from the service lateral or other disposal terminal to the
outside foundation walls of any building must consist of good cast iron soil pipe or schedule 40 PVC pipe with a
minimum coverage of four feet. (MC#1146)
(3) All sanitary and storm drains inside the building shall consist of good cast iron soil pipe or schedule 40 PVC
pipe. (MC#1146)
(4) Defective or Inferior Pipe Prohibited. No master plumber or other authorized person shall lay and connect
with any public sewer any pipe that is cracked, damaged, or of an inferior grade or quality, under penalty as is
herein provided.
15.12 ROOTS IN DRAINS
(1) When it becomes necessary to dig up more than 50 percent of vitrified clay or other type house sewers
because of stoppages by tree roots, said sewer shall be replaced in its full length with cast iron pipe or
schedule 40 PVC pipe.
(2) Drain Passage Obstructed. In all cases where the course of any sewer or drain is obstructed by water, gas,
steam, or other pipes or conduits, the question of passing over or under such obstruction or of raising or
lowering thereof, to permit the construction and installation and venting of the sewer or drain, shall be
determined by the inspector or his/her authorized agent.
(3) Drains Conveying Industrial Wastes. No person shall connect any public garage, factory, brewery, distillery,
stock yard, slaughter house, tannery, or other building establishment of any kind whatsoever by any drain or
sewer with the main sewer, through which it is intended or designed to discharge any offal, garbage, filth, or
other solid refuse or through which substances may be discharged into the main sewer, unless such
installations are provided with an adequate intercepting appliance approved by the inspector. Piping for
industrial plants or like buildings must convey such wastes separately to a predetermined point so that the
restricted wastes may be treated prior to discharge into the house sewer or public sewer. (Also see restricted
wastes and appliances as contained in the State Code.) NOTE: The attention of owners, architects, engineers,
and plumbers is directed to the above provisions. For additional information consult the inspector.
5
(4) Drains Discharging Obnoxious Liquids. No person shall connect any premises with any drain or sewer entering
into the main sewer through which any obnoxious, explosive, or odorous liquids or substances may be
discharged into the main sewer.
(5) Old Drain Ends and Connections Guarded. The ends of all sewers and drain pipes not immediately connected,
and the open ends of all abandoned sewers shall be securely closed to prevent the introduction of sand or
earth.
(6) Draining Sanitary Sewage into Storm Sewers. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
sanitary, industrial or organic sewage into a sewer designed or designated as a storm sewer.
(7) Draining Storm Water into Sanitary Sewers. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm
water or clear water drains of any kind, including subsoil and building drain tile drains, into a sewer designed
or designated as a sanitary sewer. If storm water or clear water is being discharged into a sanitary sewer, the
inspector shall give the person offending 15 days' notice to disconnect. Failure to disconnect after such
notice shall authorize the inspector to disconnect and assess the costs of such disconnection against the
property involved. The inspector shall have the alternative right at the end of such notice to institute action
for violation of this ordinance.
(8) Discharging of Drains and Sewer. No person shall permit any drain or sewer of any kind carrying obnoxious or
explosive or inflammable effluent to discharge into any open sewer or gutter, or upon any street or public
alley, or ditches or upon or over any sidewalk or into any city sewer system.
15.13 CESSPOOLS, PRIVY VAULTS
No person shall construct any cesspool or other receptacle for filthy water, or convert any well into a cesspool within
the limits of the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
15.14 INSTALLATION OF WATER SUPPLY
(1) The building supply pipe shall be laid at right angles to the curb line so that its location and that of the curb
box may be readily determined. All underground water pipe of a diameter of two inches or less shall be of
approved copper pipe. Where the pipe is of a greater diameter than two inches it shall be of ductile iron.
(2) Service Pipes. Service pipes are to be laid carefully in a trench with perfect alignment not less than five feet
deep, or at the same elevation of city main. (MC#1146)
(a) Service pipe up to and including one inch shall be type K copper from main to the curb and
connections made with three-quarter (3/4”) or one inch (1”) corporation cocks.
(b) Service pipes one and one quarter inch (1-1/4”) or larger shall be type K copper or ductile iron and
connections made with the main and with a branch connection and valve.
(c) Water service pipes from the stop box to the water meter shall conform to one of the standards listed
in SPS table 384.30-7
(d) Curb boxes shall be located within one foot of sidewalk line on owner's property and on sidewalk
grade, and have cast on the top the word "water". Except where zoning ordinance does not require a
setback, they may be installed on City property at a distance not to exceed one foot from property line.
(e) Water meters shall be set not less than two feet above the finished floor in the basement, or where
the water department shall direct.
(3) Water Service.
(a) No plumber shall turn on, leave turned on, any water service curb stop after the completion and trial
of his/her work, which for any reason has been turned off by the Wisconsin Rapids water
department.
(b) No unauthorized individual shall turn on or off the water after it has been turned on or off from a
given service, nor shall anyone make openings in the street or turn off water at the main without a
permit and supervision as provided for in this ordinance.
(c) No water service will be turned on or meter set by the Wisconsin Rapids water department until the
inspector certifies that the plumbing installation is satisfactory.
(4) Testing. All concealed water supply piping within the walls or under the floor of any building shall be tested by
a water test or air test to a pressure not less than city water pressure. After the test has been made the
piping shall be drained.
(5) Cross Connections. No private water system shall be connected directly or indirectly to any private water
main or pipe that in turn is connected to any publicly-owned water main or pipe.
(6) Separate Water Service.
(a) Only one service connection will be laid out to each lot or building if the latter covers more than one
lot.
(b) Buildings on separate or adjoining lots must be supplied through separate independent service
connections, and cannot be combined or joined together and receive their supply through a single
service connection.
6
(7) Connection to Main. No person shall cut, tap, break, or make a connection any kind to any public or private
water main without a permit from the proper authority, and all such work shall be executed in compliance
with rule and regulations governing said connection
(8) Private Water Supply Systems, Water Supply Piping and Appliances. All private water supply systems and
water supply piping and appliances, including the water service piping within the building or from the
buildings to the main in the street, alley, or other terminal, and the connecting of domestic hot water storage
tanks, water softeners, water heaters with the water supply systems, private or public, are hereby defined to
be plumbing work and shall be done in accordance with the State Plumbing Code, the provisions of this
chapter, and rules and regulations of the water works department. Private systems must be tested by a
sample sent to state laboratory at least three times each year.
(9) Meter Bypass Connections. All meter installations over one inch (1”) shall be provided with a bypass
connection that is equal to or one normal size less than the meter size. The property owner shall also supply
a lockable bypass valve that is similar to a McDonald model 6101 W or a Milwaukee valve series 20 ball
valve with a latch-lock handle. The valve will be sealed by the utility, and shall not be operated without utility
permission, unless an emergency exists. The utility shall be notified as soon as possible when a bypass valve
is used for emergency purposes. Examples of the required meter bypass connection are available from the
utility.
15.15 DUTIES
(1) Owners. It shall be the duty of each and every owner of lot or lots which are occupied by dwellings or other
inhabited buildings where there are sewer and water facilities in the streets, avenues, or alleys abutting
thereon, to promptly put in and construct house drains and sewer water connections with proper provisions
and equipment so as to avoid the necessity for and the use of outside toilets and privies. When said
connections have been made such outdoor toilets and privies shall be razed and shall not be used for any
other purpose.
(2) Board of Health.
(a) It shall be the duty of the Board of Health to have proper house drains and sewers constructed from
every lot abutting a public sewer and water pipe and occupied by dwellings or other inhabited
buildings and connected with the public sewer in a proper manner.
(b) Upon the report of the Board of Health filed with the council and holding and declaring the
construction of a private house drain or sewer from any lot or lots described in this ordinance to be
necessary in the interest of the public health, the council shall require such private drain or sewer to
be constructed and connected with the public sewer.
(3) City Engineer (or his/her authorized agent). (MC#1146)
(a) The City Engineer (or his/her authorized agent) under the order and direction of the common council
shall prescribe the location, arrangement, form, materials, and construction of every such private
drain or sewer and determine the plan and manner of connecting the same; the work of construction
shall be in all cases subject to supervision of the city engineer, but the cost of such private drains and
sewers shall not be included in the estimate of the cost of any public sewer and such cost shall be
charged upon the lot or lots for the benefit of which such drain or sewer shall be constructed.
(b) The City Engineer (or his/her authorized agent) shall at the direction of the Board of Health prepare
and file in the office of the City Clerk, ready for the examination of the parties interested, the plans and
specifications of any private drains or sewers so ordered to be constructed and the city clerk shall at
the direction of the board of health give notice to the lot owners to construct such private drains and
sewers, designating in such notice a reasonable time within which the work shall be completed; and in
case any lot owner fails or neglects to do the work required of him to be done within the time so
specified, the city engineer shall cause the work to be done with charges added to the tax bill in
accordance with the city ordinance for time payment.
15.16 SALE AND USE OF FIXTURES
(1) The sales and use of new or used plumbing fixtures is prohibited within the City of Wisconsin Rapids, unless
considered in first class condition by the inspector.
(2) No plumbing fixtures or supplies shall be installed within the City of Wisconsin Rapids unless they fully
conform to the state code.
15.17 PLUMBING AFFIDAVIT
STATE OF WISCONSIN )
) ss
COUNTY OF WOOD )
7
_______________________________, being first duly sworn on oath deposes and says that he/she has applied for a
plumbing permit to the building/plumbing inspector of the City of Wisconsin Rapids to do plumbing work in a home
owned and occupied by him/her at ______________________________. This affidavit is made for the purposes of
complying with the provisions of the building code of the City of Wisconsin Rapids and the State of Wisconsin, which
provides that plumbing work may be done by one who owns and occupies his/her own home providing the installation
complies with the plumbing code of the City of Wisconsin Rapids and the State of Wisconsin.
Dated this _____ day of __________, 20_____.
Signature of Owner
Subscribed and sworn before me this _____ day of __________, 20_____.
Notary Public, _________ County, WI
My Commission Expires:_____________
15.18 CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL (MC#1124)
(1) Cross Connection Defined. That a cross connection shall be defined as a connection or potential connection
between any part of a water supply system and another environment containing substances in a manner
that, under any circumstances, would allow the substances to enter the water supply by means of back
siphonage or back pressure.
(2) Cross Connection Prohibited Without Approval. That no person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit
to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross connection. No interconnection shall be
established whereby potable water from a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular
public water supply of the City of Wisconsin Rapids may enter the supply or distribution system of said
municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use
of such supply shall have been approved by the Wisconsin Rapids Water Works and Lighting Commission
and by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources in accordance with Section NR 810.15(2),Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(3) Inspections. That it shall be the duty of the city plumbing inspector and one appointed person from the water
utility to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water system where cross
connections with the public water system is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections
based on potential health hazards involved shall be established at not less than once every 10
years and as approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(4) Right to Inspect. That upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the Plumbing Inspection
Department and appointed person from the water utility shall have the right to request entry at any
reasonable time to examine for cross connections any property served by a connection to the public water
system of the City of Wisconsin Rapids. If entry is refused, such representative shall obtain a special
inspection warrant under Section 66.122, Wisconsin Statutes. On request the owner, lessee or occupant of
any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping
system or systems on such property.
(5) Discontinuance of Service. That the Water Works and Lighting Commission is hereby authorized and directed
to discontinue water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of this ordinance exists, and
to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of
the public water system. Water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice and opportunity for
hearing under Chapter 68, Wisconsin Statutes, except as provided in Section 6. Water service to such
property shall not be restored until the cross connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with the
provisions of this ordinance.
(6) Emergency Authority. That if it is determined by the Water Works and Lighting Commission that a cross
connection or an emergency endangers public health, safety or welfare and requires immediate action, and a
written finding to that effect is filed with the clerk of the City of Wisconsin Rapids and delivered to the
customer's premises, service may be immediately discontinued. That customer shall have an opportunity for
hearing under Chapter 68, Wisconsin Statutes, within 10 days of such emergency discontinuance.
(7) Supplementary Regulation. That this ordinance does not supersede the State Plumbing Code and the City of
Wisconsin Rapids plumbing ordinance Chapter 15, but is supplementary to them. (MC#1146)
8
15.19 WELL ABANDONMENT ORDINANCE (MC#759)
(1) Purpose. To prevent contamination of groundwater and to protect public health, safety and welfare by
assuring that unused, unsafe or non-complying wells or wells which may serve as conduits for contamination
or wells which may be illegally cross-connected to the municipal water system, are properly maintained or
abandoned.
(2) Applicability. This ordinance applies to all wells located in the City of Wisconsin Rapids on premises which
are provided water service by the Water Works and Lighting Commission of Wisconsin Rapids. Utility
customers outside of the jurisdiction of the municipal system may be required under contract agreement or
utility rule to adopt and enforce equivalent ordinances within their jurisdictions for purpose stated in Section
1 above.
(3) Definitions.
(a) Municipal Water System means a community water system owned by a city, village, county, town,
town sanitary district, utility district, public inland lake and rehabilitation district, municipal water
district or a federal, state, county, or municipal owned institution for congregate care or correction, or
a privately owned water utility serving the foregoing.
(b) Non-complying means a well or pump installation which does not comply with the provisions of s. NR
812.42, Wisconsin Administrative Code, Standards for Existing Installations and which has not been
granted a variance pursuant to s. NR 812.43, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(c) Pump Installation means the pump and related equipment used for withdrawing water from a well
including the discharge piping, the underground connections, pitless adapters, pressure tanks, pits,
sampling faucets and well seals or caps.
(d) Unsafe means a well or pump installation which produces water which is bacteriologically
contaminated or contaminated with substances in exceedance of the standards of Chapters NR 809
or 140, Wisconsin Administrative Code, or for which a Health Advisory has been issued by the
Department of Natural Resources.
(e) Unused means a well or pump installation which is not in use or does not have a functional pumping
system.
(f) Well means a drill hole or other excavation or opening deeper than it is wide that extends more than
10 feet below the ground surface constructed for the purpose of obtaining groundwater.
(g) Well Abandonment means the filling and sealing of a well according to the provisions of s. NR
812.26, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(4) Abandonment Required. All wells located in the City of Wisconsin Rapids on premises provided water service
by the Water Works and Lighting Commission of the City of Wisconsin Rapids shall be abandoned in
accordance with the terms of this ordinance and Chapter NR 812, Wisconsin Administrative Code, by
September 1, 1993 or no later than one year from the date of connection to the municipal water system,
whichever occurs last, unless a well operation permit has been obtained by the well owner from the City of
Wisconsin Rapids.
(5) Well Operation Permit. The Water Works and Lighting Commission may grant a permit to a private well owner to
operate a well for a period not to exceed five years providing the conditions of this section are met. An
owner may request renewal of a well operation permit by submitting information verifying that the
conditions of this section are met. The Water Works and Lighting Commission, or its agent, may
conduct inspections or have water quality tests conducted at the applicant's expense to obtain or
verify information necessary for consideration of a permit application or renewal. Permit applications
and renewals shall be made on forms provided by the Water Works and Lighting Commission. The
permit application fee shall be per the adopted fee schedule established by the Water Works and
Lighting Commission. The following conditions must be met for issuance or renewal of a well operation
permit:
(a) The well and pump installation shall meet the Standards for Existing Installations described in s. NR
812.42,Wisconsin Administrative Code. The well and pump system shall be evaluated by a licensed
well driller or pump installer and certified on the Wisconsin Well and Pressure System Inspection
Form 3300-221 to comply with ch. NR 812 subch. IV, prior to issuing the initial permit and no less
than every 10 years afterwards.
(b) The well and pump shall have a history of producing safe water as evidenced by at least one coliform
bacteria sample. In areas where the Department of Natural Resources has determined that
groundwater aquifers are contaminated with substances other than bacteria, additional chemical
tests may be required to document the safety of the water.
(c) There shall be no cross-connections between the well’s pump installation or distribution piping and
the municipal water system.
(d) The water from the private well shall not discharge into a drain leading directly to a public sewer
utility unless properly metered and authorized by the sewer utility.
9
(e) The private well shall have a functional pumping system.
(f) The proposed use of the private well shall be justified as reasonable in addition to water provided by
the municipal water system.
(6) Abandonment Procedures.
(a) All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of this ordinance or rule shall be abandoned according to
the procedures and methods of s. NR 812.26, Wisconsin Administrative Code. All debris, pump,
piping, unsealed liners and any other obstructions which may interfere with sealing operations shall
be removed prior to abandonment.
(b) The owner of the well, or the owner's agent, shall notify the Water Works and Lighting Commission at
least 48 hours prior to commencement of any well abandonment activities. The abandonment of the
well shall be observed by a designated representative of the Water Works and Lighting Commission.
(c) An abandonment report form, supplied by the Department of Natural Resources, shall be submitted by the
well owner to the Water Works and Lighting Commission and the Department of Natural
Resources within 30 days of the completion of the well abandonment. The form must be
completed by the licensed well driller, pump installer, or certified operator performing the
abandonment.
15.20 SAMPLING MANHOLES AND GREASE TRAP REPORTS (MC#698)
(1) Installation of Sampling Manholes
(a) All new construction or addition to existing businesses for which grease traps are required, such as
restaurants, schools, supermarkets with deli areas, and similar type businesses, shall be required to
install a sampling manhole, also referred to as an inspection manhole, on said businesses' sanitary
lead at a location prior to the lead reaching the city sewer main. The sampling manhole shall be
installed on the property of the owner of the real estate to which the service is provided. Said
business shall also be informed that they will be required to install an external grease trap if grease
in excessive amounts is later found in their sewage.
(b) The owner of the well, or the owner's agent, shall notify the Water Works and Lighting Commission at
least 48 hours prior to commencement of any well abandonment activities. The abandonment of the
well shall be observed by a designated representative of the Water Works and Lighting Commission.
(c) An abandonment report form, supplied by the Department of Natural Resources, shall be
submitted by the well owner to the Water Works and Lighting Commission and the
Department of Natural Resources within 30 days of the completion of the well abandonment.
The form must be completed by the licensed well driller, pump installer, or certified operator
performing the abandonment.
(2) Grease Trap Reports: The city plumbing inspector shall coordinate a grease trap cleaning report procedure for
all businesses with grease traps. If the report is not sent to the plumbing inspector, as required, the property
owner and/or business owner will be sent a notice of noncompliance requiring the report to be submitted
within ten (10) days.
15.21 STATE CODES ADOPTED.
Wisconsin Administrative Code SPS Chapters 381-387 and 390-391 is hereby adopted by reference. Any future
amendments, revisions and modifications of said chapter SPS 381-387 and 390-391 incorporated herein are
intended to be part of this code. A copy of said codes and amendments are to be kept on file in the office of the
plumbing inspector. (MC#1146)
15.22 PENALTIES AND VIOLATIONS.
Plumbing work that is constructed in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be corrected in the time frame
given by the plumbing inspector. Should the plumbing inspector feel that remedy by local citation is the best remedy
he/she and/or his/her designee shall cause such citation to be issued and file such citation and supporting
documents that he/she feels are necessary with the municipal court clerk for action in such court. Each day that a
violation exists may be considered a separate violation. (MC#1146)
1
Chapter 16 Gas Equipment Code
16.01 Inspector
16.02 Conforming to Code
16.03 Inspections
16.04 Accessibility
16.05 Non-liability of City
16.06 Permits Required
16.07 Safety Devices
16.08 Conversion - Venting
16.09 Gas Equipment
16.10 Standards - Equipment and Piping
16.11 Gas Meter Locations
16.12 Piping
16.13 Air for Combustion
16.14 Room for Space Heaters
16.15 Venting
16.16 Authority to Turn on Gas
16.17 Testing of Service
16.18 Leak Tests
16.01 INSPECTOR
All references to the inspector in this chapter mean the building/plumbing inspector of the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
16.02 CONFORMING TO CODE; AUTHORITY TO DISCONNECT
The inspector shall order and the gas utility is hereby authorized to disconnect any gas appliances or gas piping which shall be
found not to conform to the requirements of this ordinance, or which may be found defective and in such condition as to
endanger life and property. Where such disconnection has been made, a notice shall be attached to such appliance or gas
piping which shall state that the same has been disconnected, together with reason therefor, and the signature and official
capacity of the person making the disconnection, and such notice shall not be removed nor shall the appliance or gas piping be
reconnected until authorized by the department having jurisdiction to do so. The owner and/or occupant of the premises shall
be immediately notified of the disconnection and reason therefore.
16.03 INSPECTIONS
(1) Upon completion of installation of gas space heating equipment and prior to the use thereof, the building
inspector and the gas utility shall be notified that such gas space heating equipment is ready for inspection.
(2) The inspector is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this ordinance, and the
inspector or his authorized representative, upon presentation of proper credentials, may enter any building or
premises for the purpose of making inspection or preventing violations of this ordinance.
(3) The inspector shall issue a certificate of approval at the completion of the work for which a specific permit has
been issued, if, after inspection it is found that such work complies with the provisions of this ordinance and all
other requirements of law or ordinance applicable thereto. A duplicate of each piping certificate shall be
delivered to the gas company.
(4) For the purposes of enforcing provisions of this section, the inspector shall make inspections once each year
of all public buildings and business establishments. He shall at the request of the fire chief accompany him or
his representative to inspect a suspected violation and shall take steps to bring the installation up to standards
covered in this code.
16.04 ACCESSIBILITY
Gas equipment shall be so constructed and installed in such locations as to be readily accessible for adjustment, cleaning,
removal, and replacement of parts and for the performance of all maintenance and service work.
16.05 NON-LIABILITY OF CITY
2
This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the City of Wisconsin Rapids any liability or responsibility for
damages to any person injured by any defect in any gas piping or appliance mentioned herein, or by installation
thereof, nor shall the City of Wisconsin Rapids or any official or employee thereof be held as assuming any such
liability or responsibility by reason of the inspection authorized hereunder or certificate of inspection issued by the
inspector.
16.06 PERMITS REQUIRED
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to install, or cause to be installed, any space heating equipment, including
controls, piping duct, and vent connections without obtaining from the City a permit to do so; except that no
permit or license shall be required for work defined as "minor repairs". Minor repairs are hereby defined as
adjustments of appliances, replacement of parts, repairing leaks, and similar work. The applicant shall contact
the gas utility to determine if gas in sufficient quantities is available at the location to be served before applying
for the permit.
(2) Permit Application. At the time of application for a permit, the following information shall be provided by the
persons or contractor making the application:
(a) Maximum hourly BTU input rating of equipment
(b) Type of equipment: Room heater, furnace, boiler, unit heater etc.
(c) Heating medium: Air, steam, water, or other.
(d) Type of circulation: Gravity, forced, or other.
(e) Name of manufacturer of equipment.
(f) Whether of not the appliance to be installed is listed as accepted by a nationally recognized testing
agency such as the American Gas Association Inc. Laboratories or Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.
(3) Fees. Fees are as set forth in the Building Code of the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
(4) Temporary Use. When temporary use of gas is desired, the City may grant a permit for such use for a period
of not to exceed 90 days, provided that the gas piping which is desired to be used be given a test equal to that
required as a final inspection. The test pressure should be at least 2 times the operating pressure and should
show no pressure loss in a minimum time of 15 minutes.
(5) Installation by Owner. The permit or permits required by this code may be issued to any person to do any
construction or work regulated by the code in a single family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes,
including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such buildings, in the event that such a
person is a bona fide owner of such dwelling and accessory building and quarters, and that the same are
occupied by or designed to be occupied by said owner, provided that the owner shall personally purchase all
material and shall personally perform all labor in connection therewith. An owner-constructed installation shall
be subject to the same standards and tests as required of a dealer's or contractor's installation.
16.07 SAFETY DEVICES
(1) A boiler or furnace shall be equipped with approved safety devices installed in accordance with manufacturer's
instructions and arranged to limit high steam pressure or water temperatures or high air temperatures in
warm-air furnaces. Each steam boiler shall be equipped with low water cut-off. The safety devices to be used
shall be such as to cut off the gas supply to the burners in case of excessively high air, water, or steam
temperatures or low water supply.
(2) If the firing door of a furnace or boiler is equipped with a positive locking device to keep the door closed, the
device shall be removed or altered so that abnormal pressure on the inside of the combustion chamber will
cause the door to open; however, this shall be done in such a manner that the door is closed tightly during
normal operation of the furnace and burner.
16.08 CONVERSION - VENTING
Gas vent connection on all conversion installations, including the draft hood, shall be sized according to dimensions
listed in tables as approved by the American Standards Association as shown in manual ASA Z21.30-Current.
16.09 GAS EQUIPMENT
All gas equipment installed on any premises shall be substantial and durable construction and shall be designed and
installed pursuant to processes and methods reasonably adequate to assure safe and efficient operation.
16.10 STANDARDS - EQUIPMENT AND PIPING
Gas equipment and gas piping which meets the minimum requirements for the safe installation and performance of
gas equipment and gas piping conforming to the current standards of the following nationally recognized authorities
herein named, shall be conclusively deemed to meet the minimum requirements of this ordinance, to-wit: American
Gas Association, American Standards Association manual "Installation of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances in Buildings,
ASAZ21.30-Current", and National Board of Fire Underwriters except as further provided in this ordinance.
3
16.11 GAS METER LOCATIONS
(1) A meter location, approved by the gas utility, shall be provided as close as practicable to the point where the
gas service piping enters the building.
(2) The location shall be such that the meter, meter connections, gas service piping tee, and gas service piping
shut-off valve are exposed and readily accessible for inspection, installation, replacement, removal, locking
and unlocking, and reading.
(3) Gas meters shall not be placed where the meters would likely be subject to damage, such as in halls, coal
bins, public passage ways, over doors, or in locations subject to dripping water or unusual moisture conditions.
(4) Where more than one meter is supplied through one service line, a stop cock shall be installed at each meter
outlet.
16.12 PIPING
(1) Piping shall be wrought iron, steel, or approved tubing.
(2) Pipe joints may be screwed, flanged, or welded.
(3) Cast iron fittings shall be prohibited.
(4) For operating pressures of 125 p.s.i. or less, pipe and fittings shall be designed for a pressure of at least 125
pounds per square inch gauge.
(5) All gas service and house piping shall be of the sizes required to supply the number of outlets and shall not be
less than that recommended by the gas utility for the appliances served.
(6) All gas piping or tubing inside buildings must be securely strapped to joists or ceiling with iron straps or
approved wire hangers. No hangers made of nails or wood will be permitted.
(7) The use of bushings in any house or yard line or the use of unions in concealed location is prohibited.
(8) All gas outlets shall extend through the floor or base board not less than two and one-half (2-1/2") inches.
(9) It shall be unlawful to remove or disconnect any gas equipment without capping or plugging with a screwed
joint fitting the outlet from which the gas equipment was removed. All outlets to which gas equipment is
connected shall be left capped or plugged gas tight.
(10) Each consumer's service line shall be provided by the consumer with a suitable stop cock located in an
accessible place at the outlet of the meter.
(11) When two or more gas meters are installed on the same premises but supply separate customers, the housepiping
system shall not be interconnected.
(12) The practice of using any gas pipe as a ground for electrical purposes for radio, telephones, etc., is prohibited,
and such connections, if any, will be disconnected immediately upon discovery and without notice.
(13) In multiple meter installations and in installations having more than one house-piping system supplied by the
same gas meter. Each separate house-piping system shall be plainly identified by the installer by attachment
of a metal tag indicating the number of house-piping systems at the meter location. This should be checked
for compliance at the time of the final inspection.
16.13 AIR FOR COMBUSTION
Appliances shall be installed in a location where there is enough ventilation to satisfy combustion requirements of the
appliance. If adequate air is not available due to confined area or tightly closed room, outside air shall be admitted through a
vent opening or duct.
16.14 ROOM OR SPACE HEATERS
(1) Any room or space heater shall be installed in such a manner as to protect the surrounding combustible
material by having adequate clearance to provide air circulation with a minimum clearance of 6" or as
otherwise recommended by the manufacturer.
(2) Wall-type heaters shall not be installed in walls of combustible material unless specifically approved.
16.15 VENTING
(1) Appliances shall be flue-connected or otherwise vented to carry off the products of combustion in accordance
with the following:
(a) Any domestic appliance with input rating in excess of 50,000 BTU per hour as well as any appliance
that is provided with a vent opening.
(b) Any appliance with an input rating of over 5,000 BTU per hour, if this rating exceeds 30 BTU per hour
per cubic foot of room space.
(c) All space heaters, steam, hot water boilers, and hot air furnaces, floor furnaces, recessed heaters,
unit heaters, duct furnaces, and hot water heaters.
(d) Gas-fired incinerators shall be vented.
4
16.16 AUTHORITY TO TURN ON GAS
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation excepting an authorized agent or employee of a person,
firm, or corporation engaged in the business of furnishing or supplying gas and whose service pipes supply or
connect with the particular premises to install, extend, repair, alter, or open any portion of the service piping, to
remove or install a gas meter, or turn on or reconnect gas service in or on any premises provided, however,
that the gas service piping valve contained within the building may be closed for emergency reasons; or may
be closed and later reopened for the purpose of altering or repairing any portion of the house-piping system
where and when gas service, at the time is being furnished and provided that the requirements listed in
Section 16.18 below be followed at the time the gas service piping valve is closed and reopened.
(2) It shall be unlawful to turn on or supply gas to house piping at any premises unless at least one gas appliance
is connected to the gas piping system and all outlets are properly and securely connected to gas appliances or
capped or plugged with screw joint fittings.
16.17 TESTING OF SERVICE
(1) Prior to closing the gas service piping valve, (except in emergency to stop leaking gas,) all pilot and burner
valves of all gas equipment connected to the house-piping system shall be closed and the gas meter test hand
shall be observed for a sufficient length of time to make sure that there is no gas passing through the meter. If
the gas meter test hand shows movement, the house-piping system and all gas equipment supplied by the
meter shall be inspected and the necessary steps be taken to prevent the passage of gas through the meter
before gas service valve is closed.
(2) At the time the gas service piping valve is reopened, the gas meter test hand shall be observed for a sufficient
length of time to make sure that no gas is passing through the meter. If the gas meter test hand shows
movement, the house-piping system and all gas equipment supplied by the gas meter shall be inspected
immediately to locate the gas leak. The gas service piping valve shall be closed until necessary repairs have
been made, after which the test specified by this paragraph shall be repeated.
(3) If, after observation of a sufficient length of time, the gas meter test hand does not show movement, the
house-piping system shall be purged of air and all burners of all gas equipment connected to the house-piping
system shall be lighted and gas permitted to burn for a sufficient length of time to make sure that the housepiping
system and gas equipment have been completely purged. Purging shall be done to the outside
wherever possible and shall be done in a safe manner to prevent the accumulation of gas within the dwelling.
16.18 LEAK TESTS
(1) Leaks in gas piping shall be located by applying soapy water, oil, or some suitable solution to the exterior of
the piping.
(2) Fire or acid shall not be used to locate leaks, nor shall water be introduced into the gas piping.
(3) It shall not be permissible to repair defects in gas pipes or fittings, but after having been located, the defective
pipe or fittings shall be removed and replaced with sound pipe or fittings.
(4) Test made by the installer and final piping inspection by the inspector shall be made after all piping authorized
by the permit has been installed and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been attached hereto. This
inspection shall include an air pressure test at which time the piping shall stand an air pressure equal to 2
times the anticipated operating pressure but not less than 10 pounds PSI gauge and the piping shall hold this
air pressure for a period of at least 15 minutes without any perceptible drop. A U-gauge type mercury column
or approved type of indicating pressure gauge shall be used for the test.
1
Chapter 17 Electrical Code
17.01 Object
17.02 Scope
17.03 Inspector
17.04 Bond and Oath of Office
17.05 Duties
17.06 Inspections
17.07 Authority to Discontinue Electrical Operations
17.08 Appeal
17.09 Owner's Privilege
17.10 City and Inspector not Liable
17.11 Definitions
17.12 License Required
17.13 Issuance of License
17.14 License Fees and Periods
17.15 Insurance
17.16 Revocation of Licenses
17.17 Persons Exempt from License Requirements
17.18 Industrial Work
17.19 Permits
17.20 Exceptions
17.21 Permit and Inspection Fees
17.22 Size of Service
17.23 Service Wiring
17.24 Conductors
17.25 Rewiring Existing Buildings
17.26 Permit and Service for Temporary and Emergency Work
17.27 Penalties and Violations (MC#1147)
17.01 OBJECT
The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard persons and property and to give assurance of all manner of electrical work
being done in a workman like manner, by establishing minimum standards for the installation and maintenance of
electrical systems, by regulating and providing for the inspection of the installation and maintenance of electrical
wiring, equipment and devices, and providing for the licensing and verification of certification of persons, firms and
corporations undertaking electrical work who are certified as per the State of Wisconsin COMM 5 and 17 Administrative
Code Chapter SPS 305 and 316, and fixing a penalty for the violation thereof. Compliance with these standards is
intended to result in installations reasonably free from electrical hazards. The standards merely prescribe and establish
a reasonable minimum and do not constitute a specification for electrical installations and electrical equipment
generally. Specifications for electrical installations are not complete when they only require compliance with this
chapter, because of adequacy, suitability, operating efficiency, convenience, finish, appearance, and value of electrical
installations may be greatly varied or affected in many respects without departure from the regulations of this chapter.
17.02 SCOPE
(1) The regulations of this chapter shall apply to the supply of electricity, the licensing and verification of
certification status of electricians, and to all sales, rentals, leases, uses, installations, alterations, repairs,
removals, renewals, replacements, disturbances, connections, disconnections, and maintenance of all
electrical materials, wiring, conductors, fittings, devices, appliances, fixtures, signs, and apparatus, or parts
thereof, or attachments therefor, hereafter referred to as electrical equipment, which are intended to be, or
are, within, on, under, over, or near, all buildings, structures, equipment, and premises. This electrical code
shall apply to all existing installations that did not comply with the current electrical code at the time of
installation, as well as all new ones.
2
(2) The Wisconsin Administrative Code, the Wisconsin Statutes and Annotations, the National Electrical Code
(NFPA 70), (NFPA 73) and the State of Wisconsin Electrical Code Chapter SPS 316 as amended from time to
time shall become a part of this Code. (MC#1147)
17.03 INSPECTOR
(1) The inspector shall be of good moral character and shall be a qualified person licensed electrical inspector well
versed in approved methods of electrical construction for safety of life and property, and Statutes of the State
of Wisconsin relating to electrical work, the rules and regulations issued to the Department of Commerce,
Safety and Buildings Electrical Division under authority of the Statutes, the National Electrical Code of the
National Fire Protection Association as referenced by the State of Wisconsin. The inspector shall have met or
be able to meet the requirements as set forth by Chapters SPS 305 and 316. (MC#1147)
(2) The inspector shall be located in the city hall and shall not be interested, either directly or indirectly, in the
installation of wiring, preparation of plant and specifications, sale or manufacture of any material, process or
device entering into or used in, or in connection with, electrical installations, except as authorized by the
Common Council of the City of Wisconsin Rapids. The Electrical inspection may be utilized for inspection
services by other municipalities as agreed to by the Common Council.
(3) The inspection shall be performed by the electrical inspector, termed inspector, or the assistant. The assistant
inspector shall be hired by the Inspector and approved by the common council.
(4) The city shall reimburse the inspector and assistant for transportation costs accumulated while enforcing this
ordinance on the same basis as the other city employees.
17.04 OATH OF OFFICE (MC#1147)
The inspector shall take and subscribe an oath of office which, together with the certificate of his/her appointment,
shall be filed with the city clerk.
17.05 DUTIES
(1) The inspector or the assistant shall have the authority to enter all buildings and premises and all parts thereof,
except occupied dwellings and then only with the occupant or owner's permission, in order to make an
inspection, or test the electrical equipment or wiring contained therein or thereon to enforce the regulations of
this chapter.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse lawful entry to the Inspector or the assistant, or to interfere with,
harass, abuse, obstruct, or cause delay in the performance of their duties. The inspector or the assistant shall
have the authority, and they are hereby empowered to order the removal of any and all obstructions including
lath, plaster, lumber, boards, and partitions.
(3) The inspector, having reasonable cause to believe a violation exists, shall make examinations of electrical
wiring and appliances installed within the City of Wisconsin Rapids and when such wires or appliances are
found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, or not in compliance with this Chapter, he/she shall notify the
person, firm, or corporation owning, using, operating, or installing the same to place them in a safe condition.
Any person, firm or corporation failing or refusing to make the necessary repairs or changes, and have such
completed within 15 days after receipt of such notice, shall be in violation of this Code and the Inspector is
hereby empowered with authority to order discontinuance of electrical service to such defective wires or
appliances until they have been repaired, removed, or changed as directed by the inspector.
(4) The electrical inspection in conjunction with the Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Court shall issue citations for
violations in matters of noncompliance with all applicable State Statutes, Wisconsin Administrative Code rules,
City of Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Codes, or Water Works & Lighting Commission rules.
17.06 INSPECTIONS
(1) Complete records of all permits issued and inspections made and other official work performed under the
provisions of this ordinance shall be kept and so arranged as to afford prompt information concerning
electrical installations.
(2) The inspector may periodically inspect all public buildings and business establishments. He/she may at times
deemed necessary by the fire chief, accompany the fire inspector, for inspections, and may make
recommendations to correct violations and assist in the investigation of fires of electrical or undetermined
origin.
(3) All electrically operated amusement devices shall be inspected by the inspector and the operator shall comply
with his/her recommendations to assure safe operation of this equipment. All carnivals and similar groups
must obtain an electrical permit and inspection before operation is started.
(4) Failure to notify the inspector for an inspection will result in the permit holder removing materials to expose
concealed work or, at the discretion of the inspector, result in penalties as outlined in the adopted fee
3
schedule for the first offense and second offense. Third and subsequent violations will result in a citation being
issued. (MC#1147)
17.07 AUTHORITY TO DISCONTINUE ELECTRICAL OPERATIONS
The inspector shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all electrical currents to any equipment which is found
to be in an unsafe condition, and he/she shall attach an official notice, and cut or discontinue electrical service in
cases of emergency and where such electrical currents are dangerous to life or property or any interference with the
work of the fire department. No person, firm, or corporation shall reconnect any equipment thus cut off until written
permission is given by the inspector.
17.08 APPEAL
Where the inspector refuses to issue a certificate of occupancy on the electrical work of any building, or condemns the
same, the owner may, within five business days after receiving written notice from the inspector, file notice of appeal in
writing with the Zoning Board of Appeals.
17.09 OWNER'S PRIVILEGE (MC#1147)
A property owner may not install a new electric service and main electrical panel on their residence or accessory
building unless the owner is a state licensed electrician. A property owner may personally install electrical wiring inside
their own single family residence or accessory building, including new sub panels and branch circuits, which is owned
and occupied by them or to be occupied by them as a permanent residence, provided that said owner shall:
(1) Apply for and secure a permit in accordance with succeeding sections.
(2) Pay required fees
(3) Sign an affidavit stating they are responsible for their work and that they will comply with SPS 320.10
regarding these inspections.
(4) Do the work themselves in accordance with this code
(5) Apply for inspections as required
(6) Prove their electrical knowledge and receive the approval of the inspector
17.10 CITY AND INSPECTOR NOT LIABLE
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any person supplying
electricity to, or selling, renting, owning, using, operating, controlling, installing, altering, repairing, removing, replacing,
disturbing, connecting, or maintaining, any electrical equipment, for damages to person or property caused by any
defect herein or therefrom; nor shall the city or its inspector be held as assuming any such responsibility or liability by
reason of the issuance or revocation of any license, permit or certificate, or the inspection authorized by this chapter, or
by reason of the approval or disapproval of any electrical equipment, sales, rentals, drawings, plans, specifications,
materials, samples, test reports, literature, information or schedules, authorized in this chapter.
17.11 DEFINITIONS (MC#1147)
(1) Master Electrician: anyone who meets the requirements and definition of and is certified by the State of
Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters SPS 305 and 316.
(2) Residential Master Electrician: anyone who meets the requirements and definition of and is certified by the
State of Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters SPS 305 and 316.
(3) Journeyman Electrician: anyone who meets the requirements and definition of and is certified by the State of
Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters SPS 305 and 316.
(4) Residential Journeyman Electrician: anyone who meets the requirements and definition of and is certified by
the State of Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters SPS 305 and 316.
(5) Industrial Journeyman Electrician: anyone who meets the requirements and definition of and is certified by the
State of Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters SPS 305 and 316.
(6) Electrical Contractor: any person who meets the requirements and definition of and is certified by the State of
Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters SPS 305 and 316.
(7) Electrical Apprentice: any person, 16 years of age or over who shall enter into any contract of service,
expressed or implied, whereby he/she is to receive from or through their employer in consideration of their
services, in whole or in part, instruction of the electrical craft. All apprentice electricians shall be indentured
and serve an apprenticeship under Chapter 106 of the State Statutes before being eligible to make application
for a journeyman electrician license, and may work only under the direct supervision of a master or journeyman
electrician, and work in accordance with the guidelines so stated in this chapter.
(8) Plant Electrician: shall be a master or journeyman electrician regularly employed as primary occupation, by a
firm or corporation and whose electrical work for such employer is limited exclusively to the plant or shop of
their employer. These firms assume all responsibility for the plant electrician's performance. These persons
shall be state certified by the State of Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters SPS 305 and 316.
4
(9) Limited Licensee: may be any person, but not a firm or corporation, approved by the city electrical inspector to
install, reconnect, or remove specific major electrical appliances or signs as defined in 17.12(5) and under the
conditions set forth in 17.12(5).
(10) Beginning Electrician: any person who meets the requirements and definition of and is certified by the State of
Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter SPS 305 and 316. A beginning electrician may only work under the
direct supervision of a master or journeyman electrician. All helpers or trainees shall be certified and shall
register with the electrical inspector.
(11) Residential Wireman: any person who meets the qualifications of and is designated by the IBEW or another
equivalent organization. These persons shall only do wiring in one and two family dwellings or multifamily
occupancies under the supervision of a Municipal licensed electrical contractor. (MC#988)
(12) Material Handler: any person hired as a general laborer. This person may not directly perform any electrical
work or make any electrical connections.
(13) Electrical Construction or Electrical Work: The installation of all equipment, wiring, material, fittings, devices,
appliances, fixtures and apparatus used for the production, modification, regulations, control, distribution,
utilization or safeguarding of electrical energy for mechanical, chemical, cosmetic, heating, lighting or similar
purposes as covered by the scope of the Wisconsin State Electrical Code SPS 316.
17.12. LICENSE REQUIRED
(1) No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of planning, installing, altering or repairing any
electric wiring or apparatus for the utilization of electric current for light, heat or power in the City of Wisconsin
Rapids, Wisconsin, without first having procured a license therefor as provided in this chapter the Wisconsin
Administrative Code Chapter SPS 305 and 316. Any person, firm or corporation that does electrical
construction without a license, except as allowed elsewhere in this chapter, shall be subject to a citation and
penalties as provided in this code. In no case shall any person or electrician do electrical work in the City of
Wisconsin Rapids, Wisconsin unless under the supervision of a licensed master electrician or licensed
electrical contractor, who shall be responsible in accordance with this chapter. All new applicants for Master
electricians, electrical contractors, and Journeyman electricians who do not hold a current valid City of
Wisconsin Rapids license shall be certified under the Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters SPS 305 and
316. All journeymen, apprentices, beginning electricians and material handlers shall register with the
inspector's office showing proof of their status. There shall be at least one licensed Journeyman or licensed
Master electrician at each job site for each apprentice, beginning electrician or material handler, so that a oneto-
one ratio of licensed electricians to all others is maintained. State certified electricians shall not be required
to purchase a Municipal journeyman license. (MC#1147)
(2) Master Electrician License. At least one member of a firm or corporation shall hold a master electrician license.
No person, firm, or corporation shall contract or undertake to install or repair electrical wires or apparatus
within the City of Wisconsin Rapids, Wisconsin, except as otherwise herein provided, without, first having
obtained a master electrician license.
(3) Journeyman Electrician License. Unless as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall alter, install, or
repair electric wires or apparatus for the utilization of electric current, or supervise the same, without first
having obtained a journeyman electrician license, except indentured apprentices or certified beginning
electricians serving under the direct supervision of a master electrician or journeyman electrician.
(4) Short Term License. A short term license may be granted to state certified electricians or other persons who
have completed a State approved apprenticeship, who are not permanent residents of the city and who are
hired by licensed master electricians to perform only electrical work on one project as shall be described in
their application. The term of this license shall last for the length of the project or one year whichever is
shorter.
(5) Limited License. A limited license may be granted to any individual, but not a firm or corporation, which will
entitle such person to (1) install, remove, reconnect or provide maintenance of household electrical
appliances, and install new premises wiring to these appliances in existing dwellings. These persons may only
connect or disconnect and provide maintenance to commercial and industrial electrical appliances; or (2)
install, remove reconnect or maintain outdoor advertising signs. Such license may be granted by the city
electrical inspector upon application made by such person on a form furnished by the electrical inspection, if
the electrical inspector is satisfied that the applicant has sufficient knowledge of the type of work involved that
his/her work will be safe and in accordance with the requirement of this code. Such license shall be subject to
revocation in the same way as other licenses issued under this code. All electrical work performed under this
license shall be subject to permits as defined under 17.19 and 17.21. The issuance of such license may be
subject to passing a written or oral examination.
(6) Residential Wireman. A residential wireman license may be granted by the electrical inspector to any individual
who has been designated as a residential wireman by the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers Local
5
388 or another equivalent organization. Residential wiremen may perform wiring as allowed by this chapter
without direct supervision by a journeyman or master electrician. (MC#988)
17.13 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE
(1) Application for a license shall be made to the electrical inspector on forms furnished by him, and before such
license shall be issued the application therefor shall be approved by the city electrical inspector. A license may
be issued to persons certified under the Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters SPS 305 and 316 upon the
signature of the electrical inspection.
(2) Master, journeyman electrician, residential wireman and limited licenses shall be issued, subject to the
provisions of this section. Such licenses shall not be assignable or transferable.
(3) When a current license holder allows their license to lapse by not filing a proper application before its renewal
date, this person shall revert to the same status of a person not previously licensed.
17.14 LICENSE FEES AND PERIODS
(1) License fees shall be as follows:
Class License Fee
(a) Master $50.00
(b) Journeyman $30.00
(c) Residential Wireman $30.00
(d) Limited $30.00
(e) Short Term $10.00
(f) Apprentice none
(2) License Periods. All licenses shall be issued for a maximum of three (3) years commencing the 1st day of
January and expiring the 31st day of December, per the three-year National Electrical Code cycle year of
adoption, unless sooner revoked. The fees for such licenses shall be paid to the city treasurer.
17.15 INSURANCE
All master electricians and limited licenses shall be issued and granted only upon condition that the person, firms, or
corporations applying therefor shall first file with the city electrical inspector a minimum of a $250,000 general liability
insurance certificate.
17.16 REVOCATION OF LICENSES
Any license granted under the provisions of this ordinance may be revoked by the city electrical inspector if the licensee
violated any ordinance or law relating to electrical work or is guilty of installing electrical construction which is a hazard
to life or property. When a license is revoked a new license shall not be granted to the same licensee for a period of at
least 30 days, nor until the licensee shall have corrected the faulty construction in accordance with the provisions of
the ordinance, and shall have made application and paid the fees as required for the original license. The city electrical
inspector shall have discretionary power to withhold the granting of a license, for cause. When a license has been
revoked, the former holder thereof shall have the same status of a person not previously licensed and shall have to
meet any qualifications such as required by any new applicant.
17.17 PERSONS EXEMPT FROM LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
(1) Employees of electrical, telephone, telegraph and railway utilities may perform the planning or superintending
and installation, operation and maintenance of equipment and materials required for the operation of the
business of such utilities without a license, but when such employees perform said work on property or
premises of other persons, firms, or corporations, except when making service connections and installing and
testing transformers, meters, and other equipment ordinarily furnished by and remaining the property of the
utility, they shall be licensed in the same manner provided for in this ordinance and failure to be so licensed
shall constitute a violation of this ordinance.
(2) The operating engineers and their assistants, in charge of power generating plants, prime movers and all
auxiliary equipment and appliances connected therewith, shall be exempt in the supervision maintenance,
repairs and in the operation of the electrical equipment under their jurisdiction, and this ordinance shall not
apply to them in any form.
(3) Plant electricians regularly employed by a firm or corporation need not be licensed while doing electrical work
that is limited exclusively to the plant or shop of their employer. All new building construction shall be done
under the required permits and adherence to all electrical code requirements including inspections.
17.18 INDUSTRIAL WORK
6
All maintenance work in industrial establishments shall be performed under the direction of a journeyman maintenance
electrician or master electrician. All new building construction installations requiring a building permit shall be done
under the required permits and adherence to all electrical code requirements including inspections.
17.19 PERMITS
(1) The inspector shall issue permits for the execution of electrical installation for light, heat, or power upon the
filing of proper application, which shall be made on forms furnished by the inspector and shall prescribe the
nature of the work as well as such other information as may be required for inspection. A plan may be required
to accompany the application at the discretion of the inspector. In no case shall any electrical work be done,
unless a permit has first been obtained. All permits shall only be valid for a period of one (1) year from date of
issue.
(2) No permit shall be required for minor repair, alterations or replacement of individual receptacles, flush or snap
switches, motors, fuses, lamp sockets or fixture ballasts due to damage or defect provided only minor changes
are made for this work.
(3) All persons shall, before doing any electrical work in a building, make application to the Inspector for a permit
covering such work. The inspector shall approve the application and issue to the applicant a statement
showing the fees to be paid for such permit. If work is commenced before a permit is approved a fee of
$100.00 or double the permit fee which ever is greater, shall be charged. A valid permit and usual fee will still
need to be filed. The electrical inspection shall have the authority to order any work halted where no permit
has been obtained, if required, except in cases of emergency, in which case the permit must be obtained as
soon as possible thereafter.
(4) Work that in the estimation of the inspector will cost less than $500 and is performed by a licensed electrician
will not be required to get a permit. (MC#1147)
17.20 EXCEPTIONS
(1) No permits shall be required for the usual operations of a local public utility company in conformance with NEC
90-2(b).
(2) No permit shall be required for the manufacturing, assembling, repairing, or testing of electrical equipment or
any electrical maintenance in any buildings used for industrial purposes, by any person, firm or corporation
having in their employ a qualified plant electrician. This exception does not apply to any new construction.
17.21 PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES (MC#1147)
Permit and inspection fees shall be assessed according to the schedule set by the Director of Planning and Economic
Development with the concurrence of the Common Council.
17.22 SIZE OF SERVICE
(1) Where there are four or less service boxes in one building having one owner and one of these has to be
changed to a 100 amp or larger, then all service boxes shall be changed to the latest approved type of at least
100 amp capacity. The service conductors shall also be changed to have adequate capacity calculated in
accordance with the State Code requirements and installed in an approved raceway.
(2) Unless otherwise restricted by the State of Wisconsin Administrative Code, all commercial multi tenant
buildings and apartment buildings shall have a single main service disconnect ahead of all premises wiring at
each service location and each individual metering device shall have a single disconnecting means after it.
(MC#1147)
(3) For a single family dwelling unit the minimum size service entrance switch shall be 100 amp and shall be of
the circuit breaker switch type.
17.23 SERVICE WIRING
(1) The service disconnecting means placement shall comply with NEC 230 and the State Electrical Code SPS 316
requirements. (MC#1147)
(2) There shall be no disconnecting means, or fuses, in the service entrance ahead of the metering device,
normally, except to meet the single main disconnect location requirement. All commercial buildings and
apartment buildings larger than a four unit shall have copper service conductors. Residential and four unit
apartments or smaller shall have aluminum or copper service conductors. (MC#1147)
(3) Service entrance conductors shall extend a minimum of three feet beyond service entrance head. The
grounded conductor shall be readily identified by either the color white or natural gray and any equipment
grounding wire shall be readily identified by the color green or be a bare copper wire.
(4) All new electrical meter installations shall require the electrical meter to be installed on the exterior of the
building.
7
17.24 CONDUCTORS
(1) Service conductors shall be enclosed in an approved listed raceway and shall terminate in a fused or circuit
breaker disconnect. Where service masts protrude through roof or where the service entrance cables attach to
the mast, the mast shall be two inches or larger rigid metal conduit.
(2) Conductors in all buildings hereafter constructed or new conductors installed when remodeling, except where
excluded under the provisions of the State of Wisconsin Administrative Code, shall be installed per guidelines
of the National Electrical Code as amended by the Wisconsin Electrical Code SPS 316. (MC#1147)
(3) Panels in commercial buildings shall be listed fusible or of the circuit breaker switched type. (MC#1147)
(4) No aluminum conductors #8 and smaller shall be used.
17.25 REWIRING EXISTING BUILDINGS (MC#1147)
In the rewiring of existing buildings (residential) or when a residential service is changed for any reason other than
storm damage, the following work must be done:
(1) Service must comply with ordinance.
(2) Remove all drop cords. A new outlet shall be installed where drop cords have been used as permanent wiring.
(3) Repair and/or replace all defective sockets, switches, and other devices.
(4) Add GFCI protection to all receptacles that are required to have this protection under the NEC and Wisconsin
State Electrical Code SPS 316.
(5) Install listed smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors to all levels when not present or fix any existing
detectors. These detectors in existing dwellings may be of the battery operated type.
17.26 PERMIT AND SERVICE FOR TEMPORARY AND EMERGENCY WORK
(1) On applying for permit for temporary electrical work, a specified period of time for which such wiring is to
remain in service must be stated or the permit will only be valid for sixty (60) days. Service shall be cut off at
the end of this period and shall not again be connected without written permission from the inspector.
(2) A temporary service during construction or repair must be installed in accord with an approved sketch
furnished by the inspector.
(3) In emergency work, the person, firm, or corporation doing or causing work to be done shall report the same to
the inspector immediately after beginning work, on forms furnished by the inspector, and such work shall be in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
17.27 PENALTIES AND VIOLATIONS (MC#1147)
Electrical work that is constructed in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be corrected in the time frame
given by the electrical inspector. Should the electrical inspector feel that remedy by local citation is the best remedy
he/she and/or his/her designee shall cause such citation to be issued and file such citation and supporting documents
that he/she feels are necessary with the municipal court clerk for action in such court. Each day that a violation exists
may be considered a separate violation.
CHAPTER 18 CITY OF WISCONSIN RAPIDS FIRE CODE
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION
18.01 Intent of Code
18.02 Adoption of Order, Codes, Rules, and SOGs
18.03 Definitions
INSPECTION PROCEDURES
18.04 Authority to Enter Premises
18.05 Inspection of Buildings and Premises Within the Jurisdiction of the Wisconsin Rapids Fire
Department
18.06 Orders to Correct Fire Code Violations
18.07 Code Compliance Responsibility
18.08 Fire Records and Reports
18.09 New Construction Permits
18.10 Multi-family Apartment Buildings
BURNING REGULATIONS
18.11 Limited Burning Policy
18.12 Responsibility for Fire Damages
18.13 DNR Regulations
FIRE CODE APPLICABILITY
18.14 Application of New and Existing Conditions
18.15 New Materials, Processes, or Occupancies Which May Require Permits not Specified in Wisconsin
Rapids Fire Code
18.16 Modification or Variance to the City of Wisconsin Rapids Fire Code
18.17 Appeals
FIRE SAFETY
18.18 Pyrotechnics
18.19 Knox Boxes
18.20 Occupancy Load Signage
18.21 Smoke Detectors
18.22 Fire Hydrant Location and Distance.
18.23 Private Fire Hydrants
18.24 Fire Department Connections (FDC) on Sprinklered Buildings
18.25 Fire Department Access
18.26 School Fire Drills
OTHER PROVISIONS OF THE FIRE CODE
18.27 Nuisance Provision
18.28 Liquor Licenses
18.29 Building Address Identification
CITATIONS, AUTHORITY, & PENALTIES
18.30 Snow Removal from Fire Hydrants
18.31 False Alarms
18.32 Three Strike Rule
18.33 Citation Authority and Enforcement
18.34 Penalty
18.01 INTENT OF CODE.
It is the intent of this code to enforce regulations consistent with national and state recognized fire protection codes.
The primary intent of the code will be the safeguarding of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion within
the jurisdiction of the Wisconsin Rapids Fire Department.
18.02 ADOPTION OF ORDERS, CODES, RULES, AND SOGs
(1) The following orders and codes are hereby adopted by reference.
(a) For all construction after July 1, 2002, the following fire codes shall apply.
(1) NFPA 1 & NFPA 101
(b) For all construction prior to 7/1/02 the following fire codes shall apply.
(1) Comm 7 – Explosive Materials
(2) Comm 9 – Manufacturer of Fireworks
(3) Comm 10 – Flammable and Combustible Liquids
(4) Comm 11 – Liquefied Petroleum Gases
(5) Comm 12 – Liquefied Natural Gas
(6) Comm 13 – Compressed Natural Gas
(7) Comm 14 – Fire Prevention
(8) Comm 15 – Cleaning and Dying
(9) Comm 30 – Fire Department Safety and Health
(10) Comm 50-64 – Building, Heating Ventilating, and Air Conditioning
(11) Comm 66 – Uniform Multifamily Dwellings
(12) Comm 70 – Historic Buildings
(13) Comm 75-79 – Existing Buildings
(14) NFPA 10 – Portable Fire Extinguisher Code*
(15) NFPA 13, 13D, & 13R – Sprinkler Codes*
(2) Whenever the provisions of the aforementioned codes conflict, the stricter interpretation shall apply.
(3) Wisconsin Rapids Fire Department Standard Operational Guidelines.
18.03 DEFINITIONS.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, for the purpose of this code, the following terms shall, have the meaning indicated in
this section:
(1) “Approved” shall mean accepted by the chief of the fire department or his designee, listing or approval of
Underwriters Laboratories Inc., the National Fire Protection Association, the National Bureau of Standards, the
American Gas Association Laboratories, or any other nationally recognized testing authority.
(2) “Automatic Fire Alarm System” shall mean a system which automatically detects a fire condition and actuates
a fire alarm signal device. These systems must be tested monthly per fire code.
(3) “Campfire” means a small outdoor fire intended for recreation or cooking, not including a fire intended for the
disposal of waste wood or refuse.
(4) “Ceremonial Fires” are those permit-approved by the fire department for events such as homecoming,
scouting, and other special events using clean, dry wood, vegetation, or yard waste, and must be attended at
all times.
(5) “Clean Wood” means natural wood which has not been painted, varnished or coated with a similar material,
has not been pressure treated with preservatives and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other
composite wood products.
(6) “Dwelling” shall mean a building occupied exclusively for residence purposes and having not more than two
apartments, or as a boarding or rooming house serving not more than 15 persons, with meals or sleeping
accommodations, or both.
(7) “Fire Department Training fires” include fires set for practice and instruction of fire fighters, or testing of fire
fighting equipment or procedures.
(8) “I.C.C. Container” shall mean any container approved by the Interstate Commerce Commission for shipping any
liquids, gaseous, or solid material that is flammable, toxic, or other hazardous nature.
(9) “Institutional Building” shall mean a building in which persons are held or detained by reason of public or civic
duty, or for correctional purposes.
(10) “Multiple-family Housing” shall mean a building occupied as the home or residence of individuals, families, or
households living independently of each other, of which three or more are doing cooking within their
apartments, including tenement houses and apartment buildings.
(11) “Open Burning” means kindling or maintaining a fire where the products of combustion are emitted directly
into the ambient air without passing through a stack or a chimney.
(12) Outdoor Wood-fired Furnace” means a wood-fired furnace, stove or boiler that is not located within a building
intended for habitation by humans or domestic animals.
(13) “Person” shall mean person, persons, firm, corporation, or co-partnership.
(14) “Places of Assembly” are buildings, or parts of a building, that that will accommodate more than 100 people
for entertainment, recreation, worship, or dining purposes.
(15) “Public Building” shall mean a building in which persons congregate for civic, political, educational, religious,
social, or recreational purposes.
(16) “Pyrotechnics” is defined in NFPA 1124, 3.3.40.5 as a chemical mixture used in the entertainment industry to
produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation.
(17) “Refuse” means any waste material except clean wood.
(18) “Residence Building”, except when classified as an institutional building, shall mean a building in which
sleeping accommodations are provided.
18.04 AUTHORITY TO ENTER PREMISES.
(1) Wisconsin Rapids Fire Department personnel may, during reasonable hours, enter any building or premises
within the jurisdiction of the department for the purpose of making any inspection or investigation under the
auspices of the codes listed in Section 18.02. Private dwellings shall not be entered without the consent or
permission of an adult occupant and do not typically fall within the purview of the fire department (also refer to
DC 14).
18.05 INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS AND PREMISES WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF THE WISCONSIN RAPIDS FIRE
DEPARTMENT
(1) The fire chief shall ensure that all buildings and premises that fall under the purview of the fire department (DC
14:02(2)(d)) are inspected as often as may be necessary to insure compliance of all codes listed in Section
18.02. Typically, the timeframe to inspect businesses within the jurisdiction of the Wisconsin Rapids Fire
Department shall be:
(a) Inspections within the City of Wisconsin Rapids shall be conducted at least once per calendar year. For
businesses with a history of habitual violations, the Fire Chief may deem it appropriate, for the safety
of the public, to inspect certain businesses more frequently.
(b) Penalties for non-compliance. The first fire inspection to any business is considered to fall under the
State of Wisconsin’s 2% dues program. However, any follow-up or subsequent inspections fall outside
of the parameters of the 2% dues program. As such, if any noted fire code violations are not corrected
within the timeframe noted on the inspection report, the Deputy Chief shall send a reminder letter to
the business at no additional charge. If the business still does not prove compliance by informing the
fire department, and a subsequent visit by fire department personnel is necessary, the charges for
such visits are as follows:
(1) 2nd visit after reminder letter: $50
(2) 3rd visit, if necessary: $100
(3) If still no compliance after the three strike rule (refer to Section 18.32), the business owner
will then be issued a citation.
18.06 ORDERS TO CORRECT FIRE CODE VIOLATIONS.
(1) Upon the inspection of any premises within the jurisdiction of the Wisconsin Rapids Fire Department, any
violation of the codes cited in Section 18.02 shall be corrected within the specified amount of time as
identified on the official fire department inspection report, or by correspondence from the fire chief or deputy
fire chief.
18.07 CODE COMPLIANCE RESPONSIBILITY.
(1) Compliance of fire code violations shall ultimately lie with the building owner. The violations will be
explained to the owner, the manager, or another available employee and a copy of the inspection report will be
left with the individual the violations are explained to, or through correspondence from the deputy fire chief’s
office.
18.08 FIRE RECORDS AND REPORTS.
(1) The chief of the fire department shall ensure that a record of all fires (NFIRS) are maintained for a period of
seven years. Fire inspection records shall be maintained for the same period of time.
(2) Fire reports may be given to the owner of a structure that has suffered a fire loss, an occupant of said property,
an insurance representative of the owner and/or occupant that has suffered the loss, and a law firm
representing the owner and/or occupant of said property. An administrative fee of $10.00 shall be charged for
each report copied.
18.09 NEW CONSTRUCTION PERMITS
(1) Any new construction in the City of Wisconsin Rapids will take out a permit with the building inspector’s office.
At such time, the building inspector’s office will notify each individual inspector (building, electrical, fire, and
plumbing) of the new construction.
(2) This tracking mechanism will allow any new construction within the City of Wisconsin Rapids to be placed the
fire inspection list in an expeditious manner.
18.10 MULTI-FAMILY APARTMENT BUILDINGS
(1) Any multi-family apartment complex (3 or more) within the City of Wisconsin Rapids must update their contact
information when rental property is sold.
(2) This procedure will be used to update inspection lists and contact information.
18.11 LIMITED BURNING
(1) Purpose. This ordinance is intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare and to safeguard the
health, comfort, living conditions, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Wisconsin Rapids due to the
air pollution and fire hazards of open burning, outdoor burning and refuse burning.
(2) Applicability. This ordinance applies to all outdoor burning and refuse burning within the City of Wisconsin
Rapids.
(a) This ordinance does not apply to grilling or cooking using charcoal, wood, propane or natural gas in
cooking or grilling appliances. However, grilling or cooking appliances are not permitted on properties
containing multifamily residences with three or more units, unless there is common area approved by
the Fire Chief for such grilling or cooking.
(b) This ordinance does not apply to burning in a stove, furnace, fireplace or other heating device within a
building used for human or animal habitation unless the material being burned includes refuse as
defined in Section 18.03 of this ordinance.
(c) This ordinance does not apply to the use of propane, acetylene, natural gas, gasoline or kerosene in a
device intended for heating, construction or maintenance activities.
(3) General prohibition on outdoor burning and refuse burning. Open burning, outdoor burning and refuse burning
are prohibited in the City of Wisconsin Rapids unless the burning is specifically permitted by this ordinance.
(4) Materials that may not be burned. Unless a specific written approval has been obtained from the Department
of Natural Resources, the following materials may not be burned in an open fire, incinerator, furnace, stove or
any other indoor or outdoor incineration or heating device.
(a) Rubbish or garbage including, but not limited to, food wastes, food wraps, packaging, animal
carcasses, paint or painted materials, furniture, composite shingles, construction or demolition debris
or other household or business wastes.
(b) Waste oil or other oily wastes except used oil burned in a heating device for energy recovery subject to
the restrictions in Chapter NR 590, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(c) Asphalt and products containing asphalt.
(d) Treated or painted wood including but not limited to plywood, composite wood products or other wood
products that are painted, varnished or treated with preservatives.
(e) Any plastic material including, but not limited to, nylon, PVC, ABS, polystyrene or urethane foam, and
synthetic fabrics, plastic films and plastic containers.
(f) Rubber, including tires and synthetic rubber-like products.
(g) Newspaper, corrugated cardboard, container board, office paper and other materials that must be
recycled in accordance with Chapter 7, except as provided in section 18.11(8).
(5) Open burning of leaves, grass clippings, pine needles, yard and garden waste, and other vegetable debris.
Open burning of leaves, grass clippings, pine needles, yard and garden waste, and other vegetative debris is
prohibited. Residents are encouraged to use city compost sites or other methods of composting.
(6) Limited open burning allowed.
(a) Campfires.
(1) Outdoor campfires for cooking or recreation are allowed provided that the fire is confined by a
control device or structure such as a fire ring or fire pit, with a maximum diameter for said
campfire of 5 feet. Only clean wood may be burned in an outdoor campfire.
(2) Campfires are only allowed on days that such burning is not prohibited by the Fire Department
or the Department of Natural Resources. Each day, residents shall contact the Fire
Department to determine if burning is authorized on that day.
(3) Open burning under this section shall only be conducted at a location at least 50 feet from
the nearest building which is not on the same property
(b) Ceremonial fires. Ceremonial Fires are allowed if a permit is granted by the Fire Chief, under
conditions as established by the Fire Chief. A permit is $5.
(c) Land clearing or maintenance of rights of way. The burning of trees, limbs, and brush for land clearing
or maintenance of rights-of-way is allowed only if approved by the Fire Chief by permit. A permit is $5,
for a maximum of ten days. The maximum number of days may be increased upon approval of the Fire
Chief. Even after a permit is issued, permission from the Fire Department must be received prior to
burning each day.
(1) Open burning of these materials shall be conducted only on the property on which the
materials were generated.
(2) Open burning may only occur when there is at least 1” of snow on the ground, or immediately
after or during periods of heavy rain.
(3) No materials larger than 6 inches in diameter or stumps may be burned.
(4) Because dirt and mud impedes the burning process and results in smoldering, dirt and mud
shall not be pushed into the burn pile.
(5) Burning shall occur no closer than 200 feet to any structure
(6) Open burning shall only be allowed from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., which means the fire
should be completely extinguished by 10:00 p.m.
(7) A burning permit issued under this section shall require compliance with all applicable
provisions of this ordinance and any additional special restrictions deemed necessary to
protect public health and safety.
(8) Any violation of the conditions of a burning permit shall be deemed a violation of this
ordinance. Any violation of this ordinance or the burning permit shall void the permit.
(d) All allowed open burning shall be conducted in a safe, nuisance-free manner, when wind and weather
conditions are such as to minimize adverse effects and not create a health hazard or a visibility hazard
on roadways, railroads or airfields. Open burning shall be conducted in conformance with all local and
state fire protection regulations.
(e) When weather conditions warrant, the Fire Chief or the Department of Natural Resources may declare
a burning moratorium on all open burning and temporarily suspend previously issued burning permits
for open burning.
(f) Open burning shall be constantly attended and supervised by a competent person of at least eighteen
(18) years of age until the fire is extinguished and is cold. The person shall have readily available for
use such fire extinguishing equipment as may be necessary for the total control of the fire.
(g) No materials may be burned upon any street, curb, gutter or sidewalk or on the ice of a lake, pond,
stream, river, or waterbody.
(h) Except for barbecue, gas and charcoal grills, no burning shall be undertaken within 15 feet from any
combustible material, combustible wall or partition, exterior window opening, exit access or exit unless
authorized by the Fire Chief.
(i) In emergency situations such as natural disasters, burning that would otherwise be prohibited is
allowed if specifically approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
(7) Burn Barrel. A burn barrel may be used in the City of Wisconsin Rapids only in accordance with the following
provisions:
(a) The burn barrel shall not be used to burn any of the prohibited materials listed in sections 18.11(4)
and 18.11(5).
(b) The burn barrel shall be located at least 50 feet from the nearest building that is not on the same
property as the burn barrel.
(c) The burn barrel shall have vent holes above the ash line for combustion air and shall be covered with
a heavy wire screen.
(d) The burn barrel shall not serve a commercial enterprise.
(8) Exemption for burning certain papers.
(a) Notwithstanding section 18.11(4)(g) of this ordinance, paper and cardboard products may be used as
a starter fuel for a fire that is allowed under this ordinance.
(b) Small quantities of confidential papers from a residence may be burned if necessary to prevent the
theft of financial records, identification or other confidential information.
(c) Confidential papers from a commercial enterprise shall be shredded or destroyed in a manner other
than burning.
(d) A fire set for burning of a small quantity of confidential papers shall be subject to and comply with
sections 18.11(6)(d) through 18.11(6)(h).
(9) Outdoor Wood-fired Furnaces. An outdoor wood-fired furnace may be installed and used in the City of
Wisconsin Rapids only in accordance with the following provisions:
(a) The outdoor wood-fired furnace shall not used to burn any of the prohibited materials listed in Section
6 of this ordinance.
(b) The outdoor wood-fired furnace shall be located at least 100 feet from the nearest building which is
not on the same property as the outdoor wood-fired furnace.
(c) The outdoor wood-fired furnace shall have a chimney that extends at least 15 feet above the ground
surface.
(d) The owner of the outdoor wood-fired furnace shall obtain an annual permit from the Fire Chief.
(e) The outdoor wood-fired furnace must be used for heating purposes.
(10) Fire Department Practice Burns. Notwithstanding Sections 18.11(3) and 18.11(4), the Wisconsin Rapids Fire
Department may burn a standing building if necessary for fire fighting practice and if the practice burn
complies with the requirements of the Department of Natural Resources.
(11) Liability.
(a) A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire shall be responsible for all fire suppression costs and
any other liability resulting from damage caused by the fire.
(b) In addition to (a) above, a person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire in violation of any part of this
ordinance may be responsible for the costs of response of the Fire Department to the fire (Engine
Company hourly rate, overtime costs of personnel, etc.), as well as being subject to citations for
violations of this ordinance.
(12) Right of entry and inspection. The Fire Chief, Deputy Fire Chief or any authorized officer, agent, employee or
representative of the City of Wisconsin Rapids who presents credentials may inspect any property for the
purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. Note: If the owner or occupant of the
premises denies access to the property for this purpose, a special inspection warrant may be obtained in
accordance with sections 66.122 and 66.123, Wis. Stats.
(13) Enforcement and penalties.
(a) The fire chief, deputy fire chief, and members of the Wisconsin Rapids Fire Department are authorized
to enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
(b) The penalty for violation of any portion of this ordinance shall be as set forth in Section 18.34.
18.12 RESPONSIBILITY FOR FIRE DAMAGES
(1) Responsibility for Fire.
(a) Any damage caused to another person’s property by burning of any kind, whether authorized or not,
shall be the responsibility of the person(s) responsible for igniting the fire. The city will charge the cost
of fire investigation and extinguishment to the perpetrator of the fire.
18.13 DNR REGULATIONS.
(1) During periods of extreme dry conditions, the Wisconsin Rapids Fire Department will follow the burning
recommendations as set forth by the local DNR office.
18.14 APPLICATION TO NEW AND EXISTING CONDITIONS.
(1) The provisions of this code shall apply equally to new and existing conditions. The exception to this rule
applies to existing conditions that may not fall within the guidelines of the codes cited in Section 18.02. If this
is the case, the fire chief or deputy fire chief shall determine if a condition shall be permitted to continue,
provided the condition does not constitute a distinct hazard to life and/or adjoining property.
18.15 NEW MATERIAL, PROCESSES, OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH MAY REQUIRE PERMITS NOT SPECIFIED IN THE CITY
OF WISCONSIN RAPIDS FIRE CODE.
(1) The mayor, the fire chief, the deputy fire chief, and the building inspector shall act as a committee to
determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes,
or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in said code.
18.16 MODIFICATION OR VARIANCE TO THE CITY OF WISCONSIN RAPIDS FIRE CODE.
(1) The fire chief and deputy fire chief shall have the authority to modify or issue a variance in regard to any of the
provisions of the City of Wisconsin Rapids Fire Prevention Code. Those individuals seeking a variance to the
municipal fire code shall apply in writing to the fire chief or deputy fire chief and identify which section of the
code they wish to modify. The specifics of any modification or variance that is granted shall be signed by the
fire chief or deputy fire chief and the party requesting the variance. The original form shall be maintained in the
official file at the fire department and a copy will be furnished to the applicant.
18.17 APPEALS.
(1) Whenever the fire chief or deputy fire chief disapprove a modification or variance, or when it is claimed
by the applicant that the provisions of the code do not apply, or that the true intent and meaning of the code
have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the fire chief or
deputy fire chief to the common council within 10 days from the date of the decision. In the event of such
appeal, the council shall set a time and place for an appeal hearing and give to the applicant at least 10 days
notice of such hearing by mail or in person.
18.18 PYROTECHNICS.
(1) There will be no pyrotechnics allowed in any structure within the City of Wisconsin Rapids without a permit from
the Wisconsin Rapids Fire Department. These permits may be obtained at Fire Station 1, 1511 12th Street
South, during the hours of 0800-1300, Monday through Friday. An officer of the fire department must inspect
the pyrotechnics before they are used. An administration fee of $25.00 will be charged for each permit.
(2) Anyone caught using pyrotechnics without the appropriate permits is subject to the penalties as set forth in
Section 18.29 of this fire code.
18.19 KNOX BOXES.
(1) All new commercial construction within the City of Wisconsin Rapids will be required to place a Knox Box on the
outside of the structure that is accessible only to the fire department in the event of an emergency.
Applications may be obtained at the east side fire station. Contractors may contact the fire department to
request a recommended location for the Knox Box.
18.20 OCCUPANCY LOAD SIGNAGE
(1) All new and existing structures within the jurisdiction of the City of Wisconsin Rapids will be required to post
occupancy load signs in places of assembly as defined in Section 18.03 of this fire code. The calculation for
occupancy load can be located in NFPA 101, Chapter 7.3.1.2.
18.21 SMOKE DETECTORS
(1) Any owner, renter, business, or leasor applying for a building, electrical, or plumbing permit for any existing
residential property, or any residential property annexed to the City of Wisconsin Rapids, shall be required to
install smoke detectors as follows:
(a) At least one smoke detector in each dwelling located within 15 feet from all rooms used for sleeping
purposes
(b) At least one detector on each level of a dwelling
(c) Detectors are required at the top of each interior stairwell in multiple family dwellings.
(2) Responsibility.
(a) It is the owner’s responsibility to supply and install detectors. The owner is responsible for
maintenance and testing detectors in common stairwells.
(b) It is the tenant’s responsibility to test and maintain detectors within dwelling units. Tenants must
notify the owner or agent in writing of any deficiencies.
(c) The owner is responsible for providing the tenant with written information regarding detector
maintenance and testing.
(d) Enforcement shall be administered by the fire chief or the deputy fire chief.
(e) The penalty for not complying with this ordinance shall be in accordance with Section 18.29 of this fire
code.
18.22 FIRE HYDRANT LOCATION AND DISTANCE.
(1) Fire hydrant location and distances shall be in accordance with NFPA Code 1, Annex I, Table I.3. (MC#1045)
18.23 PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANTS
(1) All private yard hydrants shall be painted red with the caps and bonnet painted in accordance with NFPA 291,
Fire Flow Testing and Marking of Hydrants.
(2) Class AA – 1500 gpm or greater shall be painted light blue.
(3) Class A – 1000-1499 gpm shall be painted green.
(4) Class B – 500-999 gpm shall be painted orange.
(5) Class C – less than 500 gpm shall be painted red.
18.24 FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTIONS (FDC) ON SPRINKLERED BUILDINGS
(1) Any new construction within the City of Wisconsin Rapids, where by code a sprinkler system is required, this
building will also be required to have installed a 5-inch Storz connection as the FDC.
18.25 FIRE DEPARTMENT ACCESS
(1) Any contractor that is compromising an existing roadway within the City of Wisconsin Rapids must gain
approval, in writing, from the fire department before any construction is authorized.
(2) Contractors will ensure they follow NFPA 1, Chapter 18 in regard to fire department access to structures.
(3) Any construction within the City of Wisconsin Rapids where roads must be blocked for any purpose, the
contractor will ensure the fire department has emergency access at all times. This may include installing a
temporary road dependent upon the length of the project. Furthermore, any temporary road, or construction
upon an existing roadway, the contractor will ensure the roadway is wide enough and strong enough to support
the heaviest emergency response vehicle at the fire department.
18.26 SCHOOL FIRE DRILLS
(1) The City of Wisconsin will require all schools to conduct monthly fire drills and provide such record to fire
department officials upon request.
(2) Tornado drills may be substituted for a fire drill.
(3) The fire department will provide forms for the schools to complete. These forms should be forwarded to the fire
department as soon after the conclusion of the school year as is possible, which in turn will be kept on file at
the department for a period of seven (7) years per city policy.
18.27 NUISANCE PROVISION.
(1) No person(s) shall cause, permit or allow the escape of smoke, ash, soot, or noxious fumes from any smoke
stack, chimney, or open fire within the corporate limits of the city of Wisconsin Rapids into the open air that
may cause injury, health detriment, or cause a nuisance to any person(s). In such a case, if a complaint is
received by the fire department, an officer of the department will investigate the complaint. If the complaint
proves to be valid, the officer will request the party causing the nuisance to cease and desist the action
causing the problem. If the party does not comply with the officer’s request, a report will be filed with the
deputy fire chief and after an investigation of the compliant, if the person(s) involved are found to be in
violation of this portion of the municipal fire protection code, a citation will be issued (also refer to MC 25.10).
18.28 LIQUOR LICENSES.
(1) When specifically requested by the Finance & Property committee, a business owner seeking a liquor license
will appear before the committee to explain any code deficiencies. The deputy fire chief and building inspector
may also sit in on this meeting.
(2) A license will not be issued to any business with outstanding fire or building code deficiencies.
18.29 BUILDING ADDRESS IDENTIFICATION
(1) All residences and businesses within the boundaries of Wisconsin Rapids will comply with Section 11.15.
(2) It is important for these numbers to be placed on the buildings so emergency personnel can easily identify
them during an emergency response.
18.30 SNOW REMOVAL FROM FIRE HYDRANTS
(1) Any residence or business in the City of Wisconsin Rapids that has a fire hydrant located on its property should
ensure it is free of snow during the winter months. Snow buried hydrants are more likely to freeze and not work
properly in the event of a fire.
(2) It will be unlawful to blow snow onto a city-owned hydrant. People who bury hydrants by blowing snow onto
them will be subject to a citation being issued and penalties as set forth in Section 18.29 of this fire code.
18.31 FALSE ALARMS
(1) Any business, apartment complex, or institution that has a fire alarm system will ensure that the fire
department and the dispatch center for the department are notified when testing on the system is being
conducted.
(2) Each business that has a false alarm due to malfunction or work being done on the system will receive one uncited
emergency response from the fire department per calendar year. Any subsequent response during a
calendar year will result in a bill being sent to the business as outlined in WRFD SOG 806.
18.32 18.32 THREE-STRIKE RULE
(1) Any business identified with a fire code violation will typically have 30 days to correct the deficiencies. Life
Safety Code violations that present a significant threat to life must be corrected immediately. The timeframe to
correct deficiencies will be identified on the inspection report or through correspondence from the deputy fire
chief. Any fire code violation not corrected within the specified time allotment will be warned again and 15 days
will be given to correct non-Life Safety Code violations. Failure to correct the identified violation after the
second notice will result in the application of Section 18.05.
(2) After a citation is issued by the fire department, the violator will work with the city attorney's office.
(3) Each day the violation goes uncorrected after the citation has been issued will constitute a separate violation.
18.33 CITATION AUTHORITY & ENFORCEMENT
(1) The City of Wisconsin Rapids Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the fire chief and deputy fire chief of
the Wisconsin Rapids Fire Department.
(2) This code shall empower the fire chief and deputy fire chief with citation powers. Any citations issued by the
fire chief or deputy fire chief for fire code violations shall be in accordance with the procedures and stipulations
as set forth by the City of Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Court.
18.34 PENALTIES
(1) Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or fails to comply with any order made
thereunder, shall be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $200.00 and the costs of prosecution. In default
of immediate payment of such forfeiture and costs, such person(s) shall be committed to the county jail until
such forfeiture and costs are paid. Every commitment shall limit the duration of such imprisonment to a
definite term not exceeding 90 days.
(2) Every day upon which a violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense.
1
Chapter 19 Trees and Their Disease Treatment
19.01 Purpose
19.02 Definitions
19.03 Superintendent of Parks
19.04 Planting and Removal of Public Trees and Shrubs
19.05 House Moving Permits
19.06 General Tree and Shrub Regulations
19.07 Cottonwood and Box Elder Trees Prohibited
19.08 Authority of Superintendent of Parks to Remove Trees/Shrubs and Abate Public Nuisances
19.09 Destruction of Diseased Tree: Collection of Costs
19.10 Destruction of Wood: Collection of Costs
19.11 Removal and Burning of Dead Wood from Trees
19.12 Penalties
19.13 Separability
19.01 PURPOSE
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Wisconsin Rapids, to regulate and control the planting, transplanting,
removal, maintenance and protection of trees and shrubs in the city in order to eliminate and guard against dangerous
conditions which may result in injury to persons using the streets, alleys, sidewalks or property of the city; to promote
and enhance the beauty and general welfare of the city; to prevent damage to any public sewer or water main, street,
sidewalk or other public property; to protect trees and shrubs located in public areas from undesirable and unsafe
planting, removal, treatment and maintenance practices; and to guard all trees and shrubs within the city against the
spread of disease or pests. It is the intent of the common council that the provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all
trees, shrubs or plants growing or hereafter planted in or upon any public right-of-way or other premises owned or
controlled by the city, and also to all trees and shrubs growing or to be planted in or upon any private premises which
shall threaten the lives, health, safety or welfare of the public or of the property owned or controlled by the city.
19.02 DEFINITIONS
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this ordinance they shall be construed to have the following
meanings:
(1) Person shall mean person, firm, association or corporation.
(2) Public Trees and Shrubs shall mean all trees or shrubs located or to be planted on any park, playground, or
other property owned or controlled by the city or on any public street, alley, sidewalk or highway within the
public right-of-way.
19.03 SUPERINTENDENT OF PARKS
The superintendent of parks shall direct, regulate and control the planting, care and removal of all public trees and
shrubs within the city and shall cause the provisions of this section to be enforced.
19.04 PLANTING AND REMOVAL OF PUBLIC TREES AND SHRUBS
(1) Permit Required. No person, except upon order of the superintendent of parks shall plant, transplant or move
any public tree or shrubs within the city, or cause such acts to be done by others, without first obtaining a
written permit for such work from the superintendent of parks as herein provided.
(2) Requirements and Conditions of Permits. If the superintendent of parks determines that proposed work or
planting described in an application for a permit is necessary and in accord with the purposes of this section
taking into account the safety, health and welfare of the public, location of utilities, public sidewalks, driveways
and street lights, general character of the area in which the tree or shrub is located or proposed to be located,
type of soil, characteristics and physiological needs of the species or variety of tree or shrub, he shall issue a
permit to the applicant.
(3) Replanting of Trees. As a condition of granting any permit to remove a public tree or shrub, the superintendent
of parks may require that the permittee plant one or more trees or shrubs in place of the one removed, and no
permittee under such conditional permit shall fail, refuse or neglect to plant trees or shrubs of the type, size
and in the location specified in his permit.
2
(4) Form; Expiration; Inspection. Every permit shall be issued by the superintendent of parks on forms prepared
by him and shall include a description of the work to be done and shall specify the species or variety, size,
nursery grade and location, of trees or shrubs to be planted, if any. Any work done under such permit must be
performed in strict accordance with the terms thereof and the provisions of this section. Permits issued under
this section shall expire six months after date of issue.
19.05 HOUSE MOVING PERMITS
No permit shall be issued to any person to move any building, structure or object exceeding 13-1/2 feet in height or
width upon, over or along any public right-of-way or other public place without first obtaining a written report from the
superintendent of parks who may require the applicant to furnish a bond or cash deposit to cover the cost of repairing
or replacing any public trees or shrubs which are injured as a result of the moving operations, specify the route to be
taken and impose any other conditions reasonably necessary for the protection of nearby public trees from injury.
19.06 GENERAL TREE AND SHRUB REGULATIONS
(1) Trees to be Kept Trimmed. Trees and shrubs standing in or upon any public right-of-way between the lot line
and the curb or edge of the improved street or upon any private premises adjacent to any public street,
right-of-way, park, playground or place shall be kept trimmed by the owner or owners of the premises upon or
in front of which such trees or shrubs are standing so that the lowest branches projecting over the public street
or right-of-way provide a clearance of not less than 13-1/2 feet and over all other public places of not less than
10 feet. The superintendent of parks may waive the provisions of this section for newly planted trees if he
determines that they do not interfere with public travel, obstruct the light of any street light, or endanger public
safety. Any tree or shrub not trimmed as herein provided is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. This
section shall not preclude routine trimming of such trees at the direction of the superintendent of parks.
(2) Obstruction of View at Intersections Prohibited. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no person
shall maintain, plant, or permit to remain on any private or public premises situated at the intersection of two or
more streets or alleys in the city any hedge, tree, shrub or other growth which may obstruct the view of the
operator of any motor vehicle approaching such intersection to the extent that such operator is unable to
observe other vehicles or pedestrians approaching or crossing said intersection. Any such hedge, tree, shrub
or growth is hereby declared to be a public nuisance if declared obstructions under Sections 11.06(1) and
11.06(2) of this municipal code.
19.07 COTTONWOOD AND BOX ELDER TREES PROHIBITED
No person shall plant a female tree of the species populus deltoides, variety populus balsamifera or other pistillate
form of genus Populus commonly known as "cottonwoods", a female tree of the species acer negundo, commonly
called the "seed bearing box elder", which may hereafter become infested with leptocoristrivattatus, commonly known
as the "box elder" bug.
19.08 AUTHORITY OF SUPINTENDENT OF PARKS TO REMOVE TREES/SHRUBS AND ABATE PUBLIC
NUISANCES
(1) Authority over Public Trees and Shrubs. The superintendent of parks shall have the authority to plant, trim,
spray, preserve, renew and remove public trees and shrubs or cause such work to be done as may be
necessary to insure the safety or preserve the symmetry and beauty of public streets or grounds and to protect
public sidewalks, streets, sewers and mains from damage or injury.
(2) Authority over Private Trees and Shrubs.
(a) Notice to Abate Nuisances. Whenever the superintendent of parks shall find on examination that any
tree or shrub, alive or dead, or part thereof growing or located upon private premises is a public
nuisance as defined in this ordinance, or which endangers life, health, safety or property of the public,
or which is infested with parasites or insect pests or disease which may spread or scatter to public
trees and shrubs, he shall notify the owner or his agent in writing or by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city that the nuisance must be sprayed, removed or otherwise abated as
directed in this notice within the time specified, which shall not be less than 10 days unless the
superintendent of parks shall determine that immediate correction or removal is necessary for public
safety.
(b) Immediate Hazard or Nuisance. In the event that a tree has fallen from private property onto city
property during a private cutting operation, or due to negligence of the property owner, it is the
responsibility of the owner of the property from which the tree fell to cause it to be removed in
accordance with this ordinance. Should the superintendent of parks or the city street superintendent
determine that the fallen tree is an immediate hazard or nuisance, they shall cause the tree to be
removed and shall report the expense thereof to the city treasurer who shall enter it as a charge
against the property upon which the tree was originally located. In the event that such tree has fallen
3
due to a storm or other identifiable act of God, the city shall remove the tree without charge to the
property owner.
(c) Tree Partially on Public Property. In the event that a tree, which is partially located on public property
need to be removed, the city and the sharing private property owner will share in the removal costs on
the basis of the percentage of the base of the tree on each property.
(d) Abatement by City. If the owner of such premises or his agent shall refuse or neglect to comply with
the notice within the time specified, the superintendent of parks shall cause the nuisance to be
sprayed, removed or otherwise abated and shall report the expense thereof to the city treasurer who
shall enter it as a charge against the property upon which the tree or shrub is located. If the cost of
tree removal is in excess of $100.00, the bill may be paid in equal installments over a period of five
years with interest to be paid at the rate of eight percent on any unpaid balance after the first year.
(e) Authority of Superintendent of Parks to Enter Private Premises. The superintendent of parks shall
have the authority to enter upon private premises at all reasonable times for the purposes of
examining any tree or shrub located upon or over such premises in carrying out any of the provisions
of this section.
(f) Interference with Superintendent of Parks Prohibited. No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with
the superintendent of parks or his agents, employees, or servants while they are engaged in carrying
out any work or activities authorized by this ordinance. (MC#221)
19.09 DESTRUCTION OF DISEASED TREE; COLLECTION OF COSTS
If an examination is made, as above provided, or made at the instance of the owner of the real estate, and discloses
that the tree is diseased, the superintendent of parks shall give notice to the owner of the said real estate, at his last
known address, and to the person in possession of said real estate to have such diseased tree cut down and the wood
properly disposed of within 10 days of giving such notice. If the owner or person in possession of such real estate does
not cut down the diseased tree and dispose of the wood within 10 days after such notice is given, then such tree shall
be cut down and the bark and wood disposed of by city agents on order of the superintendent of parks. Accurate
record of the expense of such cutting and disposing of shall be made and report thereof given to the city clerk, who
shall enter the amount against the respective real estate in the next and subsequent tax roll as a special tax against
such real estate, and the same shall be collected in all respects like other city taxes upon real estate.
19.10 DESTRUCTION OF WOOD; COLLECTION OF COSTS
No person shall keep, stockpile, store, sell, offer for sale, give away or transport any elm tree, elm firewood, or
branches, stump of log into or within the City of Wisconsin Rapids, between the dates of April 15 and September 1,
except for the purpose of immediately disposing of the same by burning or without debarking the same. All places
where elm logs have been stored and stockpiled must be cleaned up and bark and related debris properly disposed of
by April 15. Every owner and person in possession of real estate in the City of Wisconsin Rapids shall permit the
agents or employees of said city to enter upon said real estate and every residence, garage, wood shed, or other
structure thereon for the purpose of determining whether or not any elm material, of the type above described, is
located on said real estate or any structure thereon, and if such agent or employee ascertains that there is any elm
material located on such real estate or structure which has not been debarked and within 10 days from the date of said
notice of in lieu thereof to dispose of said elm material, and each owner and person in possession shall permit agent or
employee to take a sample of any such elm material for the purpose of determining whether or not it is infested with
Dutch elm disease, or disease carrying medium, and if such examination discloses that any such material is so
infested, the superintendent of parks shall give notice to the owner at his last known address, and to the person in
possession, to dispose of all of such elm material located on such real estate or any structure thereon.
If the owner or person in possession does not comply with any notice given as provided in this section, within
10 days after the same is given, then on order of the superintendent of parks the city agents or employees shall
remove all such elm material and dispose of the same. Accurate account of the expense of removal and burning shall
be kept and report made to the city clerk who shall enter the amount thereof in the next and subsequent tax roll as a
special tax against such real estate, and the same shall be collected in all respects like other city taxes upon real
estate. (MC#148)
19.11 REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OF DEAD WOOD FROM TREES
Each owner and person in possession of real estate in the City of Wisconsin Rapids shall cause all dead wood to be
removed from every tree on his real estate and to be property disposed of. In the event that it appears to any agent or
employee of said city that there is dead wood in any tree on private property in the City of Wisconsin Rapids, the
superintendent of parks shall cause notice to be given to the owner at his last known address, and the person in
possession of such real estate, to remove and dispose of such dead wood. If such dead wood has not been removed
and burned within 10 days after such notice is given, then the agents or employees of the city shall remove the same
and burn it. Accurate record of the cost of removing and burning such dead wood shall be kept and a report made to
4
the city clerk, and the amount thereof shall be entered in the next and subsequent tax roll as a special tax against such
real estate and same shall be collected in all respects like other city taxes on real estate.
19.12 PENALTIES
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this section shall upon conviction thereof forfeit not less than $10.00 nor
more than $200 together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be
imprisoned in the county jail until said forfeiture and costs are paid but not exceeding 90 days. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed on every day on which a violation occurs or continues.
19.14 SEPARABILITY
If any provision of this section shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court or competent jurisdiction, such
declaration shall not invalidate any other provision of this section. The common council of the City of Wisconsin Rapids
hereby declares that they would have adopted each and every provision of this section separately regardless of the
possible invalidity of any part thereof.
1
Chapter 20 Licenses, Permits, and Business Regulations
20.01 Transient Merchant Regulations
20.02 Use of Cigarettes and Tobacco Products Prohibited
20.03 Junk Dealer - License Required
20.04 Fireworks
20.05 Taxicabs and Driver Regulations
20.06 Circus or Exhibition - License Required
20.07 Loud-speaker Devices
20.08 Special Event
20.09 Bicycle Regulations and Licensing
20.10 Ambulance Rates
20.11 Non-renewal of License for City Obligations
20.12 Emergency Alarms Systems
20.13 Regulation of Pawnbrokers, Secondhand Article Dealers, and Secondhand Jewelry Dealers
20.14 Minimum Standards for Rooming Houses and Hotels
20.01 TRANSIENT MERCHANT REGULATIONS
(1) Registration Required. It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant to engage in direct sales within the City of
Wisconsin Rapids without being registered for that purpose as provided herein. (MC#568)
(2) Definitions. In this ordinance. (MC#966)
(a) Transient Merchant means any individual who, for himself or for a partnership, association, or corporation
engages in the retail sale of merchandise at any place in this state temporarily and who does not intend to
become and does not become a permanent merchant of such place. For the purposes of this section, sale
of merchandise includes a sale in which the personal services rendered upon or in connection with the
merchandise constitutes the greatest part of value for the price received, but does not include a farm
auction sale conducted by or for a resident farmer of personal property used on the farm, or the sale of
produce or other perishable products at retail or wholesale by a resident of this state. Transient merchants
shall include, but not be limited to peddlers, solicitors, and telephone solicitors. For purposes of this
chapter, the acceptance of a “donation” in exchange for goods, or an order for goods, shall be deemed an
act requiring compliance with all of the regulatory provisions of this chapter, including registration and
posting of a bond.
(1) Transient Merchant Business means any individual, partnership, corporation or business entity of
any type whatsoever, which employs transient merchant employee/representatives as defined
below either on a full-time, part-time or commission basis and is not a permanent merchant as
defined in paragraph (b).
(2) Transient Merchant Employee/Representative means any individual who, for him/herself, or for
another (including but not limited to partnership, association or corporation) sells goods, or take
sales orders for the later delivery of goods, at any location other than the permanent business
place or residence of the individual, partnership, association or corporation.
(b) Permanent Merchant means a transient merchant who, for at least one year prior to the consideration of
the application of this ordinance to said merchant has continuously operated an established place of
business in the local trade area among the communities including and bordering the place of sale or has
continuously resided in the local trade area among the communities including and bordering the place of
sale and now does business from his/her residence.
(c) Merchandise shall include personal property of any kind, and merchandise provided incidental to services
offered or sold. The sale of merchandise includes donations required by the seller for the retention of
merchandise by a donor or prospective customer. "Merchandise" shall also include the sale of a service of
any kind.
2
(d) Charitable Organization shall include any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary person,
partnership, association, or corporation, or one purporting to be such.
(e) Clerk shall mean the city clerk.
(3) Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this ordinance:
(a) Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products, or bakery merchandise to regular customers on
established routes.
(b) Any person selling merchandise at wholesale to dealers in such merchandise.
(c) Any person selling agricultural products which such person has grown.
(d) Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders away from the established place of
business for merchandise regularly offered for sale by such merchant within this county and who delivers
such merchandise in their regular course of business.
(e) Any person who has an established place of business where the merchandise being sold is offered for sale
on a regular basis, and in which the buyer has initiated contact with, and specifically requested a home
visit by said person.
(f) Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has had a prior business transaction,
such as a prior sale or credit arrangement with the prospective customer.
(g) Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the sale or offering for sale of
merchandise.
(h) Any person holding a sale required by status or by order of any court and any person conducting a bona
fide auction sale pursuant to law.
(I) Any employee, officer, or agent of a charitable organization who engages in direct sales for, or on behalf of,
said organization, provided that there is submitted to the clerk proof that such charitable organization is
registered under Section 440.41, Wisconsin Statutes. Any charitable organization not registered under
Section 440.41, Statutes, or which is exempt from the statute's registration requirements shall be
required to register under this ordinance.
(j) Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant but against whom complaint has been made to the
clerk that such person is a transient merchant; provided that there is submitted to the clerk, proof that
such person has leased for at least one year, or purchased the premises from which he/she is conducting
business, or proof that such person has conducted such business in the city for at least one year prior to
the date complaint was made.
(k) Any individual licensed by an examining board as defined in Section 15.01(7), Wisconsin Statutes.
(MC#568)
(l) This ordinance does not apply to transient merchants while doing business at special events authorized by
the common council. (MC#568)
(4) Registration. (MC#966)
(a) Transient merchant businesses must complete all registration requirements with the city clerk no less
than 30 days prior to commencing any and all selling activities in the City of Wisconsin Rapids and
transient merchant employee/representatives must complete all registration requirements with the city
clerk no less than 72 hours prior to commencing any and all selling activities in the City of Wisconsin
Rapids. Registration shall include the following information:
(1) Transient Merchant Business
(a) Business name, permanent address, telephone number, Wisconsin seller’s permit
number, name of business contact person, contact person’s date of birth, driver’s
license or identification number and issuing state;
(b) Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the goods offered, and any
services offered;
(c) Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable;
(d) Total number of employees selling during business operations covered by this license;
(e) Dollar value of most expensive merchandise or service offered;
(f) Dates in which selling activity shall occur;
(g) Names of last three cities, villages, towns where business has conducted similar
business just prior to making this registration;
(h) Place where business on-site contact person can be personally contacted for at least
sixty (60) days after leaving this city.
3
(i) Location, address and telephone number from which business will be conducted, if any,
and written permission from the owner of the property for the applicant to conduct
business on the property, which statement shall be submitted with the registration form;
(j) Statement as to whether applicant has been charged or convicted of any crime or
ordinance violation related to applicant's transient merchants business within the last
five years; the nature of the offense and the place of conviction;
(2) Transient Merchant Employee/Representative
(a) Name, permanent address, and telephone number, and temporary address, if any;
(b) Date of birth, driver’s license or identification number, issuing state, height, weight, and
color of hair and eyes;
(c) Name, address, and telephone number of the person, firm, association, or corporation
that the transient merchant represents or is employed by, or whose merchandise is
being sold;
(d) Location, address and telephone number from which business will be conducted, if any,
and written permission from the owner of the property for the applicant to conduct
business on the property, which statement shall be submitted with the registration form,
if not already provided by the transient merchant business with its application;
(e) Nature of business and a brief description of the merchandise and services offered;
(f) Proposed method of delivery of merchandise, if applicable;
(g) Make, model, and license number of any vehicle to be used by applicant in the conduct
of his/her business;
(h) Place where applicant can be personally contacted for at least 60 days after leaving this
city;
(i) Statement as to whether applicant has been charged or convicted of any crime or
ordinance violation related to applicant's transient merchants business within the last
five years; the nature of the offense and the place of conviction;
(j) Dates in which selling activity will occur.
(b) Applicants shall present to the clerk for examination:
(1) For an employee/representative, a driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be
reasonable required by the clerk;
(2) For the business, a state certificate of examination and approval from the seller of weights and
measures where applicants business requires use of weighing and measuring devices approved
by state authorities
(3) For the business and/or an employee/representative, a State of Wisconsin or Wood County
health officer's certificate where the applicant's business involves the handling of food, beverages
or clothing and is required to be certified under state law; such certificate to state the applicant is
apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated not more than 90 days prior to
the date the application is made. The applicant’s equipment shall be subject to inspections by the
Wood County health department at the time of application and at periodic intervals thereafter.
(c) At the time of registration or additional licensing within a current registration period, a non-refundable fee
shall be paid to the clerk. Fees shall be charged according to the following schedule:
Business Employee Time Period
$50 $10 two consecutive days
$100 $10 four consecutive days
$150 $10 one week
$175 $15 one month
$250 $20 six months
$500 $40 one year
Sales may take place only within the time period permitted by a license. Licenses shall be subject to
refusal as provided in Section 20.01(5) or revocation as provided in 20.01(7) and 20.01(10). Transient
merchant businesses who are sole proprietors personally conducting sales shall be required to purchase
only the transient merchant business license.
4
(d) The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the clerk his/her agent to accept service in process in any
civil action brought against the applicant arising out of any sale or service performed by the applicant
cannot, after reasonable effort, be served personally.
(e) Upon payment of said fee and the signing of said statement, the clerk shall register the applicant as a
transient merchant, date the entry, and issue a license. Said registration and license shall be subject to
subsequent refusal as provided in 20.01(5) below.
(5) Investigation.
(a) Upon receipt of each application, the clerk may refer it immediately to the chief of police who may make
and complete an investigation of the statements made in such registration.
(b) The clerk shall refuse to register the applicant if it is determined, pursuant to the investigation above, that
the application contains any material omission or materially inaccurate statement; complaints of a
material nature have been received against the applicant by authorities in the last cities, villages, and
towns, not exceeding three, in which the applicant conducted similar business; the applicant was
convicted of a crime, statutory violation, or ordinance violation within the last five years, the nature of
which is directly related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling; the applicant failed directly to
comply with any applicable provision of 20.01(4)(b) above. (MC#568)
(6) Appeal. Any person denied registration may appeal the denial through the appeal procedure provided by ordinance
or resolution of the common council or if none has been adopted, under the provisions of Sections 68.07 through
68.16, Wisconsin Statutes.
(7) Regulation of Transient Merchants.
(a) Prohibited Practices.
(1) A transient merchant shall be prohibited from: calling at any dwelling or other place between the
hours of 9:00 P.M. and 9:00 A.M. except by appointment; calling at any dwelling or other place
where a sign is displayed bearing the words "No Peddlers", "No Solicitors", or words of similar
meaning; calling at the rear door of any dwelling place; or remaining on any premises after being
asked to leave by the owner, occupant or other person having authority over such premises.
(2) A transient merchant shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or misleading statements
concerning the quality, quantity, or character of any merchandise offered for sale, the purpose of
his/her visit, his/her identity or the identity of the organization he/she represents. A charitable
organization transient merchant shall specifically disclose what portion of the sale price of
merchandise being offered will actually be used for the charitable purpose for which the
organization is soliciting. Said portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the
merchandise.
(3) No transient merchant shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and
vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be
observed.
(4) No transient merchant shall make any loud noises or use any sound amplifying device to attract
customers if the noise produced is capable of being plainly heard outside a 100-foot radius of the
source.
(5) No transient merchant shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around the area in which
he/she is conducting business.
(b) Disclosure Requirements.
(1) After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to a prospective customer, a
transient merchant shall expressly disclose his/her name, the name of the company or
organization he/she is affiliated with, if any, and the identity of merchandise or services he/she
offers to sell.
(2) If any sale of merchandise is made by a transient merchant, or any sales order for the later
delivery of merchandise is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have the right to cancel said
transaction if it involves the extension of credit or is a cash transaction of more than $25.00, in
accordance with the procedure as set forth in Section 423.203, of the Wisconsin Statutes; the
seller shall give the buyer two copies of a typed or printed notice of that fact. Such notice shall
conform to the requirements of Section 423.203(1)(a), (b), and (c); (2); and (3) of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
(3) If the transient merchant takes a sales order for the later delivery of merchandise, he/she shall,
5
at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a written statement containing the terms of
the agreement, the amount paid in advance whether full, partial or no advance payment is made,
the name, address and telephone number of the seller, the delivery or performance date and
whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms thereof.
(8) Bond
(a) A transient merchant business shall post with the clerk at the same time the registration form is filed with
the clerk a cash bond in lawful money of the United States, in an amount based on the most expensive
item of merchandise or service sold. The bond shall be $1,000 for goods priced less than $1; $2,500 for
goods priced from $1 to $49.99; $5,000 for goods priced from $50 to $99.99; $7,500 for goods priced
from $100 to $249.99; and $10,000 for goods priced $250 or more. The transient merchant shall name
all persons upon whose behalf the bond shall be posted. Buyers or donors who wish to cancel their
transactions or claim a refund as permitted in 20.01(7)(b)(2) may do so by presenting within the time
limits in 20.01(7)(b)(2) to the clerk the merchandise purchased or the credit papers, and the clerk shall
refund to the donor or buyer the amount paid to the seller. The clerk shall deduct from the bond any
amount so refunded plus $25 for each refund made as a handling charge. The clerk shall store the
merchandise and papers upon which the refund was grounded, notify by first class mail the seller at the
address provided in the registration form. Twenty days after such notice is mailed the clerk may sell or
destroy such merchandise and papers, crediting any money received therefore to the seller's bond
account. Once the bond has been depleted by 20 percent, transient merchant shall upon written notice
thereof by first class mail, within 10 days after mailing of such notice, replenish the bond or forfeit the
registration. No transient merchant shall conduct activities within the city once such notice has been
mailed until such time as the fund is replenished unless the registration is revoked, in which case no
further sales shall take place. Balances of cash bonds are fully refundable after 60 days from the license
expiration date if the city clerk has received no notice of complaints or upon written notification by all
complainants that complaints have been satisfactorily settled, whichever is later.
(b) As an alternative to the cash bond required in Section 20.01(8)(a), the transient merchant business may
present a surety bond from a reputable bonding firm for the period of sale and a period extending no less
than six months after the end of the period of sale. The amount of the bond shall be determined as in
section 20.01(8)(a) above. The bond shall name all persons for whom the bond is posted. Refunds to
customers for any returns of merchandise to the city clerk shall be paid by the bonding firm or transient
merchant to such customers. Claims for refunds shall be within the time limits of Section 20.01(7)(b). The
clerk shall store the merchandise and papers upon which the refund was grounded, and notify by first
class mail the seller and bonding firm at the address provided in the registration form and on the bond. No
transient merchant shall conduct activities in the city if evidence of a refund is not received by the clerk
within 20 days of the mailing of such notice or returned merchandise. The clerk shall retain such returned
merchandise until sufficient evidence is received that money has been refunded to those buyers who
returned merchandise. Upon receipt of sufficient evidence, the clerk shall advise the transient merchant
by first class mail to obtain the stored merchandise. Twenty days after such notice is mailed, the clerk may
sell or destroy such merchandise and papers, with any money received from the sale to be paid to the
transient merchant or the bonding company based on payment of the refund to the customer.
(9) Display of Permit and Records
(a) The chief of police shall report to the clerk all convictions for violation of this ordinance and the clerk shall
note any such violation on the record of the registrant convicted.
(b) The transient merchant shall be required to display his/her issued permit on demand by a police officer
and shall carry said permit on his/her person while engaged in permit selling activity.
(10) Revocation of Registration.
(a) Registration may be revoked by the Finance and Property Committee after notice and hearing, if the
registrant made any material omission or materially inaccurate statement in the application for
registration, made any fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation in the
course of engaging in direct sales, violated any provision of this ordinance has pending a criminal charge,
a civil ordinance violation charge which relate to the particular selling activity or was convicted of any crime
or ordinance or statutory violation which is directly related to the registrant's fitness to engage in direct
selling. (MC#920)
(b) Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally or pursuant to Section 20.01(4)(d) above on the
6
registrant at least 72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing: such notice shall contain the time and
place of hearing and a statement of the acts upon which the hearing will be based. (MC#966)
(11) Penalty. Any person or firm adjudged in violation of any provision of this ordinance shall forfeit not less than $10.00
nor more than $1,000.00 for each violation per day plus costs of prosecution. Each violation shall constitute a
separate offense. (MC#568)
20.02 CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS (MC#835)
(1) License Fee. Pursuant to Section 134.65(2)(a), the fee for a cigarette and tobacco products retailer license shall be
$100 for each year beginning July 1 and ending June 30, with the fee prorated in monthly increments for periods of
less than a year. Only complete calendar months shall be considered for prorating of the fee.
(2) Use of cigarettes and tobacco products by minors prohibited.
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), no person less than 18 years of age may do any of the following:
(1) Buy or attempt to buy cigarettes or tobacco products.
(2) Falsely represent his or her age for the purpose of receiving any cigarettes or tobacco products.
(b) A child may purchase cigarettes or tobacco products for the sole purpose of resale in the course of
employment during his or her working hours if employed by a retailer licensed under Section 134.65(1) of
the Wisconsin Statutes.
(c) A law enforcement officer shall seize any cigarettes or tobacco products involved in any violation of
Subparagraph (2)(a) committed in his or her presence.
20.03 JUNK DEALER - LICENSE REQUIRED
(1) No person or persons, association, partnership, firm or corporation shall hereafter in the City of Wisconsin Rapids
keep, conduct or maintain any building, structure, yard or place for keeping, storing or piling, in commercial
quantities, whether temporarily, irregularly or continually, or for the buying or selling at retail or wholesale or dealing
in any old, used or second hand materials of any kind, including cloth, rags, clothing, paper, rubbish, bottles,
rubber, iron, brass, copper, or other metal, furniture, used motor vehicles or the parts thereof, or other articles
which from its worn condition renders it practically useless for the purpose for which it was made, and which is
commonly classed as junk, whether with a fixed place of business or as an itinerant peddler, without first having
obtained and paid for a license, as hereinafter provided. One carrying on the aforesaid business shall be referred to
herein as "junk dealer". (32)
(2) Application for License. Every applicant for a license to engage in the business of junk dealing shall file with the city
clerk a written application upon a form prepared and provided by the city, signed by the applicant or applicants.
Said application shall state:
(a) The name and residence of the applicant, if an individual, partnership or firm, or the names of the principal
officers and their residences, if the applicant is an association or corporation.
(b) The detailed nature of the business to be conducted and the kinds of material to be collected, bought,
sold or otherwise handled.
(c) The premises where such business is to be located or carried on.
(3) Each application shall contain an agreement that the applicant accepts the license, if granted, upon the condition
that it may be suspended for cause at any time by the mayor.
(4) Inspections. The city clerk shall report such applications to the chief of police, health officer, fire chief and building
inspector, who shall inspect or cause to be inspected such premises to determine whether it complies with all laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations. Said premises and all structures thereon shall be so situated and constructed
that the business of junk dealer may be carried on in a sanitary manner, shall contain no fire hazards, and shall be
arranged so that a thorough inspection may be made at any time by the proper health, fire, building and police
authorities.
(5) Fencing Required. Each of the premises upon which the business of junk dealer is to carried on shall be enclosed
by a proper fence or other structure not less than seven feet in height, constructed so that no dust or other material
may pass through. Said enclosure shall be maintained in good condition at all times. No article shall be piled so as
to protrude above said enclosure.
(6) Junk Yard Not Near Residences. No premises shall be used for carrying on the business of junk dealer when more
than two buildings situated within a distance of 300 feet are used solely for residence purposes. Any junk dealer
using premises for the business of junk dealing at the time of the passage of this ordinance, which does not comply
with this section, may be granted a license for six months but said license shall no be renewed.
7
(7) Issue of License. Upon the filing of the application and the payment to the city of the license fee hereinafter
provided, the city clerk shall issue to the applicant a license to engage in business as provided in Section 20.05(6).
No license shall be refused except for a specified reason. All licenses shall be numbered in order in which they are
issued and shall state clearly the location of the junk business, the date of issuance and expiration of the license,
and the name and address of the licensee. No applicant to whom a license has been refused shall make further
application until a period of at least six months shall have elapsed since the last previous rejection unless he can
show that the reason for such rejection no longer exists.
(8) License Fee. Every junk dealer shall pay an annual license fee of $200. All licenses shall be issued as of July 1 and
shall continue in force until June 30 next succeeding the date of issuance thereof, unless sooner revoked. The fee
for new licenses issued during the license year shall not be prorated. (MC#973)
(9) License on Premises. Every junk dealer's license shall designate the place of business from which the junk dealer
receiving such license shall be authorized to carry on such business. No licensee shall remove his/its place of
business from the place designated in the license until a written permit has been secured from the city council and
the same shall have been endorsed upon the license.
(10) Other Prohibited Acts. No junk dealer shall carry on the business at or from any other place than the one
designated in the license therefor. Nor, shall said business be carried on after such license has been revoked or
has expired.
(11) Health Rules. The health officer shall formulate reasonable rules and regulations relating to the conduct of the
business of junk dealing which shall protect the health of the community. No junk dealer shall violate any such rule
or regulation.
(12) Reports by Junk Dealer. Every junk dealer, upon being served with written notice to do so by a member of the police
department, shall report to the police chief on blank forms to be furnished by the police department, an accurate
description of all goods, articles, or other things purchased or received by him in the course of business of a junk
merchant at such time and during such period of time specified in the notice, stating the amount paid for and the
name, residence, and general description of the person from whom such goods, articles, or things were received.
(13) Lost or Stolen Goods. If any goods, articles, or things whatsoever shall be advertised in any newspaper printed in
the city as having been lost or stolen, and the same of any answering the descriptions advertised, or any part or
portion thereof, shall be or come into possession of any junk merchant or peddler, he or it shall give information
thereof in writing to the police chief and state from whom the same was received. Any junk merchant or peddler
who shall have or receive any goods, articles, or things lost or stolen, shall exhibit the same on demand to any
police officer, or to the mayor, police chief, or any magistrate or any person duly authorized in writing by the police
chief or any magistrate who shall exhibit such authorization to such dealer or peddler.
(14) Revocation of License.
(a) Upon complaint being made in writing by any municipal official or resident of the city to the city clerk that
any licensee has violated any of the provisions of this ordinance, the mayor shall summon such licensee to
appear before him at the time specified in the summons, which shall not be less than three days after the
date of the service thereof, to show cause why his license shall not be revoked. The mayor shall proceed to
hear the matter if he finds the allegations of said complaint are correct, he shall revoke said junk dealer's
license.
(b) Whenever any license shall be so revoked, no refund of any unearned portion of the fee therefore shall be
made and no license shall be granted to any person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation whose
license has been revoked within a period of one year from the date of revocation. Notice of such
revocation and the reason or reasons therefor in writing shall be served by the police chief upon the
person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation named in the application, by mailing the same to the
address given in the application, and upon filing a copy of same with the city clerk. (32)
20.04 FIREWORKS (MC#1130)
(1) STATUTES ADOPTED. The provisions of Section 167.10, Wisconsin Statutes, are hereby adopted and incorporated
in this section.
(2) FIREWORKS DEFINED. The term “fireworks” shall be defined as provided in Section 167.10(1), Wisconsin Statutes.
(3) SALES REGULATED. No person shall sell, offer to sell, possess with intent to sell, or give away fireworks within the
City.
(4) POSSESSION AND USE REGULATED. Except as provided in Section 167.10(3), Wisconsin Statutes, no person shall
possess or use fireworks without a permit issued in accordance with this section.
8
(5) USER’S PERMIT.
(a) As provided in Section 167.10(3), Wisconsin Statutes, user’s permits may be issued for public or private
celebrations after proper application to the fire chief on forms provided by the fire chief. The permit
application must be received by the fire chief not less than 30 days prior to the requested date of use.
(b) Before granting any fireworks permit, the applicant shall file with the fire chief a certificate of liability
insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to write such policies in the State of Wisconsin in a
form approved by the city attorney in an amount not less than $2,000,000. The City shall be named as an
insured in such policy of insurance.
(c) The fire chief shall issue the permit after receipt of all items required for application as specified in this
section. The permit shall be subject to such conditions as the Fire Chief determines are appropriate for
public safety in accordance with nationally recognized safe practice. The fee for the permit shall be as set
by the council.
(d) Notice of all user permits issued under this section shall be given to the police department at least 7 days
before the date of authorized use.
(e) A user permit may not be issued to a person under 18 years of age.
(6) Revocation. Failure to comply with Wisconsin Statutes, Administrative Code, NFPA Regulations, or the Wisconsin
Rapids Municipal Code may result in revocation of the permit.
20.05 TAXICABS AND DRIVER REGULATIONS
(1) License Required. No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, a taxicab within the limits of the City of
Wisconsin Rapids without having first secured a taxicab license as herein provided.
(2) Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following definitions shall be used:
(a) Taxicab means a motor vehicle having a seating capacity of fewer than eight persons, regularly engaged in
the business of carrying passengers for hire, not operated on a fixed route. The fare is calculated on the
basis of distance traveled or waiting time.
(b) Taxicab Driver means a person who operates a taxicab as defined in Section 20.05(8).
(3) Exceptions. No city license shall be required of an owner or driver for operating or driving a taxicab licensed by
another municipality for the purpose of delivering passengers to a point within the City of Wisconsin Rapids, nor to
persons operating vehicles over regular routes or between fixed terminals, funeral cars, ambulances, vehicles
licensed by permit of the Wisconsin Public Service Commission, or rent-a-cars.
(4) Taxicab Business License Application. Application for a taxicab license to operate one or more taxicabs, or an
application to operate additional taxicabs under an existing license shall be made in writing to the city clerk upon
forms furnished, giving the address (in a commercial zone) from which the business is conducted, and signed by
the owner of the business, or his duly authorized agent. The application must also state for each vehicle to be
operated, the make, model, and year of manufacture, capacity for passengers, the Wisconsin State Certificate of
Title number, license number, and the dispatch system used.
(5) License Fees. The taxicab license fee shall be $75.00 per year or a prorated amount for any fractional part thereof.
The license fee shall commence July 1 and end June 30.
(6) Insurance. No taxicab license shall be issued until the applicant deposits with the clerk a policy of liability insurance
covering all vehicles to be included under the license. Such insurance policy shall be issued by a company licensed
to do business in Wisconsin and shall insure against loss from liability to the amount of $250,000.00 for the injury
or death of one person in any one accident; and in the amount of $500,000.00 for the injury or death of more than
one person in any one accident; and in the amount of $100,000.00 for damage to property of others for any one
accident due to the negligent operation of such vehicle.
The policy of insurance shall contain a provision that the same may not be canceled before the expiration
of its term except upon 10 days written notice to the city. The cancellation or other termination of any insurance
policy issued in compliance with this section shall automatically revoke and terminate all licenses issued for the
vehicle covered by such insurance policy, unless another policy shall have been filed and approved, pursuant to this
section, and shall be in effect at the time of such cancellation or termination.
(7) Rates. The licensee shall post, or cause posting, of established fares in all cabs.
(8) Licensing of Taxicab Drivers. Except as exempted under Section 20.05(3), no person shall operate a taxicab as a
taxicab driver within the city without first obtaining a license as herein provided.
(a) Qualifications. A taxicab driver must hold a valid Wisconsin driver's license. No taxicab driver's license shall
be issued to any applicant who has been convicted of a felony within the five years prior to filing
9
application unless the common council determines that such offense is unrelated to the applicant's
competency and qualification for the license, nor to any applicant who is the holder of a state occupational
operator's license.
(b) Application. Written application for a taxicab driver's license shall be filed with the clerk giving the name,
address, age, whether the applicant has been convicted of a felony, the type and number of state
operator's license issued to the applicant, and stating experience.
(c) Fee. The application must be accompanied by a license fee of $5.00 per year or fractional part thereof.
(d) False Application Statement. The license of any applicant who makes a false statement in his application
shall be void and the license be surrendered to the chief of police or any member of the police department
upon demand.
(9) General Regulations.
(a) Identification. All taxicabs shall be suitably marked or identified as such. Each driver shall have his picture
and name posted in the vehicle.
(b) Subject to Traffic Regulations. The state traffic code and the City of Wisconsin Rapids traffic regulations
shall apply to the use and operation of taxicabs.
(c) Fares to be Posted. Each taxicab shall have a card on which shall be printed in plain, legible figures the
fares charged, posted in a conspicuous place inside the cab in plain sight of passengers.
(d) Number of Passengers Limited. No taxicab owner or operator shall carry or permit to be carried in any
taxicab more than the number of passengers specified on the license applicable to the taxicab.
(e) Operator not to Drink. No person operating a taxicab shall drink any intoxicating beverage or be under the
influence thereof while so engaged
(f) Inspection by Chief of Police. The chief of police shall have the authority at all times to inspect taxicabs
and drivers.
(g) Condition of Cars - Reported Periodically. The brakes, horn, lights, and tires of every motor vehicle used for
hire under this section shall be examined and tested as to the sufficiency at least once every 180 days by
a garage or service station who shall furnish a certificate as to the examination of said motor vehicle, and
the sufficiency of its brakes, horn, lights, tires, and restraining devices, which certificate shall be filed in
the office of the city clerk.
(10) Revocation. A taxicab business or driver's license may be revoked by the common council for a violation of this
Section; any provision of Chapters 340 through 349, Wisconsin Statutes; the Wisconsin Rapids Traffic Code; or for
any offense affecting the safety or welfare of passengers. Such revocation may be for all vehicles or any vehicle
included under a license. A taxicab driver license issued hereunder shall be automatically revoked if the licensee
shall be convicted of violation of this code or of any provisions of Chapters 340 through 348, Wisconsin Statutes,
one time within any consecutive 12 month period. The clerk shall notify the licensee of such revocation, and the
licensee may within 10 days of such notice, in writing, request a hearing on such revocation before the Wisconsin
Rapids Finance and Property Committee. (MC#920)
(11) Off-Street Parking Required. Before a license will be issued under this section, the licensee must provide adequate
off-street parking in a commercially zoned area for the vehicles to be licensed. Such off-street parking shall be
stated in the application for a license. (MC#323)
(12) Failure of Passenger to pay Taxicab Fare. (MC#480)
(a) No person shall neglect or refuse to pay for the service of any taxicab with the intention of defrauding the
operator, providing the rates charged are in conformance with those posted in the vehicle.
(b) Every driver of a taxicab shall have the right to demand payment of the posted fare in advance and may
refuse service unless so prepaid, but no driver shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey any orderly
person upon request.
(c) Persons in violation of this section shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than
$200.00, together with costs of prosecution.
20.06 CIRCUS OR EXHIBITION - LICENSE REQUIRED
(1) Every circus and non-resident carnival operated for gain either under canvas or in the open or otherwise, and every
show, concert, exhibition or skilled performance under canvas or in the open within the boundary of this city shall
first apply for a license from the licensing board of the city as provided herein. (147)
(2) Licensing Board
(a) Upon receiving the application for a license, the licensing board, composed of the mayor, chief of police,
10
chief of the fire department or the fire inspector, the electrical inspector and the Finance and Property
Committee, shall review the license application and make a recommendation to the city council for its
approval or rejection. This action shall be by a majority vote of said board and shall be based on any or all
facts available to the board as to whether or not such show, performance or act is for or against; the good
order of the city; protection of the public morals and decency; public safety against fire, explosion, riot or
disorder; preservation of public peace and order; furtherance of sanitation and the safeguarding of the
public health. (MC#920)
(b) The licensing board, by majority vote, may at any time after granting a license under this ordinance, revoke
such license if they ascertain from later facts that such show, performance or act is against the good order
of the city, or is against public morals or decency; or is unsafe as to fire explosion, or riot or disorder, or is
against the public peace or order; or is against the public health or sanitation.
(3) License Fee
(a) The license fee for a circus desiring to exhibit within the boundary lines of this city shall be $100.00 per
day, for each circular day, payable in advance.
(b) The license fee for non-resident carnival shows desiring to exhibit within the city is hereby fixed at $50.00
per day for each and every day such carnival remains in this city; said fee is payable in advance. The
closing hours each day for the carnival shall be set by the licensing committee based on the location of the
carnival.
(c) The license fee for other shows, concerts, exhibitions or skilled performances operated for gain either
under canvas or in the open air shall be $10.00 per day, payable in advance.
(4) Set-back From Lot Line. No circus, non-resident carnivals, shows, concerts, exhibitions or skilled performances
operated for gain under canvas or in the open, within the boundary of this city, shall set up its tents, booths or other
equipment, park its trucks, vehicles, or trailers or stake out its animals or otherwise make use of the land within 10
feet of the property line adjoining such field or lot it may use, and a violation of this provision shall be considered
sufficient to cancel such license.
(5) Exception. The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to religious, fraternal or home talent exhibitions whose
personnel is composed solely of residents of the City of Wisconsin Rapids, Wisconsin.
(6) Collection of License Fee. If a license is granted to an applicant, it is hereby made the duty of the chief of police to
collect the required license fee and turn the same over to the city treasurer, obtain his receipt therefore, and file
the same with the city clerk. Thereupon, the mayor and the city clerk shall issue the proper license to the applicant.
The chief of police shall suppress all shows, circuses, exhibitions or entertainments until a license is duly obtained
in accordance with this ordinance.
(7) Action Upon Revocation of License. The chief of police shall immediately close or suppress any show or exhibition
as set forth when such license has been revoked by the licensing board. (147)
20.07 LOUD-SPEAKER DEVICES (82)
(1) That it shall be unlawful for any person, co-partnership, association, firm, or corporation to maintain and operate in
any building or on any premises in the City of Wisconsin Rapids, or to cause to be used or operated any mechanical
device, machine, apparatus or instrument for intensification of amplification of the human voice or any sound of
noise in any public or private place in such manner that the peace and good order of the neighborhood is disturbed,
or that should cause a disturbance or congestion in traffic or the gathering of groups in any particular locality;
without having first secured a permit therefor.
(2) Bands. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the use of any bands or orchestra on the streets of said city,
used or operated in a non-commercial parade or otherwise.
(3) Application For Permit. Any person may secure the permit above mentioned by application to the chief of police of
said city, which application shall state therein the hours and time of intensification or amplification.
20.08 SPECIAL EVENTS. (MC#1054)
(1) Subject to paragraph (2) herein, no person, firm, group, or corporation shall sell food or refreshments, or sell or give
away any goods, wares or merchandise, or carry on any business or trade whatsoever, in or on city parks, parking
lots, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, streets, or any public right-of-way.
(2) The sale of food, refreshments, or other items may be permitted for special events as designated by the City, and in
certain public areas as designated by the city, provided a permit is obtained.
(a) Application for the permit shall be made to the city clerk on forms provided by the clerk, containing such
11
information as the clerk may require. Permits shall be conspicuously displayed at the place where such
sales are being made. The Clerk shall require that each applicant obtain liability insurance, and shall
provide each applicant with rules that need to be adhered to as part of the permit.
(b) The clerk shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a violation of any rule or ordinance or upon good
cause shown.
(3) Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be fined not less than fifty
dollars nor more than five hundred dollars for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
20.09 BICYCLE REGULATIONS AND LICENSING
(1) Definitions:
(a) Bicycle: every device propelled by the feet acting upon pedals and having wheels, any two of which are not
less than 14 inches in diameter.
(b) Dealer in Bicycles: any firm, store, business establishment, or individual engaged in the sale of bicycleswholesale
or retail.
(c) Operate: The word "operate" or any form thereof shall mean and refer to the use, putting into action, or
causing to function of a bicycle by a person mounted thereon.
(d) Rental Agency: any individual firm, store, or business establishment engaged in the business of offering for
rental or offering for rental of bicycles for hire by the public.
(e) Bicycle Lane: that portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, where permitted, and so
designed by appropriate signs and markings.
(f) Bike Route: any bicycle lane, bicycle way, or highway which has been duly designated and which is
identified by appropriate signs and markings.
(g) Bicycle Way: any path or sidewalk or portion thereof designated for the use of bicycles.
(2) Application of Ordinance. No individual shall operate a bicycle upon any street, alley, public roadway, sidewalk,
bicycle lane, bicycle route, bicycle way, or other public right-of-way in the City of Wisconsin Rapids unless the bicycle
is registered and has properly affixed thereto a registration plate, as herein provided. This section shall apply to all
permanent and temporary residents of the City of Wisconsin Rapids, and to non-residents who operate bicycles
within the city habitually or frequently, either in going to and from school, place of employment, or for any other
purpose; but shall not apply to casual travelers or tourists passing through the city on bicycles, not to those
residents of cities, villages, and townships adjacent to the City of Wisconsin Rapids who are validly and currently
registered within their respective jurisdiction. Any person operating a bicycle within the City of Wisconsin Rapids
must comply with local bicycle regulations.
(3) Registration - Fee - Inspection.
(a) Registration shall be made with the Wisconsin Rapids Police Department, or any other departments
designated by the City of Wisconsin Rapids, who shall provide the appropriate forms therefore, upon
payment of a registration fee of $5.00 such designated department shall issue a registration plate for the
bicycle which shall permit the bicycle to be operated within the City of Wisconsin Rapids as herein
provided. (MC#492)
(b) The registration shall be permanent from the date of issuance providing that said bicycle remains with the
registered owner, and at the same registered address. There shall be no charge for changing the address
of the registered owner providing they report such change of address within 10 days.
(c) No person shall be entitled to register a bicycle when that person is believed by the issuing department to
have no claim to, or evidence of, ownership of said bicycle, or have no right to possession of said bicycle.
(d) The registering department may inspect each bicycle before registering, and may refuse to register any
bicycle in an unsafe mechanical condition.
(4) Display of Registration Plates.
(a) No bicycle shall be considered registered until a registration plate is securely affixed to the bicycle, which
shall remain so affixed until re-registration or until removed by the police department or issuing
department for cause. Such license shall be attached securely to the rear of the bicycle seat or to the rear
fender.
(b) No person shall intentionally destroy, mutilate, or alter the identification plate affixed to any bicycle, or
remove without the owner's permission, any identification plate from any bicycle. In the event of a
necessary replacement, the fee shall be $3.00.
12
(5) Transfer and Cancellation of Registration. Within 10 days after any bicycle registered hereunder shall have changed
ownership, been transferred, or been dismantled and/or taken out of operation, the individual in whose name the
bicycle has been registered, shall report such information to the police department. The license plate shall not
remain with the bicycle but shall be destroyed immediately by the person disposing of, or transferring the bicycle.
The new owner shall register the bicycle as stated in Section 20.09(3)(a). The original owner shall be subject to
Section 20.09(3)(a) with regard to any other bicycle.
(6) Buying, Selling, or Renting of Bicycles. The police department or issuing department is hereby authorized to stamp
numbers on the frame of bicycles in a legible manner for identification purposes, upon which no serial number can
be found or upon which the serial number is illegible, or obscured for identification purposes.
(a) Every firm, store, business, establishment, or individual engaged in buying, selling, or exchange of bicycles
in the City of Wisconsin Rapids shall maintain for three years from the date of transaction a record
containing the brand name, color, type, and serial number of each bicycle bought, sold, or exchanged and
shall record the name and address of each person buying, selling, or exchanging a bicycle. This record
shall be open to inspection by representatives of the Wisconsin Rapids Police Department or designated
issuing department, during reasonable business hours.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any firm, store, business establishment or individual within the City of Wisconsin
Rapids, to purchase, receive in trade, or otherwise acquire any bicycle from which the serial number on the
frame of a bicycle has been removed, destroyed, mutilated, or altered, without first reporting the same to
the Wisconsin Rapids Police Department.
(7) Other Provisions.
(a) Any member of the police department is authorized to inspect any bicycle operating within Wisconsin
Rapids City Limits at reasonable time for the purpose of making a check of the license, license number,
serial number, and for the purpose of determining the mechanical condition of the bicycle. If the police
officer inspecting such bicycle determines that said bicycle is unsafe and should not be operated, may
impound, and order said bicycle owner to cease operating said bicycle until necessary repairs have been
made, to the satisfaction of the police officer making the determination.
(b) Use of bicycle without owner's consent: It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any bicycle
within the City of Wisconsin Rapids without the owner's consent.
(c) Enforcement of provisions: The Chief of Police of Wisconsin Rapids shall enforce the provisions of this
ordinance.
(8) State Laws Adopted by Reference. Provisions of State Law are hereby adopted by reference Section 346.02(4) and
346.77 through 346.82.
(9) Rules for Driving and Operating Bicycles. All operators of bicycles shall observe and obey all rules dealing with
vehicular traffic and in addition obey all rules contained in this chapter.
(a) Every bicycle when operated upon a highway shall be in good and safe mechanical condition.
(b) No person shall operate any bicycle upon any part of any public highway, sidewalk, bicycle path, bicycle
route, bicycle lane, in such a manner as to interfere with the rights of other persons using said facilities.
(c) No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than upon or astride a permanent regular seat attached
thereto. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at any one time than the original manufacturer's
design; and for which it is equipped as so designed. However, one child's seat may be securely fastened to
the bicycle, which seat shall be so designed and manufactured for this specific purpose. Such seat shall
be equipped with a safety belt, arm rest, back rest, foot rest, and spoke protector. The operator of a
bicycle so equipped with a child seat shall be 16 years of age or older. The passenger on said bicycle shall
be six years of age or younger.
(d) When two or more persons in a group are operating bicycles, they shall ride single file, except when
passing other bicycles, or motor vehicles.
(e) No person operating a bicycle shall turn without giving an arm signal such as required by state law for the
operation of motor vehicles.
(f) No person operating a bicycle shall cling or attach thereon himself or bicycle to any other moving vehicle.
(g) No person operating a bicycle shall propel any other vehicle, person, or plaything by attaching it to the
bicycle the person is operating, except those trailers designed for this specific purpose by a manufacturer.
All home-made trailers are permissible providing they have been inspected for safety by a police officer.
Such trailers must meet all safety requirements.
(h) No person shall operate a bicycle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs or while physically or
13
mentally unfit to operate the same.
(i) No bicycle shall be operated on any highway, street, sidewalk, bicycle way, bicycle path, bicycle route in
Wisconsin Rapids during any period of time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise
without a headlight visible from the front of such bicycle, for not less than 500 feet when properly lighted
and attached nor without an adequate lighted red tail light and red reflector not less than 2-1/2 inches in
diameter to and visible from the rear of such bicycle for a distance from 50 to 500 feet to the rear. The tail
light shall not be used in lieu of said reflector.
(j) Every bicycle when operated upon any Wisconsin Rapids street, highway, sidewalk, bicycle path, bicycle
way, bicycle route, shall be equipped with a brake adequate to control the movement and stop such
vehicle whenever necessary.
(k) No bicycle may be equipped with nor may any person riding a bicycle use any siren or compression whistle.
(l) Unless preparing to make a left turn, every person operating a bicycle upon a street or highway in the City
of Wisconsin Rapids carrying two-way traffic shall ride as close as applicable to the right side of the
unobstructed traveled roadway. On one-way streets, the operator of the bicycle shall ride as close as
applicable to the right or left side of the unobstructed roadway. Every person operating a bicycle upon a
street or highway shall exercise due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same
direction. It shall be unlawful to do any trick riding on any street, highway, or sidewalk or to operate any
bicycle without a hand on the handle bars. No person shall carry or transport such packages or material
attached to or unattached to such vehicle as to impede the safe operation of such bicycle.
(m) Any dealer, firm, store, business establishment, or individual engaged in rental of bicycles, shall not rent
any bicycle unless the bicycle is registered as prescribed in this ordinance and such bicycle shall also meet
the safety and mechanical condition therein.
(n) No bicycle owner or operator shall park the same on any highway, street, bicycle lane, bicycle path, bicycle
route, sidewalk, within the City of Wisconsin Rapids, in such a manner as to interfere with the free passage
of the public.
(o) Bicyclists exercising due care may operate a bicycle upon any sidewalk except as noted herein:
(1) Immediate school grounds during school hours.
(2) Sidewalks on the north and south side of West Grand Avenue from the westerly most point of the
intersection of 1st Avenue South through the 400 block of West Grand Avenue.
(3) East and west sides of 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Avenues from the intersection of Jackson through
the intersection of Goggins Street.
(4) The west side of 4th Avenue North between the intersection of Jackson Street through McKinley
Street intersection.
(5) The east side of 1st Street North from the intersection of Oak through the intersection of Jackson
Street.
(6) East and west sides of 2nd Street in a northerly direction from the intersection of East Grand
Avenue through Baker Street intersection.
(7) North and south side of Oak Street from the 2nd Street intersection through the 3rd Street
intersection.
(8) The west side of 3rd Street North from Oak Street intersection to Market and the Baker Street
intersection.
(9) Newspaper carriers may drive their bicycles on sidewalks when delivering papers provided the
use thereof is not restricted.
(p) Bicycles restricted from using streets for operating in certain areas of the City of Wisconsin Rapids. Such
streets must be signed conforming to National and State standards.
(1) Riverview Expressway from its intersection at West Grand Avenue through the most easterly
intersection within the city limits of the east side of the river.
(2) 8th Street South from its intersection of Oak Street through the Two Mile Avenue intersection.
(3) Grand Avenue bridge from the 2nd Street South intersection through the 1st Avenue South
intersection.
(4) Jackson Street bridge from the 1st Street North intersection through the 1st Avenue North
intersection.
(5) While operating on any sidewalk, bicycle lane, path, or trail, all cyclists shall exercise due care and
shall yield the right of way to all pedestrians using such facility. Audible signals shall be given
14
when passing.
(6) Any person operating a bicycle on a sidewalk and about to enter or entering the intersection
within the crosswalk, shall yield to all traffic including pedestrians within or approaching such
crosswalks, except if cyclists dismount and walk their bicycles across intersection within the
crosswalk. When cyclists walk their bicycles across intersections, they shall have the same rights
due pedestrians. This shall apply to all crosswalks in or outside the intersections.
(10) Bicycles and Play Vehicles; Responsibility of parent or guardian for violation of bicycle and play vehicle regulations.
(a) No parent or guardian of any child shall authorize or knowingly permit such violations of the provisions of
this ordinance and chapters 346.73 through 346.81 of Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) No person riding upon or propelling any unicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, toboggan, or toy vehicle shall
attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway or go upon any roadway, bike way,
bike path, or bike lane except while crossing a roadway at a crosswalk.
(11) Driving Bicycles on Bicycle Lane.
(a) Unless two-way traffic is authorized by appropriate signs, every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle
lane shall ride in the same direction in which vehicular traffic on the lane of the roadway nearest the
bicycle lane is traveling. Appropriate signs shall be installed on all bicycle lanes open to two-way traffic.
(b) Unless otherwise provided, a person operating a bicycle may enter or leave a bicycle lane only at
intersections or at driveway adjoining the bicycle lane.
(c) Any person may leave a bicycle lane at any point by dismounting and walking it out of the lane. A person
may enter a bicycle lane at any point by walking his/her bicycle into the lane and then mounting it.
(d) Every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle lane shall exercise due care and give an audible signal
when passing a bicycle rider proceeding in the same direction.
(e) Every operator of a bicycle entering a bicycle lane shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles and
pedestrians.
(f) Mopeds are prohibited from using bicycle lanes or paths (where signs are erected prohibiting their use).
(12) Driving Bicycles on Bicycle Way.
(a) Every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle way shall:
(1) Exercise due care and give audible signs when passing a bicycle rider or a pedestrian proceeding
in the same direction.
(2) Obey each traffic signal or sign facing a roadway which runs parallel and adjacent to a bicycle
way.
(b) Every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle way open to two-way traffic shall ride on the right side of
the bicycle way.
(c) Every operator of a bicycle entering a bicycle way shall yield the right-of-way to all bicycles and pedestrians
in the bicycle way.
(13) Penalty for Violators.
(a) Any person 16 years of age or older who shall violate any provision of this ordinance shall be fined not less
than $10.00 or more than $200.00 plus court costs, and in default of payment of such fine, shall be
imprisoned in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
(b) Any person over the age of 14 years and under the age of 16 years who violates any provision of this
ordinance shall be fined $10.00 and no court costs. Such penalty shall be in violation of local Wisconsin
Rapids ordinance only.
(c) Any bicyclist under the age of 14 years of age who shall violate any provision of this ordinance shall have a
written warning notice served to the offender's parent or guardian setting forth said violation. For any
subsequent violation within one year, said parent or guardian shall be fined $5.00 plus court costs for the
first offense, $10.00 plus costs for the second offense, and $25.00 plus costs for the third offense and
subsequent offenses. (MC#271)
20.10 AMBULANCE RATES (MC#1221)
(1) The common council shall, by resolution, set or adjust ambulance rates for the City of Wisconsin Rapids. Ambulance
rates will be kept on file with the City Clerk and the Fire Department.
(2) Ambulance Delayed Runs. Ambulance trips where it is necessary for the ambulance to wait and return with the
patient shall be charged as two runs.
(3) Multiple Patients. A charge of 70 percent of the base rate will be assessed for each of multiple patients in one
15
ambulance.
20.11 NON-RENEWAL OF LICENSE FOR CITY OBLIGATIONS (MC#777)
The City of Wisconsin Rapids shall not grant or renew licenses or permits to any business or individual upon which there are
delinquent personal property taxes, special assessments, or any other financial obligations owed to the city.
20.12 EMERGENCY ALARMS SYSTEMS (MC#933)
(1) Purpose. The primary purpose of this section is to reduce the number of false alarms. It is also meant to
encourage the installation of quality alarm systems to insure maximum safety and protection of property. This
section will also impose standards and requirements for negligence of the user of an alarm system or of employees
operating the system.
(2) Alarm User means any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the City of Wisconsin
Rapids. Exceptions would be motor vehicle alarms.
(a) False Alarm means any of the following:
(1) The activation of an alarm through negligence of the owner, lessee, employee or any agents.
(2) Activation of an alarm from mechanical failure or malfunction due to improper maintenance of
the alarm user.
(3) Activation of an alarm due to improper installation by the alarm business.
Alarms that are caused by adverse weather conditions will not be included as false alarms.
(b) Hold-Up Alarm System means an alarm system that is activated by a robber or employee of the protected
premises.
(c) Local Alarm System means an alarm system that when activated causes an audible or visual signaling
device. This system is an on-premises alarm system.
(d) Residential Alarm means all alarm systems that are installed to protect a private residence.
(3) False Alarms; Hold-Up Alarms; Burglar Alarms.
(a) The owner, lessee, or agent of any hold-up alarm shall be assessed a fee for each false alarm activated
after three occurrences in any 12-month period.
(1) 4th occurrence - $50.00
(2) 5th occurrence - $100.00
(3) 6th occurrence - $200.00
(4) Starting with the 7th false alarm, each subsequent false alarm will cost the licensee or permit
holder $150.00. This scale will terminate at the end of each calendar year and then repeat itself.
20.13 REGULATION OF PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND ARTICLE DEALERS, AND SECONDHAND JEWELRY DEALERS
Sections 134.71 and 138.10 of the Wisconsin Statutes and subsequent amendments thereto are incorporated herein by
reference.
20.14 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR ROOMING HOUSES AND HOTELS (MC #1091)
(1) General Provisions. Every rooming house and hotel shall comply with the minimum standards for dwellings and
dwelling units set forth in Chapter 36 of the Municipal Code.
(2) Rooming Houses:
(a) Effective 60 days after passage and publication of this ordinance, no person shall operate a rooming
house unless he holds a valid rooming house permit issued by the city clerk, upon approval of the chief
housing official, and in the name of the operator, and for the specific dwelling or dwelling unit. The
operator shall apply to the city clerk for such permit, which shall be issued by the city clerk upon approval
of the chief housing official and upon compliance by the operator with the applicable provisions of this
ordinance and of any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, together with a fee of $20.00 for
rooming houses with four or less rooming units, plus $2.00 for each additional five, or fraction thereof,
rooming units in excess of four such units. This permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the
rooming house at all times. No such permit shall be transferable. Every person holding such a permit shall
give notice in writing to the chief housing official within 30 days after having sold, transferred, given away,
or otherwise disposed of ownership of, interest in, or control of any rooming house. Such notice shall
include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such rooming
house. Every rooming house permit shall expire at the end of the calendar year in which issued, unless
16
sooner suspended or revoked as herein provided. (MC#380)
(b) The issuance of a rooming house permit shall not in any way signify or imply that a rooming house
conforms with the Wisconsin State Building Code or the Building and Zoning Codes of the City of Wisconsin
Rapids, Wisconsin.
(c) Any person whose application for a permit to operate a rooming house has been denied may request, and
shall be granted, a hearing on the matter before the Board of Zoning Appeals, under the procedure
provided in Chapter 36, Section 111.
(d) Whenever upon inspection of any rooming house the chief housing official finds that conditions or
practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this ordinance or of any rules or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, the chief housing official shall give notice in writing to the operator of such rooming
house that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period, to be determined
by the chief housing official, the operator's rooming house permit will be suspended. At the end of such
period, the chief housing official shall re-inspect such rooming house, and if he finds that such conditions
or practices have not been corrected, he shall give notice in writing to the operator that the latter's permit
has been suspended. Upon receipt of notice of suspension, such operator shall immediately cease
operation of such rooming house, and no person shall occupy for sleeping or living purposes any rooming
unit therein.
(e) Any person whose permit to operate a rooming house has been suspended, or who has received notice
from the chief housing official that his/her permit is to be suspended, unless existing conditions or
practices at his/her rooming house are corrected, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the
matter before the housing appeals board, under the procedure provided by Chapter 36, Section 111.
Provided that if no petition for such hearing is filed within 10 days following the day on which such permit
was suspended, such permit shall be deemed to have been automatically revoked.
(3) Basic Equipment. Every rooming house and hotel shall be equipped with at least one flush closet, one lavatory, and
one bathtub or shower for each eight persons, or fraction thereof, within the rooming house or hotel, including
members of the family of the owner or operator if they share the use of the facilities. The lavatory and bathtub or
shower shall be connected to the hot water system, as specified in Chapter 36, Section 505. In a rooming house or
hotel in which both sexes are accommodated, separate toilet rooms, each with water closet, lavatory, and bathtub
or shower, a minimum of two flush water closets and lavatory located in separate rooms, which are conspicuously
marked, shall be required. In a rooming house or hotel in which rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be
substituted for not more than one half of the required number of water closets.
(4) Location of Toilets, Baths. Every flush closet, flush urinal, lavatory, and bathtub or shower required in Section
20.14(3), shall be located within the rooming house or hotel in a room, or rooms, which:
(a) Afford privacy and are separate from the habitable rooms;
(b) Are accessible from a common hall and without going outside the rooming house or hotel; and
(c) Are not more than one story removed from the rooming unit of any occupant intended to share the
facilities.
(5) Shades, Drapes, etc. Every room used for sleeping shall be supplied with shades, draw drapes, or other devices or
materials which, when properly used, will afford privacy to the occupant of the room.
(6) Bedding, Bed Linen, Towels. Where bedding, bed linen, or towels are supplied, the owner shall maintain the
bedding in a clean and sanitary manner, and he shall furnish clean bed linen and towels at least once a week and
prior to the letting of any room to any occupant.
(7) Means of Egress. Rooming houses or hotels, occupied or containing accommodations for 10 or more persons on
the second story, or which are more than two stories in height, shall conform to the egress requirements for
multiple dwellings contained in Chapter 36, Section 702.
(8) Sanitary Maintenance by Owner. The owner of every rooming house or hotel shall keep all walls, floors, and ceilings
in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition.
(9) Guest Register. The owner of every rooming house or hotel shall keep at all times, in a convenient place, a book or
register wherein every person applying for accommodations must sign his/her name and place of residence before
such accommodations are furnished and such book or register shall be available for inspection by the chief
housing official at all times.
(10) Garbage and Rubbish Containers. The owner of every rooming house or hotel, where garbage and rubbish is
produced, shall provide adequate containers therefore, as specified in Chapter 36, Section 308.
1
Chapter 21 Airport
Preamble
The City of Wisconsin Rapids, Village of Port Edwards, and Town of Grand Rapids, through contract, have assumed
ownership of property and facilities now known as Alexander Field, South Wood County Airport, Wisconsin Rapids, Wisconsin,
and have bound themselves to jointly own, regulate, operate, and maintain said airport in accordance with existing federal,
state, and municipal law. Each municipality shall have equal rights and the regulation, operation, and maintenance of the
airport shall be through an airport commission, known as Municipal Airport Commission for Alexander Field, South Wood
County, with the commission consisting of one representative from each municipality.
The commission is charged with the responsibility of submitting to each municipality a budget and the
municipalities shall, through appropriation, make available to the commission necessary funds to implement the said
budget. Any one of the municipalities may veto or alter any portion of the budget which they feel is not in the best interest of
their community, thus changing the budget and resulting in appropriations made accordingly.
The commission shall have the authority to enter into any contract or contracts which can be fulfilled through
expenditures authorized in the approved budget and which said contracts pertain to the operation and maintenance of the
said airport. The commission also has the authority to reallocate funds within the approved budget.
The commission, in an effort to carry out its responsibilities with respect to regulating, operating, and maintaining
Alexander Field and further, to insure adequate facilities are provided within the means set forth in appropriations from the
municipalities, and further to promote safe air transportation for aircraft owners and the public, the commission has set
forth in writing, ordinances which it believes necessary to meet the criteria established above. These ordinances are set
forth in booklet form, bear the approval of municipalities jointly owning Alexander Field, with enforcement through law
enforcement agencies of said municipalities.
21.01 Height of Structures and Trees and Use of Property in Vicinity of Airport
21.02 Minimum Standards Flight Training
21.03 Aircraft and Ultralight Sales Minimum Standards
21.04 Fueling of Aircraft
21.05 Ultralight Vehicles and User Fees
21.06 Fuel Flowage Fee
21.07 Vehicle and Pedestrian Traffic on Airport Property
21.08 Aircraft Hangars
21.09 Aircraft, Engine, and Accessory Maintenance and Repair Standards
21.10 Use, Transportation, or Handling of Hazardous Materials or Chemicals on Alexander Field
21.11 Airport Pedestrian Trail
21.01 HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES AND TREES AND USE OF PROPERTY IN VICINITY OF AIRPORT (MC#1009)
(1) Definitions. As used in this ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) “Airport” means the Alexander Field – South Wood County Airport located in Section 30, Township 22
North, Range 6 East, Wood County, Wisconsin.
(b) “Airport hazard” means any structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which obstructs the airspace
required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to such
landing or taking off.
(c) “Non-conforming use” means any structure, tree, or use of land, which does not conform to a regulation
prescribed in this ordinance or an amendment thereto, as of the effective date of such regulation.
(d) “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock
association, or body politic, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative
thereof.
2
(e) “Runway” means a level portion of an airport having a surface specially developed and
maintained for the landing and take-off of aircraft.
(f) “Structure” means any object constructed or installed by man.
(g) “Tree” means any object of natural growth, except farm crops which are cut at least once a year,
and except shrubs, bushes, or plants which do not grow to a height of more than twenty (20) feet.
(h) “Zones” means an area of land with a single height limitation, the boundaries of which are section
lines and subdivisional lines of sections, except for those parts of the City of Wisconsin Rapids
where street centerlines are used for zone boundaries.
(i) “Joint Board of Appeals” means the South Wood County Airport Height Limitation Joint Board of
Appeals.
(j) “Height Limitation Map” means the HEIGHT LIMITATION ZONING MAP, South Wood County Airport,
Wisconsin Rapids, Wisconsin, dated April 30, 2004.
(k) “Airport elevation” means 1010 feet above Mean Sea Level. (MSL)
(2) Zones. All zones established by this section are as shown on the map dated April 30, 2004 entitled “Height
Limitation Zoning Map, South Wood County Airport, Wisconsin Rapids, Wisconsin,” which is attached hereto and
adopted as part of this ordinance. A full sized map is available for inspection at the office of the South Wood County
Airport Commission, Wisconsin Rapids City Hall.
(3) Height Limitation Zones. Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, no structure shall be constructed, altered,
or relocated which is in excess of the height limit indicated on the map referred to in 21.01(2), and no trees planted
after the adoption of the original ordinance shall be allowed to grow to a height in excess of the height limit
indicated on said map.
(4) Use Restrictions. Notwithstanding the provisions of 21.01(3) of this ordinance, no use may be made of land in any
zone in such a manner as to create electrical interference with radio communication between the airport and
aircraft, or make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and other lights, or result in glare in the
eyes of pilots using the airport, or impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, or otherwise endanger the landing,
taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft.
(5) Non-conforming Uses.
(a) Not retroactive. The regulations prescribed in 21.01(2) and 21.01(3) of this ordinance shall not be
construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any nonconforming use, except
as otherwise provided by 21.01(7)(e).
(b) Changes. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended
use of any structure, if the construction or alteration of such was begun prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, and if such is diligently prosecuted.
(c) Removal. This section shall not interfere with the removal of nonconforming uses by purchase or the use
of eminent domain.
(6) Administration. It shall be the duty of the Airport Administrator to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed
herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the Airport Administrator or his designee upon a
form furnished by him. Applications which are, by this ordinance, to be decided by the Airport Administrator shall be
granted or denied within thirty (30) days of the date of filing of the application. Applications for action by the Board
of Appeals shall be forthwith transmitted by the Airport Administrator to the Board of Appeals for hearing and
decision. There shall be no charge for applications or permits.
(7) Permit.
(a) FAA Statement. Proponents shall include with their permit application a letter of final determination from
the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) saying the structure would be “No Hazard to Air Navigation.”
Proponents may ask the FAA to perform an aeronautical study and issue a determination by submitting to
the FAA a Form 7460-1, Notice of Proposed Construction or Alteration. The FAA aeronautical study is free
of charge, but may take as long as 60 days to complete. The Airport Administrator will not accept an
application without an FAA determination.
(b) Future Uses. No structure shall hereafter be constructed, erected, or installed or be permitted to remain in
any zone created by 21.01(2) of this ordinance until the owner or his agent shall have applied in writing for
a permit therefor and obtained such permit from the Airport Administrator, except: Structures less than
thirty-five (35) feet in height above the Airport Elevation (or 1045 ft. MSL) within one-half mile of the airport
boundary; or structures less than fifty (50) feet in height above Airport Elevation (or 1060 ft. MSL) within
the area beginning one-half mile from the airport boundary and extending to one mile from the airport
3
boundary; or structures less than one hundred (100) feet above the Airport Elevation (or 1110 ft. MSL)
within the area beginning one mile from the airport boundary and extending to three miles from the
airport, as shown on the Height Limitation Map.
(c) Exceptions. The parcel of land shown as "E" on the Height Limitation Map, south of and adjoining the
airport, will limit the height of structures, poles, and trees according to the Avigation Easement established
August 13, 1982, recorded September 17, 1982, in Volume 516, page 41, Wood County Register of
Deeds. Exercising the rights of this easement will be the responsibility of the South Wood County Airport
Commission. A complete copy of the easement is available for examination at the office of the South Wood
County Airport Commission, Wisconsin Rapids City Hall, or the Grand Rapids Town Hall, or the Village of
Port Edwards Municipal Building.
(d) Permit display and issuance. Said permit shall be posted in a prominent place on the premises, prior to
and during the period of construction, erection, or establishment. Application for such permit shall indicate
the use for which the permit is desired, and shall describe and locate the use with sufficient particularity to
permit the Airport Administrator to determine whether such use would conform to the regulations herein
prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the Airport Administrator shall issue the permit
applied for.
(e) Existing Uses. Before any non-conforming structure may be replaced, altered, or rebuilt, a permit shall be
applied for and secured in the manner prescribed by paragraph (a) authorizing such change, replacement
or repair. No such permit shall be denied if the structure will not become a greater hazard to air navigation
than it was on the effective date of this ordinance, or than it was when the application for permit was
made. It will not be necessary to apply for a permit under this section for the construction of any new
structure or the modification or reconstruction of any existing structure located within 660 (six hundred
sixty) feet of existing structures of industrial plants located within the area affected by this ordinance
providing they are of a height equal to or less than the maximum height of the present structures.
(f) Trees. In the event the Airport Administrator determines that a tree, planted after the adoption of the
original ordinance, is in violation of the height restriction for the zone in which it is located, he shall give
written notice by certified mail to the land owner to take such steps as are necessary to bring said tree in
compliance with this ordinance within ten (10) days of said notice. Should the land owner fail to comply
with said notice, the Airport Administrator or his designated agent or employee shall have the right to trim,
prune, or remove said tree at the land owner’s expense.
(8) Hazard Marking and Lighting. Any permit or variance granted under Sections VII or IX, may, if such action is deemed
advisable by the Airport Administrator to effectuate the purpose of this ordinance and if such is reasonable in the
circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or trees in question to permit the owner
of the airport, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be
necessary to indicate to the flyers the presence of an airport hazard.
(9) Joint Board of Appeals. There is hereby created a Joint Board of Appeals, consisting of three (3) members. The chief
executive officer of each of the three municipalities will appoint one member to the board and that appointee will
serve at the pleasure of the respective chief executive officer. Such board shall be constituted and have all the
powers, duties and functions as provided in s. 62.23, (7) (e) of the Wisconsin Statutes, but not more than 2
members of such board shall be owners or occupants of the area affected by the ordinance
(10) Appeals and Review.
(a) Variances. Upon appeal in special cases the Board of Appeals may, after investigation and public hearing,
grant such variance from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where
owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship,
and such relief will do substantial justice and be in accord with the spirit of this ordinance, and does not
create a hazard to the safe, normal operation of aircraft.
(b) Aggrieved Person. Any person aggrieved or affected by any decision of action of the Airport Administrator
made in his administration of this ordinance may appeal such decision or action to the Board of Appeals.
(c) Procedure. Any appeal taken pursuant to this section shall be in conformity with the procedure established
by Section 62.23, (7) (e) of the Statutes.
(11) Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100) for such offense, together with the costs of
prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the county
jail until said forfeiture and costs are paid, but not to exceed thirty (30) days for each violation. Each day that a
4
violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(12) Severability. If any of the provisions of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is
held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions of this ordinance and the invalid provisions or
application are declared to be severable.
21.02 MINIMUM STANDARDS FLIGHT TRAINING
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to establish minimum standards for the orderly development and growth
of the airport, and to provide various aeronautical service standards. The intent of these standards are to be fair
and reasonable and to encourage rather than prohibit the development of needed aviation services that are
operated in a responsible, safe and efficient manner.
(2) Statement of Concept. A flight training operator is a person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or group
engaged in instructing student pilots in dual and solo flight training, in fixed and/or rotary wing aircraft, in ultralight
vehicles, and provides such related ground school instruction as is necessary to prepare for the taking of a written
examination and flight check ride for the categories of pilots' licenses and ratings, if applicable.
(3) Minimum Standards
(a) The operator shall conduct their activities and render their services in a safe, responsible and efficient
manner, and the operator shall be solely responsible for all of the acts of their agents and/or employees.
The operator shall lease from the Municipal Airport Commission an area of not less than 8,000
square feet of ground space which shall include a building of at least 2,000 square feet of floor space,
including office, with telephone and restrooms.
The operator shall be required to instruct student pilots or operators in any one or all of the
following:
(1) dual and solo flight in fixed wing aircraft
(2) rotary wing aircraft
(3) ultralight vehicles
The operator shall also provide, by himself or through a nominee acceptable to the Municipal
Airport Commission, such related ground school instruction as is necessary to prepare the student to take
a written examination and flight check ride for a private pilot's license or appropriate rating from the
Federal Aviation Administration, if applicable.
The operator shall insure that their operation will meet the continuing requirements for
certification by the Federal Aviation Administration and applicable state and local requirements.
The operator shall maintain at least one aircraft or ultralight or a sufficient number to adequately
handle the number of students contemplated.
The operator shall employ currently certificated instructors, if FAA required, to meet the demands
of the number of students engaged in such flight training. Never less than one.
The operator must be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Municipal Airport Commission
that he has had experiences in flight training. This information must be included in the statement of the
operator's qualifications.
The operator shall be available for business, or "on call", as a minimum, at least eight hours daily,
five days a week.
(4) Authorization. No operator shall be permitted to operate at the Airport (Alexander Field) without a fully executed
lease agreement with, or permit, license or written authorization from the Municipal Airport Commission containing
provisions for strict compliance with the minimum standards as adopted and all rules and regulations, and
containing such other provisions as may be determined by the Municipal Airport Commission which may be
required under such lease, or any other special circumstances which may be applicable to any such particular
operator. The location of the Flight Training Operation shall be at a site or location as determined by the Municipal
Airport Commission in keeping with existing plans, suitable space and the orderly development of Alexander Field.
The Municipal Airport Commission must approve the location, size, and height of any signs that may be used to
promote the business or operation and retains the right to reject or order the removal of any signs that become
unsightly.
(5) Insurance Requirement. An operator shall demonstrate to the Municipal Airport Commission satisfactory evidence
that they have in force, insurance coverage in the amount stipulated below:
(a) Ultralight or Aircraft Liability
(1) Bodily Injury (each accident)
5
(a) $100,000 each person
(b) $300,000 each accident
(2) Passenger Liability
(a) $100,000 each person, each accident
(3) Property Damage
(a) $300,000 each accident
(4) Comprehensive Public Liability & Comprehensive Property Damage
(a) Bodily Injury (each accident)
(1) $100,000 each person
(2) $300,000 each accident
(5) Property Damage
(a) $300,000 each accident
(6) Assignment. It is to be understood by all operators that the agreement entered into as a result of these standards
or any part thereof, may not be sub-let or assigned without the written consent of the Municipal Airport
Commission.
(7) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance may face revocation of the
authorization to operate on Alexander Field and/or shall upon conviction thereof forfeit not less than $200.00 nor
more than $500.00 together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of the forfeiture and costs of
prosecution shall be imprisoned in the county jail until said forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90
days. Each day that the provisions of this ordinance are violated shall constitute a separate offense.
21.03 AIRCRAFT AND ULTRALIGHT SALES MINIMUM STANDARDS
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to insure that the Municipal Airport Commission is aware of all aircraft
sales activities taking place on Alexander Field; to insure that an adequate degree of service is provided and that
necessary facilities are available to support the activity. The intent of these standards is to be fair and reasonable
and to encourage rather than prohibit the orderly growth of aeronautical activity at the airport. At the same time, it
is desirous to have structures, facilities, and services well planned, located and operated so as to become an asset
to the facility, community and surrounding area.
(2) Statement of Concept. An aircraft or ultralight sales operator is a person or persons, firm, or corporation engaged in
the sale of new or used aircraft or ultralights through franchises or licensed dealership or distributorship (either on
a retail or wholesale basis) of an aircraft or ultralight manufacturer or otherwise; and provides such repair, services,
and parts as necessary to meet any guarantee or warranty on new or used aircraft or ultralights sold by him.
(3) Minimum Standards.
(a) Building Requirements: The operator shall lease from the Municipal Airport Commission an area of not less
than 8,000 square feet of ground space on which shall be erected a building to provide 2,000 square feet
of floor space for aircraft storage, office, and restrooms which shall be properly heated and lighted, and
shall provide telephone facilities for customer use.
(b) Parking Requirements: The operator shall provide auto parking space within the leased area to
accommodate at least three automobiles.
(c) Apron Requirements: The operator shall provide a paved aircraft apron within the leased area to
accommodate aircraft movement from the operator's building to the taxiway or the access to the taxiway
that has been or will be provided for the operator.
(d) Repair or Servicing Requirements: The operator shall provide necessary and satisfactory arrangements for
repair and servicing of aircraft, but only for the duration of any sales guarantee or warranty period.
Servicing facilities may be provided through written agreement with a repair shop operator at Alexander
Field and a copy of such agreement must be made available to the Municipal Airport Commission. The
operator shall provide an adequate inventory of spare parts for the type of new aircraft or ultralight for
which sales privileges are granted. The operator who is engaged in the business of selling new aircraft or
ultralights shall have available or on call at least one single engine demonstrator.
(4) Insurance Requirements. The operator performing services as outlined above will be required to carry the following
types of insurance in the limits specified. Evidence of insurance coverage must be provided the Municipal Airport
Commission.
(a) Aircraft or Ultralight Liability
(1) Bodily Injury (each accident)
6
(a) $100,000 each person
(b) $300,000 each accident
(2) Passenger Liability
(a) $100,000 each passenger, each accident
(3) Property Damage
(a) $300,000 each accident
(b) Comprehensive Public Liability and Comprehensive Property Damage
(1) Bodily Injury (each accident)
(a) $100,000 each person
(b) $300,000 each accident
(2) Property Damage
(a) $300,000 each accident
(5) Hours of Operation and Personnel. The operator shall have his premises open and services available eight hours
daily, five days a week, or they must be able to be contacted within a reasonable time (24 hours) through use of an
answering service or other device. The operator shall have in his employ, trained personnel in such numbers as are
required to meet the minimum standards set forth in an efficient manner, but never less than one person.
(6) Authorization. No operator shall be permitted to operate at the airport (Alexander Field) without a fully executed
lease agreement with, or permit, authorization or license from the Municipal Airport Commission containing
provisions for strict compliance with the minimum standards adopted and all rules and regulations, and containing
such other provisions as may be determined by the Municipal Airport Commission which may be required under
such lease, or any other special circumstances which may be applicable to any such particular operator. All
requests made by potential operators shall be in writing and shall contain information and/or evidence as to how
the minimum standards will be met and the names and addresses of corporation officers, principals or owners and
operators of the firm or business.
(7) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance shall upon conviction thereof forfeit not
less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00 together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of the
forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the county jail until said forfeiture and costs are paid, but
not exceeding 90 days. Each day that the provisions of this ordinance are violated shall be considered a separate
offense.
21.04 FUELING OF AIRCRAFT
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to insure that any fuel systems that exist on Alexander Field are installed
in such a manner that contamination of ground water or pollution does not occur and that the potential for
accidents or fire involving property of the commission and others does not occur. Furthermore, the Municipal
Airport Commission desires to eliminate the possibility of any liability and/or the high cost of clean-up, should a spill
occur.
(2) Installation of Private Fuel Systems. Prior to the installation of any private fuel system on Alexander Field,
authorization in writing must first be obtained from the Municipal Airport Commission. The Municipal Airport
Commission may or may not grant permission based on location, need, future development of the airport, size of
storage and other pertinent facts. As of April 1 of each year, all owners of private fuel systems previously located
and authorized on Alexander Field will submit a report to the Municipal Airport Commission which will contain the
following information:
(a) Age of System
(b) Monitoring or Leak Detection Devices Present
(c) Size of Tanks and Number
(d) Type Fuel Stored
(e) Name of Owner and Address
(f) Anticipated Upgrading (if applicable)
(g) Type Tank or Tanks (double lined-fiberglass steel, etc.)
(h) Last Date Tanks Tested for Leakage
(i) Any Problems or Maintenance Performed Since Last Report
Any private fuel systems authorized to be installed on airport property are subject to inspection by a
designated representative of the commission and person, persons or contractor performing the installation must
furnish the commission with a signed, notarized statement that the installation was completed in accordance with
7
plans, specifications-and requirements of all state and local laws and ordinances.
(3) Permits. The Building Inspector, Town of Grand Rapids, will only issue a permit for fuel storage (underground or
above) after receiving written authorization from the Municipal Airport Commission. The Municipal Airport
Commission and Building Inspector will not issue a permit or give authorization unless all requirements with respect
to leak detection, monitoring, control of spills and proper installation in accordance with local and State of
Wisconsin directives are met.
(4) Refueling Area. The Municipal Airport Commission does not have adequate facilities with which to develop a
refueling area using standard one to six gallon gasoline containers that will eliminate all possibilities for
contamination or pollution, and therefore has restricted or prohibited their use on Alexander Field. Refueling at
other than the FBO facilities may be done by use of self-contained fuel delivery vehicles provided such refueling
vehicles have proper safety devices for refueling aircraft and are registered and approved by the Department of
Industry, Labor and Human Relations and the Department of Natural Resources.
(5) Unauthorized Fuel Systems. Fuel systems installed without the Municipal Airport Commission's knowledge or
authorization and fuel stored on airport property in volumes of more than six U.S. gallons are considered in violation
of this ordinance and must be removed from airport property.
(6) Bond and/or Liability Insurance. The Municipal Airport Commission, in an effort to eliminate possible liability on its
part, may require a bond or liability insurance of the owner of the fuel system in an amount deemed adequate to
protect the commission and taxpayers of communities jointly owning Alexander Field.
(7) Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance shall upon conviction thereof, forfeit
not less than $200.00 nor more than $1,000.00 together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment
of the forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until said forfeiture and costs are
paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
21.05 ULTRALIGHT VEHICLES AND USER FEES
(1) Purpose. The Municipal Airport Commission desires to establish a system to assess a fee to ultralight vehicles
hangared at Alexander Field for the utilization of the facilities there upon used, as well as establishing traffic
patterns and altitude considerations to conform to safe procedures for all aeronautical operations in the confines
of Alexander Field airspace; herein referred to as a user fee.
(2) References.
(a) Part 103 FAA Rules
(b) Airport Compliance Requirements FAA 5190.6A
(c) Part 91 - General Operating and Flight Rules
(d) Part 101 - Moored balloons, kites, ultralight vehicles, unmanned rockets, and unmanned free balloons
(e) FAA Airmans Information Manual
(f) FAA Advisory Circular 90-66 - Recommended Standard Traffic Pattern for Airplane Operations at
Uncontrolled Airports
(3) Registration Forms. All ultralight owners who have ultralights hangared at Alexander Field will be required to register
their ultralight with the Municipal Airport Commission as of April 1 of each year. (A sample of the registration form is
on file in the city clerk's office.) Said registration form will be completed in three copies by the ultralight owner.
Forms are available from the designated fixed base operator and distribution of completed forms will be one to the
Municipal Airport Commission, one to the fixed base operator, and one to the owner.
(4) Flight Rules and Operating Procedures. At the time of registration, the fixed base operator will furnish the owner of
the ultralight vehicle a copy of flight rules and operating procedures for ultralights hangared at Alexander Field, and
such will be verified by signature of the owner on the registration form. These flight rules and procedures may be
changed, altered, or revised as conditions at Alexander Field dictate. Ultralight and general aviation owners
hangared at Alexander Field will be furnished copies for their information and compliance within FAS guidelines.
All ultralight and general aviation owners and operators hangared at Alexander Field are responsible for becoming
familiar with the flight rules and operating procedures and to operate their vehicle in accordance with such rules
and procedures. Ultralight activities (landings, take-off, and "touch and go") are to take place on the grass strip
developed for use by the ultralights whenever weather conditions permit.
(5) User Fees. There is hereby established a yearly user fee in the sum of $10.00 to be payable to the Municipal Airport
Commission through the designated fixed base operator. Such user fee is to be paid on or before April 1 of each
year. The fee is based on a $.05 per gallon fuel flow fee, with an ultralight vehicle estimated to fly 100 hours/year
at a two gallon an hour fuel burn. (100 x 2 = 200 x $.05 = $10.00) User fee to be consistent upon 100 hours/year
8
calculation with a two hour fuel burn. If fuel flow fee goes to $.10/gallon, user fee would fluctuate
accordingly. If not paid by April 1, a statement will be sent out and a late fee of $9.00 will be added.
(6) Violations.
(a) Failure to register ultralights or pay user fee on or before April 1 of each year. Any ultralight owner
hangared at Alexander Field and utilizing same facility for the purpose of take-off or landing, who has
failed to make available to the fixed base operator, the registration form, and pay the user fee, shall be in
violation of this ordinance. Each day Alexander Field is used for the above purpose shall be considered a
separate offense and subject to penalties in accordance with this ordinance upon conviction.
(7) Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance shall upon conviction thereof, forfeit
not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00 together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of
the forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until said forfeiture and costs are paid,
but not exceeding 90 days.
21.06 FUEL FLOWAGE FEE
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to increase revenue and insure that users of Alexander Field assist in
defraying some of the cost of operation of Alexander Field, and further that the investment of funds for
improvements from the local communities, state and federal agencies are not lost because of inadequate
maintenance of facilities.
(2) Amount of Fees. There is hereby established a fuel flowage fee of $.05 per gallon on all aviation fuel used or
dispensed on Alexander Field. This fee pertains to all fuel entering Alexander Field, be it by trailer mounted tank,
truck deliveries, tanker deliveries, or above ground fuel contained in storage tank(s).
(3) Payments Due. Payment of the fuel flowage fee shall be made directly to the Municipal Airport Commission within
10 days of any fuel delivery to a storage tank(s) existing now or in the future on airport property. Direct delivery of
aviation fuel to an aircraft by a motorized vehicle is hereby prohibited unless approval is first obtained from the
Municipal Airport Commission.
(4) Method of Computation. Amount of fuel flowage fee due shall be based on delivery invoice from supplier or Jobber
and a copy of such invoices shall accompany the fuel flowage fee due.
(5) Verification and Audit. The Municipal Airport Commission may, at its discretion, require verification of all fuel
deliveries, to include date, supplier, type of fuel and amount, and may cause the same to be accomplished by an
auditor of its choice. Owners of fuel storage facilities shall make its records available to any auditor employed by
the Municipal Airport Commission and the commission shall insure all records are kept confidential.
(6) Penalty. Non-compliance with the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than
$200.00 together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of the forfeiture and costs of
prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until said forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90
days.
21.07 VEHICLE AND PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC ON AIRPORT PROPERTY
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to ensure pedestrian and vehicular traffic on airport premises owned and
operated by the Municipal Airport Commission for Alexander Field is regulated so as to provide safety of aircraft,
aircraft passengers, and the general public.
(2) Definition of Words and Phrases.
(a) Pedestrian: any person afoot
(b) Vehicle: every device in, upon, or by which any person may be transported or drawn upon a public highway.
Examples are bicycles, motorcycles, mopeds, cars, trucks, tractors, buses, etc.
(c) Recreational or off-road vehicles: defined as snowmobiles, three or four wheel ATVS, stock or racing cars,
or off-road dirt or racing bikes.
(d) Emergency equipment: defined as ambulances, crash rescue, fire-fighting apparatus, and such other
equipment as the Municipal Airport Commission for Alexander Field may designate as necessary to
safeguard buildings, facilities, or equipment, or to protect persons or property.
(e) Service, maintenance, and construction equipment: equipment normally operated by the Municipal Airport
Commission for Alexander Field, Federal Aviation Agency, or Wisconsin Bureau of Aeronautics on landing
areas, runways, taxiways, and peripheral roads for the servicing, maintenance, and construction of airport
facilities, navigational equipment, clearance lights, or weather equipment. This definition shall include
equipment owned and operated by contractors performing work on the airport under a contractual
9
agreement with the Municipal Airport Commission, F.A.A., Wisconsin Bureau of Aeronautics, or the U.S.
Department of Commerce.
(3) Operation of Vehicles on Runways, Taxiways and Ramps: No privately owned vehicle, recreational, or off-road
vehicle shall enter, be driven upon, or operated upon any airport runway, taxiway, or ramp, or tie-down area, or any
area posted by signs prohibiting the entrance thereon. The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency
equipment and/or service, maintenance, and construction equipment when engaged in performing official duties.
Aircraft users will be excluded from the provisions of this section relating to tie- own areas, when necessary to reach
their own aircraft, but on doing so, they shall not pass over any runway and shall proceed through said tie-down
area at a speed not to exceed 10 miles per hour. They shall not, at any time, park a vehicle on any area used for
the movement of aircraft. Such authorization shall not be granted contrary to the provisions of Part 139 or Part
107, Federal Aviation Regulations.
(4) Vehicle Parking. All vehicles parked on airport property shall be parked in designated areas and in accordance with
posted signs or other markings. The Municipal Airport Commission, or designated representative, may move, or
order the removal of, at the owner's expense, any vehicle improperly parked. Owners of aircraft housed in private or
Commission-owned T-hangars are prohibited from parking private vehicles in front or on the taxiway side of such
structures. All such vehicles must be parked behind the 25 foot setback from the taxiway, or in the T-hangars after
the aircraft is removed.
(5) Speed of Vehicles. No vehicle, recreational or off-road vehicle, shall be driven upon any road within the perimeter of
Alexander Field, or upon other airport areas in excess of the speed limit posted at the entrance of said airport, or
within the boundaries thereof if more than one speed limit shall be applicable, nor shall the driver of any such
vehicles fail to adhere to any sign posted to regulate vehicular traffic on or about Alexander Field for the public
safety.
(6) Pedestrian Traffic on Airport. No pedestrian shall be allowed beyond the administration area, or to the apron or
aircraft tie-down area, unless for the purpose of embarking in or disembarking from, an aircraft, or unless
authorized by the Airport Manager. Pedestrian traffic is prohibited on the runway and outlying area of the airport,
except for those employees of the Airport Commission, state and federal employees of F.A.A. and Bureau of
Aeronautics, or contractors engaged in airport construction or maintenance work.
(7) Exceptions. Persons who are lawfully using the Airport Pedestrian Trail. The municipal Airport Commission may
grant approval for recreation or off-road vehicles to use the perimeter of airport property for trails or for seasonal
use, provided the commission feels adequate signage and markings are in place and such use will not create a
hazard to the public or aircraft using Alexander Field. Such use will be considered temporary or seasonal and
subject to revocation should conditions dictate. Furthermore, the commission may, from time to time, issue permits
for aviation oriented activities to hold special events on airport property. In such event, an area will be posted,
barricaded, flagged or roped to insure vehicle and pedestrian traffic is controlled. (MC #904)
(8) Notification. Operators of service, maintenance, and construction equipment used for the purpose of repairing,
maintaining, or constructing airport facilities will notify the designated fixed base operator whenever it is necessary
for them to operate on airport property. The designated fixed base operator will use the above information when
issuing advisories and shall determine if it will be necessary to notify U.S. Flight Service, in order that a NOTAM can
be posted by that service.
(9) Penalties: Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit
not less than $1.00, nor more than $200.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of
the forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until said forfeiture and costs are paid,
but not exceeding 90 days.
21.08 AIRCRAFT HANGARS
(1) Purpose. The Municipal Airport Commission, having the responsibility for the administration of Alexander Field,
wishes to develop standards for the construction, lease and operation of hangars at Alexander Field. Furthermore,
it is the intent of these standards to be fair and reasonable and to encourage rather than prohibit the orderly
growth of aeronautical activity at the airport.
(2) Statement of Concept. An aircraft storage operation is a business to be operated by a person, firm, partnership,
association, corporation or group in the rental of conventional and/or T-type hangars.
(3) Minimum Standards.
(a) The Municipal Airport Commission has the right to develop or improve areas of the airport as it sees fit,
regardless of the desires or views of any operator, and without any interference or hindrance from any
10
such operator or operators. The location of any operation shall be at a site or location as determined by
the Municipal Airport Commission in keeping with established plans and the Commission shall have the
prerogative to determine the availability of suitable space for the type of operation to be performed.
(b) The operator, who is to provide a conventional hangar and/or T-type hangars, shall do so in accordance
with design and construction standards required and established by the Municipal Airport Commission for
the activity involved.
(c) The operator shall lease from the Municipal Airport Commission adequate ground area to provide for the
hangar, parking area, apron and taxiway, and shall at their own expense, pay all taxes and assessments
against any buildings or any other structures placed on the premises by-them, as well as all taxes and
assessments against the personal property used by them in their operation. Minimum space and area
requirements for this type of operation are as follows:
(1) Conventional hangar shall be of a size as determined by the Municipal Airport Commission, but
must, as a minimum, be of sufficient size to accommodate at least four single engine aircraft.
(2) The operator shall lease from the Municipal Airport Commission sufficient ground area adequate
to meet the hangar requirements.
(d) The operator must provide a hard surfaced (bituminous) apron and/or taxiway by which tenants can move
their aircraft to an existing Commission-owned taxiway or runway.
(e) The operator must provide, as a minimum, such services as snow removal and maintenance of grounds to
include mowing of grass.
(f) The operator must be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Municipal Airport Commission that he
has experience in aircraft storage. This requirement may be waived in lieu of other comparable experience.
(g) Adequate vehicle parking must be provided for tenants' vehicles in an area which does not conflict with
aviation activities.
(h) No outside storage will be allowed about the hangar complex.
(4) Insurance. The operator must produce for the Municipal Airport Commission satisfactory evidence that the following
coverages will be in existence upon completion of the construction phase:
(a) comprehensive liability and comprehensive property damage, including vehicular $1,000,000.00
(b) hangar - keepers liability $1,000,000.00
(c) fire and extended coverages $1,000,000.00
The operator shall not allow the above insurance coverage to elapse and will furnish additional certification
as evidence of changes.
(5) Availability to Tenants. The conventional hangar operator shall have his facilities available for the tenants' aircraft
removal and storage 24 hours per day, seven days a week, 52 weeks per year. Exception to this is acts of God
involving excessive snow accumulations.
(6) Authorization and Penalty. Upon meeting all the provisions of this ordinance, an operator may be granted
authorization in writing by the Municipal Airport Commission to operate an aircraft storage facility. If during the
course of the operation of the aircraft storage facility, it is determined by the Municipal Airport Commission that the
provisions of this ordinance are not being complied with, the commission shall forward by registered letter,
notification to the operator of any violations and the need for compliance. The operator will have 30 days with
which to bring the business or operation in compliance with the provisions of the ordinance. Failure to do so will
result in the authorization to operate on Alexander Field being revoked and continued operation by the operator will
be considered a violation of the ordinance, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a $200.00 a day
forfeiture for each and every day the operator remains in operation or open for business. In addition to the $200.00
a day forfeiture, the operator shall pay the cost of prosecution, and in default of payment of the forfeiture and costs
of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90
days.
21.09 AIRCRAFT, ENGINE AND ACCESSORY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR STANDARD
(1) Purpose. The Municipal Airport Commission, being in a position of responsibility for the administration of Alexander
Field, wishes to insure adequate aeronautical services and facilities are available for those patrons needing
maintenance or repair of their fixed wing aircraft, rotary wing aircraft or ultralight vehicles, and that these patrons
are protected from irresponsible, unsafe or inadequate service. It is the intent of these standards to be fair and
reasonable and to encourage, rather than prohibit the orderly growth of aeronautical activity at the airport.
(2) Statement of Concept. An aircraft engine and accessory maintenance and repair operator is a person, firm,
11
partnership, corporation, association or group engaged in a business capable of providing one or more Federal
Aviation Administration approved airframe, power plant and accessory overhaul and repair services on general
aircraft up to and including (within the scope of the certificates) executive- type jet aircraft and helicopters.
(3) Minimum Standards.
(a) The operator shall lease from the Municipal Airport Commission an area of not less than 5,000 square feet
of ground space on which shall be located a building of at least 3,500 square feet of floor space, including
an office, shop and restrooms; all property to be heated and lighted. All operators shall, at their own
expense, pay all taxes and assessments against any buildings or any other structures placed on the
premises by them, as well as all taxes and assessments against the personal property used by them in
their operation.
(b) The operator shall perform all maintenance by FAA certified mechanics and inspectors. These certificates
are the minimum requirements for any and all operators who are to perform these services.
(c) Any construction required of any operator shall be in accordance with design and construction
requirements of the Municipal Airport Commission and state, federal and local codes. Plans and
specifications shall be submitted to the Municipal Airport Commission for approval and shall be
commensurate with any construction required under the standards set forth for aircraft, engine and
accessory maintenance and repair operation.
(d) All operators shall conduct their activities and render their services in a safe, responsible and efficient
manner, and the operator shall be solely responsible for all of the acts of their agents, and/or employees.
(e) The operator shall demonstrate that it either presently owns the minimum equipment necessary to meet
the certificate requirements, or is financially able to and will purchase such equipment.
(f) The location of any operation shall be at a site or location as determined by the Municipal Airport
Commission in keeping with present plans and the orderly growth and development of Alexander Field. It
shall also be the prerogative of the Municipal Airport Commission to determine the availability of suitable
space in keeping with the type of operation to be performed.
(g) The operator must be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Municipal Airport Commission, that it
has the experience in aircraft, engine and accessory maintenance and repair. This information must be
included in the statement of the operator's qualifications. The operator shall demonstrate that it can
provide sufficient personnel trained to meet all requirements for the repair and maintenance of aircraft,
engines, parts and accessories.
(4) Insurance. The operator must produce for the Municipal Airport Commission evidence of insurance coverage in the
following amounts:
(a) comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property damage, including vehicular $1,000,000
(b) hangar-keepers' liability $1,000,000
(c) products liability $1,000,000
(d) fire and extended coverages $300,000
The operator shall not allow the above insurance coverage to elapse and will furnish additional certificates
as evidence of changes.
(5) Sub-letting, Assignment or Sale of Business. The Commission must be assured that all the provisions of this
ordinance are in force and effect, and therefore, no operator may sub-let, assign or sell their operation or business
without first obtaining, in writing, the consent of the Municipal Airport Commission.
(6) Hours of Operation. As a minimum, an operator shall be required to remain open eight hours daily, five days a week,
excluding holidays.
(7) Signs. Signs promoting or depicting the location of an aircraft, engine and accessory maintenance and repair
operation or business, must be authorized by the Municipal Airport Commission and must meet the following
criteria:
(a) be attached to the gable end of the hangar
(b) be professionally constructed and painted
(c) may be up to 8' x 10' in size provided the sign does not protrude above the peak of the hangar roof
An operator must provide the Municipal Airport Commission with a sketch of the sign and its location prior
to approval by the commission.
(8) Authorization and Penalty. Upon meeting all the provisions of this ordinance, an operator may be granted
authorization in writing by the Municipal Airport Commission to operate an aircraft, engine and accessory
maintenance and repair business on Alexander Field. If, during the course of the operation of aircraft, engine and
12
accessory maintenance and repair business, it is determined by the Municipal Airport Commission that the
provisions of this ordinance are not being complied with, the commission shall forward by registered letter,
notification to the operator of any violations and the need for compliance. The operator will have 30 days with
which to bring the business or operation in compliance with the provisions of the ordinance. Failure to do so will
result in the authorization to operate of Alexander Field being revoked, and continued operation by the operator will
be considered a violation of the ordinance, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a $200.00 a day
forfeiture for each and every day the operator remains in operation or open for business. In addition to the $200.00
a day forfeiture, the operator shall pay the cost of prosecution, and in default of payment of the forfeiture and costs
of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90
days.
21.10 USE, TRANSPORTATION OR HANDLING OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS OR CHEMICALS ON ALEXANDER FIELD
(1) Purpose. The Municipal Airport Commission is concerned about the environment and the fact certain aeronautical
activity involving hazardous materials and chemicals could contaminate the environment and adversely affect
operations at Alexander Field. Furthermore, the commission desires to eliminate the possibility of liability claims
and to provide adjacent private property owners with the assurance they will not be subjected to possible health
threatening materials and/or chemicals.
(2) List of Hazardous Chemicals or Materials. A list of hazardous chemicals and materials is on file in the city clerk's
office. This list may be updated, revised or altered periodically by the State of Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources or the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
(3) Restriction on Alexander Field. The Municipal Airport Commission desires to regulate all activities on Alexander Field
involving hazardous chemicals and materials whether it be hand carried, transported by vehicle, carried by aircraft
or dropped or sprayed by aircraft, and therefore requires a permit prior to any chemicals or materials entering onto
the property known as Alexander Field.
(4) Washing Facilities. Washing of aircraft, vehicles, containers, or any type of equipment or device used to transport,
store, spray, spread or apply hazardous chemicals or materials on Alexander Field is prohibited. Furthermore, any
aircraft contaminated or coming in contact with hazardous materials or chemicals and which lands at Alexander
Field, will, upon receipt of information by the fixed base operator that contamination or contact with hazardous
materials or chemicals has occurred, cause the aircraft to be parked on the paved apron west of the main hangar.
Immediately thereafter, the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources will be notified so that appropriate action
and directives can be issued to insure decontamination efforts are placed into effect, and that Alexander Field will
not be adversely affected.
(5) Request for Variance and/or Permits. All requests for a variance to transport or handle hazardous materials or
chemicals on Alexander Field must be submitted in the format, as shown on file in the city clerk's office. Such
format must be completed in three copies and forwarded to the fixed base operator or airport administrator for
review and/or approval. No hazardous materials or chemicals will be allowed on Alexander Field until the request is
approved. The firm, person(s), corporation, owner, operator or individual requesting the variance must provide
written information on how the hazardous chemicals or materials will be contained and how it is intended to insure
no contamination of airport property occurs.
(6) Variance Requests or Permit Fees. Each request for a variance or permit will be accompanied by a check or money
order in the amount of $25.00 made payable to the Municipal Airport Commission. The fee is not returnable and
covers the cost of research, administration and processing of the request or permit.
(7) Insurance. The Municipal Airport Commission may require, depending on the circumstances, that the firm,
person(s), corporation, owner, operator or individual requesting a variance or permit to bring hazardous materials or
chemicals on Alexander Field, to show evidence of adequate liability insurance covering all claims resulting from
improper use of chemicals or materials, contamination, over spray or pollution, and shall name the Municipal
Airport Commission as an additional insured. The amount of such coverage will be determined by the Municipal
Airport Commission based on the circumstances, but in no event less than $100,000.00.
(8) Penalty. Any person, firm, corporation, owner, operator or individual who shall violate any of the provisions of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $200.00 or more than $1,000.00 plus cost of any
clean-up or damage to the environment together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of the
forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until said forfeiture and costs are paid, but
not exceeding 120 days.
13
21.11 AIRPORT PEDESTRIAN TRAIL (MC #904)
(1) Purpose The purpose of this ordinance is to establish procedures to be followed by pedestrians using the airport
trail which is located on a portion of the perimeter of Alexander Field. It is the desire of the Airport Commission to
insure all aeronautical activity taking place at Alexander Field is not adversely affected by the trail or those persons
using it and that no interference with airplanes or the use of the Airport results from activity taking place on the
trail.
(2) Use of Airport Trail The airport trail is for the public use; however, it is restricted to walking, jogging, snow shoeing
and cross-country skiing only. No motorcycles, mopeds, snowmobiles, ATV's, or any other piece of equipment, or
device propelled by motor and which is used as a conveyance, will be allowed on the trail, except for wheelchairs.
(3) (a) Location of Trail. The airport trail starts at the north side of the terminal building, 3620 1st Street South,
Wisconsin Rapids, Wisconsin, by heading north along the tree line and follows the perimeter of Airport
property. At various points the trail leaves Airport property and is either located on road right-of-way or on
private property; however, the trail is marked and the trail returns to the point of beginning by following
Sampson Street and Two Mile Avenue. A map of the trail, attached hereto and incorporated by reference
herein, is posted at the Informational bulletin board located at the beginning of the trail, just north of the
Terminal Building. A copy of this map is on file with the clerk of this commission and the clerks of the City
of Wisconsin Rapids, Village of Port Edwards and the Town of Grand Rapids.
(b) The airport trail is approximately twelve (12) feet wide, is marked with posts and signs; has distance
markers every one-fourth (1/4) mile; has been graded and leveled and portions are covered with wood
chips after having the sod and grass removed.
(c) At various locations along the trail permanent benches have been cemented and anchored in the ground.
These are for the use and enjoyment of the public and can be used to observe aircraft utilizing Alexander
Field; to observe wild flowers and vegetation; to observe wild animals and birds in the area; or to rest and
relax. Flowers and berry producing plants along and adjacent to the trail are identified and background
information is displayed on small pedestals under clear plastic.
(4) Restrictions. It is believed that by strict adherence to the following restrictions the Airport Trail can be safe; that it
would not impede the use of Alexander Field by aircraft; that pedestrians will see the value of the Airport and the
activity generated by it; and that the public can see to what use their tax dollars are being put. It is imperative,
however, that users of the Airport Trail follow directives and signs for their safety and that of others.
(a) Designated Activities. It shall be unlawful for anyone using the trail to stray outside of an area designated
as twenty (20) feet on either side of the center line of the trail or to climb any airport fencing.
(b) Supervision of Minors and Pets. Any person of adult age who has a minor child or pet with them while
using the Airport Trail must insure that said minor or pet abides by all rules, regulations, signs, or
directives pertaining to the trail. All pets shall be on a leash.
(c) Property. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface, damage, destroy, carve, or remove the
Airport Trail or any of the signs, benches, mile markers, or pedestals beside, adjacent, or along the Airport
Trail.
(d) Weapons. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or use any air rifle, pellet gun, BB gun, sling shot, rifle,
shot gun, pistol, knife, or bow and arrow on the Airport Trail, other than law enforcement officials in the
course of their duties as such.
(e) Hours Airport Trail is Open for Use. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to use the Airport Trail
other than during daylight hours from sunrise to sunset.
If repeated offenses or violations of this ordinance occur resulting in the apprehension of persons,
issuance of citations, and conviction, the Airport Commission may and can declare the Airport Trail closed
permanently. If an emergency arises which, in the opinion of the Airport Commission, warrants the closing
of the Airport Trail, a public notice will be placed in the local daily newspaper and over the local radio
station advising the public that the trail is closed. In addition, a sign will be posted at the entrance to the
trail.
(5) Violations. All violations of this Ordinance shall be documented and reported immediately to one of the following
law enforcement agencies who shall cause the matter to be investigated and, where warranted, a citation issued:
Town of Grand Rapids Police 424-1821
Village of Port Edwards Police 887-3030
City of Wisconsin Rapids 423-4444
14
Wood County Sheriff's Department 421-8700
(6) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance shall upon conviction thereof forfeit not
less than Twenty Dollars ($20) nor more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200), together with the costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment of the forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the county jail until said
forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding ninety (90) days.
(7) Effect. This ordinance shall take effect from and after its passage, its approval by the City of Wisconsin Rapids,
Village of Port Edwards, and Town of Grand Rapids, and its publication as required by law.
1
Chapter 22 Fermented Malt Beverages
22.01 Statutes Adopted
22.02 Definition of Terms
22.03 License Required
22.04 Closing Hours
22.05 License and Fees
22.06 Qualifications - Beer and Liquor
22.07 Application
22.08 Inspection
22.09 Restrictions
22.10 Licenses for Premises
22.11 Health Rules
22.12 Operator's License - Beer and Liquor
22.13 Suspension, Revocation, or Non-renewal of License
22.15 Penalties
22.01 STATUTES ADOPTED
The statutory provisions set forth in Chapter 125, Wisconsin Statutes, and any amendments thereto relating to the defining,
licensing, regulating, and selling of fermented malt beverages are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein, except when such provisions are in conflict with the express provisions of this chapter. Any
act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter.
22.02 DEFINITION OF TERMS
As used in this ordinance, the term "fermented malt beverages" shall have the meaning given by statute.
22.03 LICENSE REQUIRED
No person or corporation shall within the City of Wisconsin Rapids distribute, sell or keep, or offer for sale at wholesale or
retail, any fermented malt beverage, or cause the same to be done, without having procured a license as provided in this
section. A license shall be required for each stand, place, room, or enclosure, or for each suite of rooms or enclosure which
are in direct connection or communication or contiguous to each other where said beverages are kept, sold, or offered for
sale.
22.04 CLOSING HOURS (MC#746)
No premises for which a Class "A" license for fermented malt beverages has been issued shall be permitted to sell
fermented malt beverages between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. The hours of a Class "B" licensee under this
chapter shall conform to state statute, except fermented malt beverages shall not be sold in original unopened packages
between midnight and 8:00 a.m.
22.05 LICENSE AND FEES
(1) Class "A" License (Off-premises Use). A Class "A" retailer's license, when issued by the city clerk under authority of
the common council, shall entitle the holder thereof to possess, sell, or offer for sale fermented malt beverages
only for consumption away from the premises where sold in original packages, containers, or bottles. The fee for
such Class "A" license shall be $100.00 per year. The sale of fermented malt beverages under Class "A" retailer's
license is restricted to grocery stores, convenience stores, and liquor stores.
(2) Class "B" License (On- or Off-premises Use).
(a) A Class "B" retailer's license when issued by the city clerk under authority of the common council shall
entitle the holder thereof to possess, sell, or offer for sale fermented malt beverages. The fee for such
Class "B" license shall be $100.00 per year.
(b) Such licenses may also be issued to bona fide clubs; state, county, or local fair associations; agricultural
2
societies; lodges, or societies that have been in existence for not less than six months prior to the date of
application, or to posts now or hereafter to be established of ex-servicemen's organizations, authorizing
them to sell fermented malt beverages at a particular picnic or similar outing or at a meeting of any such
post, or on any other occasion specified in the application, for each of which occasions a fee of $5.00 is
charged by the city clerk.
The city clerk shall have the authority to approve requests for picnic licenses for those events for which
common council approval may not be obtained in a timely manner and for which the applying organization
has obtained approval by the council for previous similar events.
(c) The fee for a six-month Class "B" beer license is $50.00.
(3) Wholesaler's License. A wholesaler's license when issued by the city clerk under authority of the common council to
a domestic corporation or to persons of good moral character who have been residents of the state continuously for
not less than 90 days prior to the date of filing application therefore, shall entitle the holder thereof to possess, sell,
and offer for sale fermented malt beverages only in original packages or containers, not to be consumed in or
about the premises where sold. The fee for a wholesaler's license shall be $25.00 per year.
(4) Section 125.185 of the Wisconsin Statutes, as adopted July 15, 1995, and amended thereafter, is hereby
incorporated by reference. A provisional retail license may be issued by the city clerk to an applicant for whom a
retail license has been approved by the common council but who has not completed the state requirement for
attendance at a responsible beverage server training course. The fee for such provisional retail license shall be
$15.00.
(5) A provisional retail license may be issued by the city clerk, prior to approval by the common council of a regular
retail license application, which authorizes only the activity allowed by the type of license applied for, under the
following circumstance: if the applicant has applied and paid for the cost of publication for the type of retail license
applied for, has paid the license fee for both the provisional and the regular license, is qualified to hold the type of
license applied for, and is applying for the provisional license to maintain continuity of an existing business that
held a retail liquor license issued by the city clerk. The applicant must provide the clerk with proof of control and/or
occupancy of the premises before the clerk will issue the provisional license.
22.06 QUALIFICATIONS - BEER AND LIQUOR
(1) Class "A" and "B" or wholesaler's license shall be granted only to persons who have attained the legal drinking age
and have resided in Wisconsin for not less than 90 days prior to the date of filing application for such license,
except Class "A" and "B" licenses may be issued to corporations.
(2) No such "A" or "B" license shall be issued to any person, who being a habitual law offender or having been
convicted of a qualifying felony unless such person has been pardoned, nor to any person, firm, or corporation
having been convicted of a violation of federal or state liquor laws or of the provisions of this section during a period
of one year prior to said application.
(3) No such license shall be granted for any premises where any other business shall be conducted in connection with
said licensed premises except that such restriction shall not apply to a hotel or restaurant not a part of or located in
or upon the premises of any mercantile establishment, or to bona fide club, society, or lodge that shall have been in
existence for not less than six months prior to the date of application. Such license for a hotel, restaurant, club,
society, or lodge may be taken in the name of an officer or manager who shall be personally responsible for
compliance with all of the terms and provisions of this section.
(4) Licenses shall not be granted for operation of any premises upon which personal property taxes or assessments
are delinquent, or against which the city has any financial claim or lien.
(5) Sanitary Conditions. Class "B" retailers' licenses for the sale of fermented malt beverages to be consumed upon the
premises where sold shall not be granted unless such premises are connected with running water and sewage
facilities, properly lighted and ventilated, supplied with adequate sanitary toilet and lavatory facilities, and are
equipped with running water. The rules and regulations of the State Board of Health governing sanitation in
restaurants shall apply to all premises for which a Class "B" retailers' license is applied for, and such license shall
not be issued unless the premises conform to those rules and regulations.
22.07 APPLICATION
(1) Written application for a license shall be filed with the city clerk upon forms provided by said clerk who shall present
said application to the council. Such application shall contain the name, residence, and age of the applicant, if an
individual, or the names of principal officers, their residences, and ages, if the applicant is an association or
corporation, together with the state of incorporation. It shall also contain the name or names of one or more
3
persons whom such corporation or association shall designate as manager or person in charge, with the address of
addresses of same. Such application shall further state such additional information as the clerk shall require. Each
application blank shall state the applicant consents to the entry of duly authorized representatives of the City of
Wisconsin Rapids at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection and search, and consents to the removal
from said premises of all things and articles there had in violation of city ordinance or state laws, and consents to
the introduction of such things and articles in evidence in any prosecution that may be brought for such offenses.
(2) Such application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant if an individual, and if a corporation, then by the
president and secretary thereof, before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths.
22.08 INSPECTION
(1) The city clerk shall notify the chief of police, health officer, chief of the fire department, and building inspector of
such application, and these officials shall inspect or cause to be inspected each application and the premises to
determine whether the applicant and the premises sought to be licensed comply with the regulations, ordinance,
and laws applicable thereto. These officials shall furnish to the common council, in writing, the information derived
from such investigation, accompanied by a recommendation as to whether a license should be granted or refused.
No license shall be renewed without a re-inspection of the premises.
(2) In determining the suitability of an applicant, consideration shall be given to the moral character and financial
responsibility of the applicant, appropriateness of the location, and premises where such licensed business is to be
conducted, and generally, the applicant's fitness for the trust to be reposed.
22.09 RESTRICTIONS
The following restrictions shall apply to the granting of licenses:
(1) No Class "A" or "B" license shall be granted to any person under the legal drinking age.
(2) The number of malt beverage licenses in the City of Wisconsin Rapids shall limited as follows:
(a) There shall be no limit on the number of wholesale malt beverage licenses issued in the City of Wisconsin
Rapids.
(b) In addition to the number of Class "B" beer licenses issued to persons or firms who also hold "Class B"
beer and intoxicating liquor licenses, there shall be fifteen (15) additional Class "B" beer licenses which
may be issued to persons or firms who do not hold Class "B" liquor licenses. (MC#1011)
22.10 LICENSES FOR PREMISES
All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall state clearly the specific premises for which
granted, the dates of issuance, the fee paid, the name of licensee, and shall expire on the 30th day of June thereafter. The
licenses so granted shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises so licenses and it shall be unlawful for any
person to post such license or to allow them to be posted upon premises other than those mentioned in this application.
22.11 HEALTH RULES
Each premises shall be conducted in a sanitary manner and shall be a safe and proper place for the purposes for which
used. The Board of Health of the city is authorized and empowered to make reasonable and general rules for the sanitation
of all places of business possessing licenses under this ordinance. Such rules or regulations may be classified and made
applicable according to the class of business conducted. All such rules and regulations shall have the same force as this
ordinance, and infraction thereof may be punished as a violation of this ordinance.
22.12 OPERATOR'S LICENSE - BEER AND LIQUOR (MC#952)
(1) A beverage operator's license, as provided by the Wisconsin Statutes, may be approved and issued by the city clerk
or deputy clerk to persons of good moral character upon payment of a biennial fee of $35.00 for any part of a twoyear
period, except the fee for any period of less than 18 months, as determined by the date of council approval,
will be $25.00. A written application shall be filed with the city clerk stating the name, residence, age, and sex of
applicant, together with any pertinent information specified in Section 22.07 of this chapter. The applicant shall be
referred to the chief of police for a report. The applicant must be 18 years of age or older. (MC#1020)
(a) A provisional license, as provided for by the Wisconsin State Statutes, may be issued by the city clerk to a
person who has applied for an operator's license, pending the usual background investigation. Provisional
licenses shall expire 60 days after issuance or when an operator's license, under subsection (1) above, is
issued to the holder, whichever is sooner. The fee for a provisional license shall be $5.00 payable to the
4
city treasurer.
(b) In addition to other uses allowed by law, the city clerk or his/her designee is authorized to issue a
provisional license to any individual, who is shown qualified by background investigation, for the period
within 60 days of issuance of a full two-year license.
(c) The provisional license shall be in the form of the treasurer's receipt for payment the provisional license
and new or renewal beverage operator's licenses.
(3) In all cases of applications for operator's licenses, a review shall be made through the police department to
determine if the applicant has any violation. Sufficient violations, as determined by city policy to be relevant to nonissuance
of an operator's license, shall disqualify an applicant from receipt of such license, except that, after
appeal by the applicant and review by common council, the council may, at its discretion, approve any license
application. (MC#1020)
22.13 SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR NON-RENEWAL OF LICENSE
The common council may at any time suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew any license granted under the provision of this
ordinance upon conviction for the violation of any of the rules, regulations, ordinances, or laws governing or applicable to
said licensed premises, or upon conviction of the licensee of any qualified felony. Such action shall be governed by the
hearing procedures set forth by state statute. Whenever any license shall be revoked, no refund or any unearned portion of
the fee paid, shall be made, and at least 12 months from the time of such revocation shall elapse before another license
shall be granted for the same premises.
22.15 PENALTIES
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall pay a forfeiture of not more than
$500.00 and the cost of collection, and in default of payment of the forfeiture and cost of collection shall be imprisoned in
the county jail for Wood County, Wisconsin, for not more than 90 days, and each day of violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
1
Chapter 23 Intoxicating Liquor
23.01 Wisconsin Statutes Adopted
23.02 License Required
23.03 License and Fees
23.04 License Application
23.05 Posting
23.06 Health Rules
23.07 Right of Entry and Removal
23.08 Limitation of Licenses
23.09 Closing Hours
23.10 Agents and Employees
23.11 Suspension, Revocation, or Non-renewal of License
23.12 Penalties
23.13 Interior Open to View
23.14 Open Container Regulations - Liquor and Beer
23.15 Operating Premises
23.16 Underage Persons - Fraternal Order of Eagles
23.17 Social Hosting
23.18 Online Ordering and Curbside Pickup of Alcohol Beverages
23.01 WISCONSIN STATUTES ADOPTED
The statutory provisions set forth in Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin State Statutes and any amendments thereto relating to
the defining, licensing, regulating, and selling of intoxicating liquor are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this
chapter, as if fully set forth herein, except when such provisions are in conflict with the express provisions of this chapter.
Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by
this chapter.
23.02 LICENSE REQUIRED
(1) No person, firm, or corporation shall vend, sell, deal, or traffic in, or for the purpose of evading any law or ordinance,
give away any intoxicating liquor in any quantity whatever, or cause the same to be done without having procured a
license as provided in this ordinance, nor without complying with all provisions of this ordinance and all statutes,
ordinances, and regulations applicable thereto.
(2) A license shall be required for each stand, place, room, or enclosure, or for each suite of rooms or enclosures which
are in direct connection or communication to each other where intoxicating liquor is kept, sold, or offered for sale,
and no license shall be issued to any person, firm, or corporation for the purpose of possession, selling, or offering
for sale any intoxicating liquor in any dwelling, house, flat, or residential apartment.
23.03 LICENSES AND FEES
There shall be three classes of licenses:
(1) Retail class "A" liquor licenses. A retail class "A" liquor license, when issued by the city clerk under authority of the
common council shall permit its holder to sell, deal, and traffic in intoxicating liquors only in original packages or
containers to be consumed off the premises so licensed. The fee for such class "A" liquor license shall be $400.00
per year. (MC#1014)
(2) Retail Class "B" liquor license.
(a) A retail class "B" liquor license, when issued by the city clerk under authority of the Common Council, shall
permit its holder to sell, deal, and traffic in intoxicating liquors to be consumed on the premises so
licensed, by the glass; or to be sold in multiples not to exceed four liters at any one time, and consumed
off the premises so licensed in the original package or container. The fee for such retail class "B" liquor
license shall be $400.00 per year. (MC#1014)
(b) Such licenses also may be issued to bona fide clubs; state, county, or local fair associations; agricultural
2
societies; lodges or societies that have been in existence for not less than six (6) months prior to the date
of application; or to posts of ex-servicemen's organizations authorizing them to sell wine at picnics or
similar gatherings. Issuance of this license shall be concurrent with issuance of a special picnic fermented
malt beverage license, except that no more than two (2) temporary Class "B" (picnic) wine licenses may be
issued under this section in any 12-month period. (MC#814)
(c) Wholesaler's License. A wholesaler's license, when issued by the city clerk, under authority of the common
council, to a domestic corporation or to persons of good moral character who have been residents of the
state continuously for not less than 90 days prior to the date of filing an application therefore, shall entitle
the holder thereof to possess, sell, and offer for sale intoxicating liquors. The fee for a wholesaler's license
shall be $500.00.
(3) Retail “Reserve Class B” license. (MC#1056)
(a) A retail “Reserve Class B” license, when issued by the city clerk under authority of the common council
shall permit its holder to sell, deal, and traffic in intoxicating liquors to be consumed on the premises so
licensed, by the glass; or to be sold in multiples not to exceed four liters at any one time, and consumed
off the premises so licensed in the original package or container. In addition to the annual fee provided in
2.(a) above, a fee of $10,000.00 shall be paid for initial issue of any license designated a "reserve"
license, pursuant to §125.51(3)(e)2 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) The City of Wisconsin Rapids hereby finds that it is in the interests of the public welfare to increase the
property tax base, provide employment opportunities, attract tourists and generally enhance the economic
and cultural climate of the community by providing additional economic incentives for new businesses with
liquor licenses.
(1) The holder of a Reserve Class B license may apply for an economic development grant in an
amount not to exceed $10,000 within twelve (12) months of the date of issuance of the Reserve
Class B License. The holder shall complete an Application for Economic Development Grant for
Reserve Class B Liquor Licenses, available from the city clerk, and shall attach complete, legible
copies of paid invoices or receipts evidencing or documenting improvements made to the
licensed premises in an amount equal to or greater than the amount requested in the economic
development grant application. Licensees must be compliant with all liquor licensing
requirements and all ordinances of the City of Wisconsin Rapids, and not have been delinquent in
any obligation to the City of Wisconsin Rapids for the previous five years.
(2) The Reserve Liquor License Grant Review Team (hereinafter "Review Team"), consisting of the city
clerk, city attorney, and an additional city staff member designated by the mayor, shall review the
grant application and either approve or deny the application, as appropriate. The grant funds shall
not be disbursed until the licensed premises listed on the application is operating and open to the
public.
(3) If the Review Team determines that the licensee is not in compliance with the approved license or
grant application requirements set forth above, the economic development grant request shall be
denied and the clerk shall make such findings in writing and cause to be delivered a copy of the
findings to the licensee. If the licensee disagrees with the Review Team's determination, the
licensee may file a written notice of appeal upon the clerk within ten (10) calendar days of the
delivery of the Review Team's findings to the licensee. The clerk shall forward said notice of
appeal to the Finance and Property Committee, which shall hold a hearing thereon within fifteen
(15) business days. The Finance and Property Committee shall then make findings of whether the
licensee is in compliance with the license requirements and whether the applications satisfies the
above requirements, and forward its findings to the common council. If the common council finds
that the licensee is in compliance with license requirements and the grant application satisfies
requirements, the common council shall notify the Review Team and the Review Team shall
authorize the payment of the Economic Development Grant.
(4) Retail “Class C” wine license. A retail “Class C” wine license, when issued by the city clerk under authority of the
common council shall permit its holder to sell, deal, and traffic in wine by the glass or in an opened original
container for consumption on the premises where sold. Such licenses may only be issued to restaurants per the
restrictions of Section125.51(3m) of the Wisconsin Statutes. The fee for such “Class C” wine license shall be $100
per year. (MC#983)
(5) Section 125.185 of the Wisconsin Statutes, as adopted July 15, 1995, and amended thereafter, is hereby
3
incorporated by reference. A provisional retail license may be issued by the city clerk to an applicant for whom a
retail license has been approved by the common council but who has not completed the state requirement for
attendance at a responsible beverage server training course. The fee for such provisional retail license shall be
$15.00. (MC#983)
A provisional retail license may be issued by the city clerk, prior to approval by the common council of a regular
retail license application, which authorizes only the activity allowed by the type of license applied for, under the
following circumstance: if the applicant has applied and paid for the cost of publication for the type of retail license
applied for, has paid the license fee for both the provisional and the regular license, is qualified to hold the type of
license applied for, and is applying for the provisional license to maintain continuity of an existing business that
held a retail liquor license issued by the city clerk. The applicant must provide the clerk with proof of control and/or
occupancy of the premises before the clerk will issue the provisional license. (MC#1197)
23.04 LICENSE APPLICATION
Application for a license to sell or deal in intoxicating liquor shall be made in writing on the form prescribed by law and shall
be sworn to by the applicant as provided by Wisconsin Statutes, and shall be filed with the city clerk not less than 15 days
prior to the granting of such license.
23.05 POSTING
Every license and permit issued pursuant to this ordinance shall be posted, while in force, in a conspicuous place in the
room or place where intoxicating liquors are kept for sale. It shall be unlawful for any person to post such license or permit,
or to be permitted to post such, upon premises other than those mentioned in the application, or knowingly to deface or
destroy such license or permit, or to remove such without the consent of the licensee or permit holder. Whenever a license
or permit shall be lost or destroyed without fault on the part of the holder, his agent, or employee, a duplicate, in lieu thereof
under the original application, shall be issued by the city clerk, on satisfying himself as to the facts, upon the payment of a
fee of $1.00.
23.06 HEALTH RULES
Each premises shall be conducted in a sanitary manner and shall be a safe and proper place for the purpose for which used.
The board of health or health officer of the city is authorized and empowered to make reasonable and general rules for the
sanitation of all places of business possessing licenses under this ordinance. Such rules or regulations may be classified
and made applicable according to the class of business conducted. All such rules and regulations have the same force as
this section and infraction thereof may be punished as a violation of this section.
23.07 RIGHT OF ENTRY AND REMOVAL
Every applicant procuring a license hereby consents to the entry of police or other duly authorized representatives of the city
at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection and search, and consents to the removal from said premises all things
and articles in evidence in any prosecution that may be brought for such offenses.
23.08 LIMITATION OF LICENSES
The following limitations shall be placed on the number of licenses granted in the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
(1) The number of “Class B” retail liquor licenses and “Reserve Class B” retail liquor licenses shall be in accordance
with Chapter 125.51(4), Wisconsin Statutes, and the number shall not be increased unless in accordance with said
state law governing the same. (MC#983)
(2) The number of retail “Class C” wine licenses shall be fifteen (15). (MC#1011)
23.09 CLOSING HOURS (MC#746)
No premises for which a wholesale or retail liquor license has been issued shall be permitted to remain open for the sale of
liquor:
(1) If a wholesale license, between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except Saturday when closing hour shall be 9:00 p.m.
(2) If a retail "Class A" license, between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(3) If a "Class B" license or a “Reserve Class B” license, during the hours allowed by state statute, except intoxicating
liquor shall not be sold in original unopened packages between midnight and 8:00 a.m. (MC#983)
(4) If a “Class C” license, during the hours allowed by state statute. (MC#983)
(5) Hotels and restaurants whose principal business is the furnishing of food and/or lodging to patrons, shall be
permitted to remain open for the conduct of their regular business, but shall not be permitted to sell intoxicating
4
liquors during the hours mentioned in subsection (3) of this section. (MC#983)
23.10 AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES
A violation of this ordinance by a duly authorized agent or employee of a licensee or permit holder shall constitute a violation
by the licensee or permit holder.
23.11 SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR NON-RENEWAL OF LICENSE
Whenever the holder of any license or permit under this ordinance shall violate any portion of the ordinance or any
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, proceedings for the suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of said license or permit
may be instituted in the manner and under the procedure established by Chapter 125, of the Wisconsin Statutes, and the
provision therein relating to the granting of a new license shall likewise be applicable.
23.12 PENALTIES
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the foregoing provisions of this ordinance shall pay a forfeiture of not more
than $500.00 and the costs of collection, and in default of payment of the forfeiture and the costs of collection, shall be
imprisoned in the county jail for Wood County, Wisconsin, for not more than 90 days, or by both such forfeiture and
imprisonment, or such other penalty as provided in Chapter 125, of the Wisconsin Statutes, where a penalty is therein
provided for any specific violation.
23.13 INTERIOR OPEN TO VIEW
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a tavern where malt, vinous, spirituous, or intoxicating liquors or any kind are
sold within the City of Wisconsin Rapids to establish or maintain in connection with such tavern, either as a part of or as an
adjunct to any room, stall, or private apartment, the interior of which is shut off from the general public view by doors,
curtains, screens, or partitions, or other devices of any kind whatsoever.
23.14 OPEN CONTAINER REGULATIONS - LIQUOR AND BEER
Whoever has in his possession any open can, bottle, or other vessel containing malt beverages or intoxicating liquor, or who
shall drink from the same on any public way, public street, alley, or parking lot shall suffer a forfeiture not to exceed
$100.00, and in lieu of such payment assessed, imprisonment for not more than 30 days in the county jail. Exception:
(1) At such times and places as may be specifically exempted temporarily from the provisions hereof by order of the
common council.
(2) Individuals in possession of any of the items set forth above are exempted from this ordinance when on the
sidewalk or boulevard in a residential area when the owner or tenant of the residence is present and said individual
is present with the permission of the owner or tenant.
23.15 OPERATING PREMISES (MC#521)
(1) No alcohol beverage license shall be renewed for any licensee who has not had a premises from which to operate
for two consecutive years, or who has failed to operate a business for selling alcohol beverages within a licensed
premises for three consecutive years. The common council may allow extensions of time for a license holder to
begin or resume operations, if the license holder demonstrates special adverse circumstances and substantial
efforts toward beginning or resuming operation.
(2) All non-renewals of licenses shall be accomplished subject to the hearing process specified by statute.
23.16 UNDERAGE PERSONS - FRATERNAL ORDER OF EAGLES (MC#717)
The Fraternal Order of Eagles is hereby allowed to permit underage persons to enter and remain in the premises located
161 3rd Street North, Wisconsin Rapids, Wood County, Wisconsin, for which they have a "Class B" Liquor and Class "B" Beer
license for the specific dates and times requested provided they obtain written authorization from the police department.
23.17 Social Hosting (MC#1189)
(1) Purpose and Findings. The Common Council of the City of Wisconsin Rapids intends to discourage underage
possession and consumption of alcohol, even if done within the confines of a private residence, and intends to hold
persons civilly responsible who host events or gatherings where persons under 21 years of age possess or
consume alcohol regardless of whether the person hosting the event or gathering supplied the alcohol. The
Common Council of the Wisconsin Rapids finds:
5
(a) Events and gatherings held on private or public property where alcohol is possessed or consumed by
persons under the age of twenty-one are harmful to those persons and constitute a potential threat to
public health requiring prevention or abatement.
(b) Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect underage persons, as well as the general public, from
injuries related to alcohol consumption, such as alcohol overdose or alcohol-related traffic collisions.
(c) Alcohol is an addictive drug which, if used irresponsibly, could have drastic effects on those who use it as
well as those who are affected by the actions of an irresponsible user.
(d) Often, events or gatherings involving underage possession and consumption occur outside the presence of
parents. However, there are times when the parent(s) is/are present and condone the activity, and in
some circumstances, provide the alcohol.
(e) A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person responsible for hosting an event or gathering where
underage possession or consumption occurs.
(2) Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
(a) Alcohol. “Alcohol” means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin
or any other distilled spirits including dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever
process produced.
(b) Alcoholic Beverage. “Alcoholic beverage” means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid
containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by
volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other
substances.
(c) Event or Gathering. “Event or gathering” means any group of three or more persons who have assembled
or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
(d) Host or Allow. “Host” or “allow” means to aid, conduct, entertain, organize, supervise, control or permit a
gathering or event.
(e) Parent. “Parent” means any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
(1) As natural, adoptive parent or step-parent;
(2) As a legal guardian; or
(3) As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the Court.
(f) Residence, Premises or Public or Private Property. “Residence”, “premises”, or “public or private property”
means any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room or other dwelling
unit, or a hall or meeting room, park or any other place of assembly, whether occupied on a temporary or
permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and
whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without permission or compensation.
(g) Underage Person. “Underage person” is any individual under twenty-one (21) years of age.
(3) Prohibited Acts. It is unlawful for any person(s) to: host or allow an event or gathering at any residence, premises or
on any other private or public property where alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present when the person knows
that an underage person will or does (i) consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage; or (ii) possess any alcohol or
alcoholic beverage with the intent to consume it; and the person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent
possession or consumption by the underage person(s).
(a) A person is responsible for violating this section if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels or
conspires with or otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.
(b) A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present at the event or gathering to be
responsible.
(4) Exceptions.
(a) This ordinance does not apply to conduct solely between an underage person and his or her parents while
the parent is present and in control of the underage person.
(b) This ordinance does not apply to legally protected religious observances.
(c) This ordinance does not apply to situations where underage persons are lawfully in possession of alcohol
or alcoholic beverages during the course and scope of employment.
(5) Penalties. A person who violates any provision of this ordinance is subject to a forfeiture of not less than $1,000
nor more than $5,000, together with the costs of prosecution. A person who is in default of payment is subject to
imprisonment in the county jail until the forfeiture and costs are paid.
23.18 Online Ordering and Curbside Pickup of Alcohol Beverages (MC # 1253)
6
(a) No establishment shall allow online purchase of alcohol beverages and curbside delivery of such purchases
("Click and Collect"), without first obtaining a "Change of Premises" from the Common Council, upon
recommendation of the Finance and Property Committee, to license that portion of the establishment's
parking lot that will allow vehicles to park for purposes of picking up their online order.
1. The licensed establishment shall file a detailed operation plan with their "Change of Premises"
form that clearly details how their "Click and Collect" operation will function. The operation plan
shall include the licensee's protocol for assuring that underage persons and intoxicated persons
do not pick up alcohol via the "Click and Collect" program.
2. Failure of licensee to provide a detailed operation plan with their "Change of Premises" application
shall result in the City Clerk not forwarding the "Change of Premises" form to the Finance and
Property Committee for consideration.
(b) No establishment holding an alcohol beverage license shall allow online purchase and pick-up of alcohol
beverages unless the sale is consummated on the licensed premises.
1. Payment for the purchase must be completed on premises and may not be completed until the
purchaser is at the licensed premises and has presented valid photo identification that has been
verified by a licensed operator employed by the premises.
2. The licensed operator must verify that the person placing the "Click and Collect" order is the same
person picking up the order.
3. The sale and delivery of "Click and Collect" purchases shall be made only by a licensed operator.
4. No alcohol sales are permitted if the purchaser fails to present valid photo
identification.
5. The "Click and Collect" system must allow the purchase of alcohol to be denied without affecting
the remainder of the purchase.
(c) Each "Click and Collect" transaction must capture and retain an image of the vehicle into which the order is
being loaded for thirty (30) days.
(d) Each "Click and Collect" transaction must record and retain the following information for thirty
(30) days:
1. The name of the purchaser.
2. The type of identification card presented and the number and expiration date of that
identification card.
3. The purchaser's date of birth.
4. The license plate of the vehicle into which the order is being loaded.
(e) Pick-up of "Click and Collect" orders shall be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
(f) If the "Click and Collect" purchaser is not the driver of the vehicle into which the order is being loaded, the
licensed operator must verify that the driver is 21 years of age or older.
(g) The licensed operator shall report to his or her manager any purchaser who shows signs of alcohol
consumption, and in conjunction with the manager, shall assess sobriety for purposes of approving or
denying the sale.
(h) The pick-up area for "Click and Collect" purchases shall be clearly defined with visible markings, signs,
and/or barriers.
(i) No events other than the delivery of "Click and Collect" orders shall be allowed on the expanded premises.
(j) Penalty. Any licensee or person who violates any provision of this subsection shall be subject to a forfeiture of
not less than $250, nor more than $1000 plus court costs and fees. Licensees are also subject to demerit
point assessment for violations of this subjection.
SECTION II All ordinances, or parts of ordinances, in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
SECTION III This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication.
1
Chapter 24 Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
24.01 Definitions
24.02 Location Outside Parks
24.03 Permit for Temporary Location Outside of Mobile Home Park
24.04 Permanent Occupancy
24.05 License for Mobile Home Park: Application and Issuance
24.06 Inspection and Enforcement
24.07 Location of Mobile Home Park
24.08 Park Plan
24.09 Water Supply
24.10 Service Building and Accommodations
24.11 Waste and Garbage Disposal
24.12 Limitation on Length of Stay and on Number of Occupants
24.13 Management
24.14 Applicability of Plumbing, Electrical and Building Ordinances
24.15 Monthly Parking Fee
24.16 Revocation and Suspension
24.01 STATE MOBILE HOME PARK LAWS ADOPTED
The Statutory Provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to mobile home parks and mobile
homes contained in Section 66.058 of the Wisconsin Statutes are hereby adopted and by reference made a part
of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by said section
incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter.
24.02 LOCATION OUTSIDE OF PARKS
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to park and/or occupy any mobile home upon any street, alley, highway
or other public place, or upon any private land within the City of Wisconsin Rapids, except as provided in
this chapter.
(2) Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any street, alley, or highway for not longer
than one hour subject to any other and further prohibitions, regulations, or limitations imposed by the
traffic and parking regulations or ordinances for that street, alley or highway.
(3) The parking of only one occupied mobile home in an accessory private garage or building, or in a rear
yard, is permitted providing no living quarters shall be maintained or any business practiced in said
mobile home while such mobile home is so parked or stored.
(4) A mobile home parked on private lands outside of a mobile home park shall be permitted to remain on
said private lands subject to the following conditions:
(a) Compliance with all provisions of this Chapter relating to mobile homes located in a licensed
mobile home park so far as applicable.
(b) Only that portion of the land in actual use as of final adoption of this ordinance, may be so
continued and the mobile home may not be extended, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, or
structurally altered.
(c) A new mobile home shall not be substituted for a mobile home existing as of final adoption of this
ordinance, and in the event such mobile home is damaged by fire, explosion, flood or other
calamity, to the extent of more than 50% of its current value it shall not be reconstructed.
(MC#74)
(5) The building inspector shall, with the assistance of the health officer and police department, enforce the
provisions of this Chapter and he shall maintain a current file of all mobile homes located outside of
mobile home parks. (MC#74)
24.03 PERMIT FOR TEMPORARY LOCATION OUTSIDE OF MOBILE HOME PARK
(1) The city health officer may issue special written permits allowing the temporary location of a mobile home
outside of a mobile home park.
2
(2) The person to whom such permit is granted shall be subject to the parking permit fee as provided in
section 24.15. The permit shall be granted only upon the written consent of the owner, legal agent of the
owner or the lessee of the location for which the permit is issued. No more than two mobile homes shall
be granted permits to locate on any one premises outside a mobile home park.
(3) Application for the permit shall be made to the city health officer and shall be accompanied by an
inspection fee of $1.00 and shall state the name and permanent address of the occupants of the mobile
home, the license number of their mobile home and towing vehicle, place of last stay, intended purpose of
stay at requested location, whether the occupants are non-resident tourists, whether any occupant is
employed in this state; the exact location of the premises, the name of the owner and the occupant of any
dwelling on the premises and the owner's and or occupant's permission to locate; a statement of the
nature and location of sanitary facilities and the permission of the occupant of the dwelling house for their
use; and a statement that all wastes from mobile home occupancy will be disposed of in a sanitary
manner. Application for location on a vacant lot or parcel of land shall be accompanied by a statement of
the nature and location of sanitary facilities, which must include a safe water supply and toilet within 200
feet of the proposed location of the mobile home; and a statement of permission from the owner for their
use.
(4) All occupants of any mobile home located outside of a mobile home park shall register with the city clerk
as provided in section 24.05. All provisions of this chapter governing the location, use and sanitation of
mobile homes located in a licensed mobile home park shall so far as they are applicable, apply to any
mobile home located outside of such mobile home park.
24.04 PERMANENT OCCUPANCY
(1) Mobile home shall not be used as a permanent place of abode or as a permanent dwelling except within
an approved mobile home park.
(2) Any action toward the removal of wheels except for temporary purposes of repair, or other action to
attach the mobile home to the ground by means of posts, piers or foundation shall be construed as an
attempt to use such unit as a permanent dwelling and shall constitute a violation of this ordinance.
(171-A)
24.05 LICENSE FOR MOBILE HOME PARK: APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or operate upon property owned or controlled by him within
the City of Wisconsin Rapids, a mobile park without having first secured a license therefor from the city
clerk. The application for such license shall be accompanied by a fee of $2.00 for each space in the
existing or proposed park but not less than $25.00. The license shall expire one year from the date of
issuance. Such parks shall comply with Wisconsin Administrative Code H77, which is hereby adopted by
reference. (MC#117)
(2) The application for such license or the renewal thereof shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be
accompanied by a fee of $1.00 for each space in the existing or proposed park. A fee of $10.00 shall be
paid for each transfer of license.
(3) The application for a license or a renewal thereof shall be made on forms furnished by the city clerk and
shall include the name and address of the owner in fee of the tract (if the fee is vested in some person
other than the applicant, a duly verified statement by that person, that the application), and such legal
description of the premises, upon which the mobile home park is or will be located as will readily identify
and definitely locate the premises. The application shall be accompanied by two copies of the park plan
showing the following, either existing or proposed:
(a) The extent and area used for park purposes;
(b) Roadways and driveways;
(c) Location of units for mobile homes;
(d) Location and number of sanitary conveniences, including toilets, washrooms, laundries and utility
rooms to be used by occupants of units;
(e) Method and plan of sewage disposal;
(f) Method and plan of garbage disposal;
(g) Plan for water supply;
(h) Plan for electrical lighting of units. If the existing or proposed park is designed to serve
non-dependent mobile home units, such plans shall clearly set forth the location of all sewer and
water pipes and connections.
24.06 INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT
3
No mobile home park license (or permit for location outside of a licensed mobile home park) shall be issued until
the city clerk shall notify the chief of police, health officer, chief of the fire department, and building inspector of
such application, and these officials shall inspect or cause to be inspected each application and premises to
determine whether the applicant and the premises on which mobile homes will be located comply with the
regulations, and ordinances and laws applicable thereto. These officials shall furnish to the common council in
writing the information derived from such investigation, and a statement as to whether the applicant and the
premises meet the requirements of the department for whom the officer is certifying. No license shall be renewed
without a reinspection of the premises. For the purpose of making inspections and securing enforcement such
officials shall have the right and are hereby empowered to enter on any premise on which a mobile home is
located, or about to be located, and to inspect the same and all accommodations connected therewith at any
reasonable time.
24.07 LOCATION OF MOBILE HOME PARKS
(1) No mobile home or mobile home park shall be located in any fire district.
(2) No occupied mobile home within the limits of the City of Wisconsin Rapids, shall be located between the
recognized setback line for the zoning district in which such mobile home is located and the street or
highway nor less than ten feet from any building or other mobile home or from the boundary line of the
premises on which located.
24.08 MANUFACTURED HOME PARK REQUIREMENTS
(1) At the time of application for a conditional use and application for a manufactured home park license,
under Section 24.05 of this code, the applicant shall submit a site plan to the zoning administrator
containing the following information:
(a) The name and address of all owners and developers of the proposed park.
(b) The legal description and lot size, in acres and square feet, of the proposed manufactured home
park.
(c) The location and size of all manufactures home spaces, storage areas, recreation areas and
facilities, landscaping, existing tree growth, water areas, roadways, sidewalks and parking sites.
(d) Detailed landscaping plans and specifications.
(e) Plans for sewage disposal, surface drainage, water system, electrical service, gas service, street
lighting and topography diagrams.
(f) Location and size of all public roadways abutting the park and all street and sidewalk accesses
from such street and sidewalk to the manufactured home park.
(g) Preliminary road construction plans, specifications and elevations.
(h) Preliminary floor plans and elevations for all structures.
(i) Description and method of disposing of garbage and refuse.
(j) Detailed description of proposed maintenance procedure and grounds supervision.
(k) Staging and timing of construction program whether or not the entire area will be developed at
one time or in stages.
(l) Such other reasonable information as shall be required by the zoning administrator.
(2) Manufactured Homes Space Requirements. Each manufactured home space shall have:
(a) At least 6,000 square feet of land area for the exclusive use of the residents of the manufactured
home located on the space with a minimum width of 50 feet and a minimum depth of 120 feet.
(b) Frontage on approved roadway and the corner of each space shall be marked and each lot shall
be numbered.
(3) Yard Requirements. All manufactured homes shall comply with the following yard requirements:
(a) No manufactured home shall be parked closer than 10 feet to the side lot lines, 20 feet to the
front lot line, nor 15 feet to the rear lot line.
(b) There shall be an open space of at least 20 feet between the sides of adjacent manufactured
homes.
(4) Parking. The following are minimum parking requirements for manufactured home parks:
(a) Each home space shall have off-street parking space for two (2) manufactured homes.
(b) Each manufactured home park shall maintain a hard-surfaced, off-street parking lot for guests of
occupants of a size equivalent to one space for each five (5) home spaces.
(c) Access drives off roads to all parking spaces and home spaces shall be hard surfaced in
bituminous concrete or portland cement concrete designed to accommodate normal traffic.
(d) Manufactured homes shall not be parked nearer than five (5) feet from any side lot lines unless
combined with a contiguous parking area.
(5) Utilities. The following minimum requirements for utilities shall be maintained:
4
(a) The source of fuel for cooking, heating or other purposes at each home shall be approved by the
building inspector.
(b) All utility lines shall be underground, except those essential for street or other lighting purposes
as set forth in this section.
(c) There shall be no obstructions impeding the inspection of plumbing, electrical facilities, utilities, or
other related equipment.
(d) Garbage, waste and trash disposal plans must be approved by the Plan Commission and must
conform to all Federal, State and local health and pollution control regulations.
(e) The owner of the manufactured home park shall pay all required sewer and utility connection fees
to the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
(6) Internal Streets: All internal street shall meet the following minimum requirements:
(a) Streets shall be hard surfaced with bituminous concrete or portland cement concrete to
accommodate the structural requirements of the city streets as approved by the city’s engineering
department.
(b) All streets shall be developed with a roadbed of not less than 34 feet and a street surface of not
less than 20 feet.
(7) Sidewalks: A 30 inch portland cement concrete sidewalk shall be built and maintained by the owner
providing access to all recreational areas, common use buildings, storage areas and to the public street
access. A 42 inch sidewalk or ramp with railing shall be supplied to 5% of the sites for accommodation of
the handicapped.
(8) Lighting. Artificial lights shall be maintained during all hours of darkness in all buildings provided for
common facilities for occupants’ use. The manufactured home park grounds, street and pedestrian area
shall be lighted from sunset to sunrise in accordance with a lighting plan approved by the city zoning
administrator (or plan commission).
(9) Recreation Areas: All manufactured home parks shall have one or more recreational areas of a minimum
of 2 acres, if possible, which shall be easily accessible to all park residents. Recreational areas shall be
so located as to be free of traffic hazards and shall, if possible, be centrally located. The size of such
recreational area(s) shall constitute a minimum of 10% of the land area of the manufactured home park.
The owner shall present a plan for these areas which shall include equipment such as playground
equipment, picnic tables etc. All equipment installed in such areas shall be owned and maintained in good
operating condition by the owner or operator of such park at his expense.
(10) Landscaping. The following minimum landscaping requirements shall be maintained in all manufactured
home parks:
(a) Each space shall be properly landscaped with at least one tree. All yards shall be sodded or
planted in grass. There shall be a minimum of 20 trees per gross acre in all areas of a
manufactured home park. Trees, grass and landscape materials shall be properly maintained and
replaced to conform to the approved landscape plans and specifications.
(b) A visual screen consisting of a compact hedge, redwood fence, coniferous trees, other approved
landscape materials, or a screen fencing approved by the zoning administrator (plan commission)
shall be installed and maintained around the peripheral of the manufactured home park to
substantially inhibit the eye level vision from the exterior when adjacent to any R1, R2, R3 district
and shall be maintained free of rubbish, debris, weeds and paper.
(11) Manufactured Home Stands Required. See COMM.27
(12) Skirting. All manufactured home units shall have skirts around the entire manufactured home made of
plastic, fiberglass or other comparable noncombustible material approved by the building inspector and
shall be of a permanent color or painted to match the appropriate manufactured home so as to enhance
the general appearance thereof.
(13) Storage Buildings. Any storage building in a manufactured home park shall be anchored.
(14) Registration of Occupants. The owner of a manufactured home park shall keep a registration list available
to the City or its agents for inspection at reasonable times.
(15) Inspection. All manufactured homes shall comply with State and Village fire, health and building
regulations. Before a manufactured home unit may be occupied, the owner must secure the inspection
and approval of the building inspector regarding compliance with such regulations.
(16) Smoke detectors must be installed in all homes per the Uniform Wisconsin Dwelling Code
24.09 WATER SUPPLY
(1) An adequate supply of pure water, furnished through a pipe distribution system connected directly with
the public water main, with supply faucets located not more than 200 feet from any dependent mobile
home shall be furnished for drinking and domestic purposes in all parks.
5
(2) Individual water service connections provided for direct use of an independent unit shall be so
constructed that they will not be damaged by the parking of such units. Such system shall be adequate to
provide 20 pounds pressure per square inch and capable of furnishing a minimum of 125 gallons per day
per space.
(3) No common drinking vessel shall be permitted, nor shall any drinking faucets be placed in any toilet room.
(4) Every mobile home park serving dependent units shall provide an abundant supply of hot water at all
reasonable hours for bathing, washing, and laundry facilities.
24.10 SERVICE BUILDING AND ACCOMMODATIONS
(1) Every mobile home park designed to serve dependent units shall have erected thereon suitable buildings
for housing toilets, lavatories, showers, slop sinks, and laundry facilities as required by this section, such
buildings to be known as service buildings. Service buildings shall be located not more than 200 feet from
any dependent unit space, nor closer than 15 feet from any mobile home space. Such buildings shall be
of permanent construction and adequately lighted, screened and ventilated.
(2) There shall be provided separate toilet rooms for each sex. Water flush toilets shall be required. Toilets
shall be provided for each sex in the ratio of one toilet for each eight dependent units or fraction thereof,
and shall have separate compartments. Every male toilet room shall also contain one urinal for each
sixteen dependent units, but in no case shall any male toilet be without one urinal. Toilet rooms shall
contain lavatories with hot and cold water in the ratio of one lavatory to every two or less water closets.
(3) Separate bathing facilities for each sex shall be provided with one shower enclosed in a compartment at
least four feet square, for each eight dependent units or fraction thereof. Each shower compartment shall
be supplemented by an individual dressing compartment of at least twelve square feet.
(4) Laundry facilities shall be provided in the ratio of one double tray unit and one conventional type washing
machine, or one automatic washing machine, with electric outlet, for each eight units. Sufficient drying
facilities shall be available.
(5) Slop sinks for disposal of liquid waste originating at the units shall be provided in a separate room of the
service building in the ratio of one slop sink for each 16 dependent units.
(6) The above accommodations shall be based on the total park capacity according to accepted plans.
(7) Floors of toilets, showers, and the laundry shall be of concrete, tile, or similar material impervious to water
and easily cleaned and pitched to a floor drain.
24.11 WASTE AND GARBAGE DISPOSAL
(1) All liquid waste from showers, toilets, laundries, faucets, lavatories, etc., shall be discharged into a sewer
system extended from and connected with the public sewer system.
(2) Every space designed to serve a non-dependent unit shall be provided with sewer connections which
shall comply with the state plumbing code. The sewer connections shall be provided with suitable fittings
so that watertight connections can be made. Such connections shall be so constructed so that they can
be closed when not connected and trapped in such a manner as to be maintained in an odor-free
condition.
(3) All sanitary facilities in any unit which are not connected with a public sewer system by approved pipe
connections shall be sealed and their use is hereby declared unlawful.
(4) Each faucet shall be equipped with facilities for drainage of waste and excess water.
(5) Every mobile home unit shall be provided with a substantial fly-tight metal garbage depository from which
the contents shall be removed and disposed of in a sanitary manner by the park custodian at least twice
weekly between May 1 and October 15, and otherwise weekly.
24.12 LIMITATION ON LENGTH OF STAY AND NUMBER OF OCCUPANTS
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any mobile home within the City of Wisconsin Rapids, for more than
90 days in each 12 month period, except as provided in section 24.03 of this section, and except that upon a
showing and proof that there exists in the community a shortage of adequate housing facilities, additional stays of
60 days may be granted as an emergency provision, provided, that this time limitation shall not apply to the
licensee of a mobile home park or his bona fide employees so as to prevent their remaining on the park premises
at all times.
24.13 MANAGEMENT
(1) In every mobile home park there shall be located the office of the attendant or person in charge of said
park. A copy of the park license and of this section shall be posted therein and the park register shall at
all times be kept in said office.
(2) It is hereby made the duty of the attendant or person in charge, together with the licensee, to:
6
(a) Keep a register of all guests, to be open at all times to inspection by state and federal officers and
the mobile home committee, which shall show for all guests:
(1) Names and addresses
(2) Number of children of school age
(3) State of legal residence
(4) Dates of entrance and departure
(5) License numbers of all mobile homes and towing or other vehicles
(6) State issuing such licenses
(7) Purpose of stay in park
(8) Place of last location and length of stay
(9) Place of employment of each occupant
(b) Maintain the park in a clean, orderly sanitary condition at all times.
(c) Insure that the provisions of this ordinance are complied with and enforced and report promptly to
the proper authorities any violations of this ordinance or any other violations of law which may
come to his attention.
(d) Report to the health officer all cases of persons or animals affected or suspected of being
affected with any communicable diseases.
(e) Maintain in convenient places, approved by the fire chief, hand fire extinguishers in the ratio of
one to each eight units.
(f) Collect the monthly parking permit fee provided for in section 24.15 of this ordinance. A book
shall be kept showing the names of the persons paying said service charges and the amount
paid.
(g) Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the premises.
24.14 APPLICABILITY OF PLUMBING, ELECTRICAL AND BUILDING ORDINANCES
All plumbing, electrical, building and other work on or at any park licensed under this section shall be in
accordance with the ordinances of the City of Wisconsin Rapids and the requirements of the state plumbing,
electrical and building codes and the regulations of the state board of health. Licenses and permits granted under
this ordinance grant no right to erect or repair any structure, to do any plumbing work, or to do any electrical work.
24.15 MONTHLY PARKING FEE
(1) There is hereby imposed on each occupied, nonexempt mobile home located in the City of Wisconsin
Rapids, a monthly parking fee as determined in accordance with Section 66.058, Wisconsin Statutes.
Said fees shall be paid to the city treasurer on or before the 10th day of the month following the month for
which such fees are due.
(2) Licenses of mobile home parks and owners of land on which are parked any occupied, nonexempt mobile
homes shall furnish information to the city clerk and city assessor on such homes added to their park or
land within five days after arrival of such homes on forms furnished by the city clerk in accordance with
Section 66.058(3)(c) and (e), Wisconsin Statutes.
(3) Occupants or owners of nonexempt mobile homes parked outside of a mobile home park shall remit such
fees directly to the city treasurer as provided in Section (1). It shall be the full and complete responsibility
of the licensee of a mobile home park to collect such fees from each occupied, nonexempt mobile home
therein and to remit such fees to the city treasurer as provided in Section 1. (MC#117)
24.16 REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION
The common council is hereby authorized to revoke any license or permit issued pursuant to the terms of this
ordinance in accordance with Wisconsin Statutes. (MC#171)
1
Chapter 25 Offenses Against Public Welfare, Safety, Morals, and Peace
25.01 Animals Not to Run at Large; Prohibited Animals; Dangerous Animals
25.02 Barns, Kennels, Stables, Pigpens, or Other Enclosures
25.03 Dog and Cat Regulations
25.04 Control of Rabies and Biting Dogs or Cats
25.05 Exemption Permit
25.06 Commercial Animal Establishments
25.07 Enforcement, Investigation, and Penalty
25.08 Curfew
25.09 Misdemeanor Crimes
25.10 Noxious Fumes and Smoke
25.11 Graffiti
25.12 Possession of Firearms and Weapons
25.13 Discharge of Firearms Unlawful
25.14 Loitering - General and Schools
25.15 Abandoned and Disabled Vehicles
25.16 Resisting an Officer
25.17 Drug Paraphernalia
25.18 Noise Ordinance
25.19 Posting on Poles Prohibited
25.20 Fire Alarm Boxes
25.21 Electric Poles and Apparatus, Telegraph, and Telephone Poles
25.22 Disorderly Conduct with a Motor Vehicle
25.23 Pedestrian and School Crossing Guards
25.24 Harbor a Runaway
25.25 Skateboards, Roller Skates, Roller Skis, Inline Skates, and Other Play Vehicles
25.26 Habitual Truancy
25.27 Residential Picketing
25.28 Cemetery Restrictions
25.29 Public Nuisances Prohibited
25.30 Juvenile Dispositions/Municipal Court
25.31 Possession/Use of Laser Pointing Devices
25.32 Explosive and Other Material Cleanup
25.33 Fraudulent Tapping of Electric Wires or Gas or Water Meters or Pipes
25.34 Deer and Waterfowl Feeding Ban
25.35 Smoking Regulations
25.36 Chronic Nuisance
25.37 Anti-Bullying
25.01 ANIMALS NOT TO RUN AT LARGE; PROHIBITED ANIMALS; DANGEROUS ANIMALS (MC#1025)
(1) No person owning or in charge of any horse, mule, cattle, sheep, goat, swine, geese, chickens, or other
domestic livestock, poultry, or fowl shall permit said animals to run at large in any part of the City of Wisconsin
Rapids.
(2) Sale and keeping of exotic pets or wild animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, have in
his possession or under his control, sell or convey within the city any poisonous reptile or any other dangerous
or carnivorous wild animal or reptile, any vicious or dangerous domesticated animal or any other animal or
reptile of wild, vicious or dangerous propensities. Specifically, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep,
maintain or have in his possession or under his control within the city any of the following animals:
All poisonous animals, including rear-fang snakes; all non-human primates, including, but not limited
to apes, chimpanzees, gibbons, gorillas, orangutans and siamangs; baboons; bears; bison; cheetahs;
constrictor snakes, six feet in length or more; coyotes; crocodilians; deer; elephants; game cocks and other
fighting birds; hippopotami; hyenas; jaguars; leopards; lions; lynxes; monkeys, either old world or new world;
ostriches; pumas; rhinoceroses; sharks; snow leopards; swine; tigers; wolves and wolf hybrids; bees, wasps
and hornets; poisonous insects; piranha fish, other than in a small, indoor fish tank.
(3) Rabbits. No more than two adult rabbits are to be kept or maintained at any residential property within the city.
No person owning, in possession of, or in charge of the care of any rabbit shall permit the rabbit to be at large
within the city. Rabbits shall be confined in adequate enclosures that are neat, clean and free of disturbing
odors. (MC#986)
2
(4) Exceptions. The provisions of Section (2) and (3) above shall not apply to circuses, menageries and other
temporary licensed exhibitions. Nor shall it apply to where creatures are in the care, custody or control of a
veterinarian for treatment, agricultural fairs, shows or projects of the 4-H, a display for judging purposes, a
state-licensed educational institution, zoo, or display of a state-licensed animal authorized by the Common
Council in a commercial pet store if: (MC #1038)
(a) Their location conforms to the provision of Chapter 11 – Zoning.
(b) All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary condition and so maintained as to
eliminate objectionable odors.
(c) Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent their escape.
(d) No person resides within 100 feet of the quarters in which the animals are kept. This restriction shall
not apply to Section (3) above, nor to displays confined within the major building of a commercial pet
store as authorized by the Common Council.
(5) Dangerous Animals.
(a) Prohibitions.
(1) No person shall own, harbor, keep, or maintain within the city limits, any “dangerous animal”
contrary to this section. Any animal alleged to be dangerous, as defined by this section, shall
be impounded as directed by the City of Wisconsin Rapids Police Department until disposition
of the charge issued by the citation and as outlined in this section. A complaint shall be filed
with the city attorney’s office.
(2) The owner of an animal found to be dangerous in the trial of a charge of harboring a
dangerous animal pursuant to this section, or by plea to such a charge, shall be prohibited
from keeping that animal in the city contrary to any restrictions contained in subsection (e).
(3) No person shall offer for sale, sell, give away, breed, buy, or attempt to buy any dangerous
animal within the city.
(4) No person shall own or harbor any animal for the purpose of animal fighting, or train, torment,
badger, bait, or use any animal for the purpose of causing or encouraging said animal to
attack human beings or domestic animals when not provoked.
(b) Definitions. “Dangerous animal” as used in this ordinance means:
(1) Any animal which habitually approaches or chases any human being or domestic animal in a
menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, without intentional provocation, on public or
private property;
(2) Any animal which bites, inflicts injury, attacks, or otherwise endangers the safety of human
beings or domestic animals, without intentional provocation, on public or private property; or
(3) Any animal owned, harbored, or trained primarily or in part for the purpose of fighting.
(c) Impoundment.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Wisconsin Rapids Police Department and any other person
designated by the common council to seize any animal whose owner is alleged to have
violated this section and transfer it to the humane society. No person shall fail to produce or
surrender up any animal to the department. The officers of the department shall have the
right to pursue an animal upon the premises of the owner or elsewhere. Any law enforcement
officer or duly authorized department employee, who has consent of the property owner or
with a warrant, may enter and inspect private property to enforce the provisions of this
section.
(2) The owner of the animal immediately impounded pursuant to subsection (1) shall be notified
in person or by certified mail within five (5) business days after the animal’s impoundment.
(a) The notice of impoundment shall inform the owner of the animal that he may
request, in writing, a trial to contest the impoundment within five (5) business days
after the animal’s impoundment.
(b) Upon a request for a trial under subsection (A), a trial shall be held within ten (10)
business days after such request. Notice of the date, time and location of the trial
shall be sent by first-class mail to the owner requesting the trial.
(c) If such owner is unknown or unascertainable, a notice shall be published in the city
newspaper, giving a description of the animal, stating where it is impounded, and
conditions for its release. If within seven (7) days after such notice no owner claims
the animal, the animal may be destroyed in a proper and humane manner. However,
if an animal before being impounded has bitten a person, the animal shall remain
impounded for ten (10) days for observation purposes.
(d) If after a trial on impoundment, the court finds no violation of subsection (a), the
animal shall be returned to its owner.
3
(e) If the court finds any violation of subsection (a), the court may proceed under
subsection (d) or (e). The owner of the animal shall be liable for the costs of
impounding, keeping, or destroying said animal. If the animal is not reclaimed within
five (5) business days of the disposition of the charge issued, the animal may be
destroyed in a proper and humane manner.
(d) Disposition.
(1) Humane Destruction. Any animal determined by the municipal court to have violated any
provision of paragraph (a) of this section may be ordered by the court to be humanely
destroyed. If the court does not issue an order authorizing the humane destruction of the
animal, it may be reclaimed from the impounding authority upon payment of all impoundment
fees and kept in the city upon proof to the court’s satisfaction of compliance with subsection
(e).
(e) Restrictions. The owner of any animal determined by the municipal court to have violated any
provision of paragraph (a) of this section, shall be subject to all of the following restrictions:
(1) Registration. The owner of any dangerous animal shall register it with the city clerk upon
disposition, and annually thereafter on or before April 1 of each year, by providing a current
color photograph of the animal and payment of a $75.00 registration fee. Upon payment of
the fee, the owner shall be issued a dangerous animal leather buckled collar of an approved
color for the purpose of identification.
(2) Liability Insurance. At the time of registration, the owner of any dangerous animal shall
provide proof of liability insurance in the amount of at least $250,000 for any acts of property
damage or liability incurred by virtue of injury inflicted by such animal. Such insurance shall
name the city as co-insured solely for the purpose of notice of cancellation of the policy.
(3) Display of Warning Sign. The owner of any dangerous animal shall display a warning sign on
his or her premises facing out from all sides of the premises warning that there is a
dangerous animal on the property. This sign should be visible and capable of being read from
a public highway or thoroughfare or within 40 feet of its placement, whichever is less. The
sign shall conspicuously display a symbol warning children of the presence of a dangerous
animal.
(4) Identification. Before release to the owner, the impounding authority or licensed veterinarian
shall implant a device which can be later detected to aid in the proper identification of the
animal as dangerous.
(5) Collar. The collar issued to the owner shall be worn by the animal at all times as proof of
registration, except when being groomed. If, when due to the length of the animal’s hair, the
collar is not visible, an approved colored leather lead may be used.
(6) Duty to keep animal under restraint while on owner's property. While on the owner's property,
a dangerous animal must be securely and humanely confined indoors or in a secure enclosed
and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and designed to
prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure must have a minimum dimension of
five feet by ten feet and must have secure sides and a secure top. If it has no bottom secured
to the sides, the sides must be imbedded into the ground no less than two feet. The enclosure
must also provide protection from the elements for the animal.
(7) Duty to keep animal under restraint while off owner's property. A dangerous animal may be off
the owner's premises if it is muzzled and restrained by an approved leather lead not
exceeding three feet in length and is under control of an adult, able-bodied person. The
muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause injury or pain to the animal or interfere
with its vision or respiration, but must prevent it from biting any person or animal.
(f) Exemption. This ordinance is not intended to restrict the training and use of dogs for and by public
law-enforcement agencies.
(g) Penalties for violations.
(1) An owner of a dangerous animal who fails to register the animal is subject to a forfeiture of
not less than $100.00 nor more than $250.00 per day.
(2) An owner of a dangerous animal who registers but neglects to have the dangerous animal
collar worn by the animal at all times, obtain liability insurance, display the standard sign, or
properly restrain the animal is subject to a forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor more than
$250.00 per day.
(3) An owner of a dangerous animal who violates subsections (a)(1), (3), or (4) is subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $100 nor more than $500 per day.
(h) Every day that a violation of this ordinance continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition
to the foregoing penalties, any person who violates this ordinance shall pay all expenses including
4
shelter, food, handling, veterinary care, and expert testimony fees necessitated by enforcement of this
ordinance.
(i) Exemptions. The provisions of this ordinance regarding dangerous animals shall not apply to animals
owned by law enforcement agencies and used for law enforcement purposes.
(j) Severability. If any provision of this ordinance is adjudged invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of this ordinance.
25.02 BARNS, KENNELS, STABLES, AND PIGPENS OR OTHER ENCLOSURES (MC#978)
(1) No barn, kennel, stable, yard, or pen or other enclosure in which cows, horses, sheep, swine, geese, chickens
or other domestic livestock, poultry or fowl or more than two dogs or cats are to be kept shall be hereafter
located upon any private premises in the City of Wisconsin Rapids, except subject to 25.05 below in regard to
dogs and cats, and except as provided in subsection (3) herein for chickens, and except as specifically allowed
in properly zoned agricultural or industrial areas with approval by the common council. (MC#1182)
(2) Any enclosure of the type referred to in (a) above that currently exists may remain in existence but shall not be
replaced or extended, shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition so as not to endanger the health,
comfort, safety, and welfare of the public, and shall be in conformance with Chapter 11, Zoning.
(3) Regulating Chickens. (MC#1182)
(a) Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms have the meaning indicated:
(1) Abutting Property. All property that abuts an applicant's property at 1 or more points, except
public streets.
(2) Backyard. That portion of a lot enclosed by the property’s rear lot line and the side lot lines to
the points where the side lot lines intersected with an imaginary line established by the rear
of the single family structure and extending to the 2 side lot lines.
(3) Chicken. A female hen of any age, including chicks. This definition does not include other
kinds of fowl including but not limited to ducks, quail, pheasant, geese, turkeys, guinea hens,
peacocks, emus, or ostriches.
(4) Coop. An enclosed structure, building or pen within which chickens roost or are housed.
(b) Keeping of chickens. Chickens may be kept or maintained upon the following:
(1) Up to 4 chickens may be raised within a lot zoned R-1 residential (one-family) or a lot zoned R-
2 residential (one- and two-family), provided there is a use as a single-family or two-family;
upon notification of all abutting property owners, and upon application and permit.
(2) Rental tenants of a single family dwelling or a one-two family dwelling that is zoned R-1 or R-2
shall obtain written approval from the landlord prior to the keeping or maintaining of chickens
on the rental premise. The landlord's written approval must accompany the applicant's permit
application.
(3) Educational facilities may keep chickens for educational purposes only.
(4) Chickens may be temporarily allowed for special purposes such as a public picnic and other
special events upon approval of the planning and economic development department.
(5) Chickens may be allowed in the local veterinarian's office for the purpose of observation or
treatment.
(6) In addition to 4 adult chickens, new born chickens (chicks) up to the age of 3 weeks may be
kept in a residence or outbuilding.
(c) Chickens are not allowed. Chickens are not allowed to be kept or maintained upon the following:
(1) Mobile home parks.
(2) Vacant lots unless the person requesting the permit resides on the abutting property.
(3) Any property not zoned as provided for in (3)(b)(1) above.
(4) Condominiums.
(d) Permit required.
(1) No owner or tenant shall own, keep or maintain chickens within the corporate limits of the city
without first obtaining a permit.
(2) The applicant for a permit must notify all abutting property owners of their intention to keep or
maintain chickens prior to applying for a permit, and the permit application must certify that
all such property owners have been notified. A list of all property owners and their addresses
must be included with the permit application. Notification of abutting property owners shall
not be required for renewal of a permit as long as the permit is kept current and has not
lapsed.
(3) The permit year shall commence on January 1, and shall end on the following December 31,
and shall be renewed annually.
(4) A permit granted shall not transfer to any other property or successor owners of permitted
property. A new permit must be applied for.
5
(5) Proof of livestock premises registration with the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade,
and Consumer Protection must be provided prior to the permit being issued.
(6) The annual fee for keeping and maintaining up to 4 chickens shall be as set by the common
council by resolution, and must be paid to the planning and economic development
department at the time of application. This fee shall not be prorated.
(7) All renewal permits are due and payable to the city no later than January 31 of the permit
year. Any lapse in permitting shall require the applicant to meet all of the initial permit
requirements as set forth above.
(8) Initial permits are due and payable within 15 days of acquiring the chickens.
(e) Property and Coop Requirements.
(1) A coop and any attached enclosure shall be located in the backyard of the permit holder's
residence and shall meet all applicable setback requirements for accessory buildings as set
forth in the Municipal Code. A drawing of the coop and any attached enclosure and their
locations shall be submitted with the permit application. A separate building permit shall be
required for any new coop and enclosures.
(2) A coop and any attached enclosure shall not be closer than 25 feet to a residential dwelling
on adjacent lot.
(3) All chickens shall be kept and maintained within a ventilated and roofed coop in compliance
with any applicable state and local requirements.
(4) All coops, including an attached coop enclosure, shall be enclosed with wire netting or
equivalent material that will prevent chickens from escaping the coop or the attached
enclosure. The ability to utilize wire netting or equivalent materials shall only be for the limited
purpose of the coop and coop enclosure; wire netting is not to be used as a boundary fence.
All other fencing must adhere to the fencing regulations found elsewhere within the Municipal
Code.
(5) The coop structural floor shall allow at least 4 square feet per chicken, and the height of the
coop shall not exceed 6 feet above ground level.
(6) The coop shall have a clear open space to allow the chickens to walk on the ground or a
concrete slab.
(f) Further Chicken Regulations. Any person keeping chickens:
(1) Shall keep or maintain chickens within a coop or attached coop enclosure at all times.
(2) Shall not keep or maintain any roosters.
(3) Shall not sell any eggs.
(4) Shall not slaughter any chickens on the premises.
(5) Shall ensure that chickens are provided with access to feed and clean water at all times.
(6) Shall consult with a veterinarian regarding chickens that appear ill, or on the occasion of a
sudden death. If a disease that would be contagious to humans is diagnosed,
recommendations to insure prevention or transmission of a disease must be followed as
recommended by the veterinarian.
(g) Sanitation.
(1) Chickens and their coops shall be kept and maintained at all times in outdoor areas and shall
not be permitted inside a residential premise or dwelling, except as provided in subsection
(3)(b)(6) above.
(2) Chicken feed shall be stored and kept in containers, which make the feed inaccessible to
rodents, vermin, wild birds, and other predators.
(3) All coops and backyards where chickens are kept or maintained shall be reasonably free from
chicken manure and other substances, such that the air or environment around the chickens
does not become noxious or offensive or create a condition that would reasonably promote
the breeding of flies, mosquitoes, or other insects, or provide a habitat, breeding or feeding
place for rodents or other animals, or otherwise be injurious to public health.
(4) Inspection. The city shall have the power, whenever it may deem reasonably necessary, to
enter a building, structure, or property where chickens are kept to ascertain whether the
keeper is in compliance with this ordinance. The police department and the planning and
economic development department may issue compliance orders and citations pursuant to
the provisions of this section, and state law.
(5) Enforcement. The city may revoke a permit in the event that there have been 3 or more
violations of this ordinance within any 6-month period, or 4 or more in any 12-month period.
(6) Restricted covenants. This section is not intended to interfere with any restrictive covenants
otherwise applicable to certain properties in the city.
6
25.03 DOG AND CAT REGULATIONS (MC#505)
(1) This ordinance shall be known as the "Dog and Cat Ordinance of the City of Wisconsin Rapids" and may be
referred to by that title.
(2) License. (MC#776)
(a) Individual Dog Licenses. Every owner of a dog more than five months of age on January 1 of any year
shall annually, by April 1 of each year, pay his or her dog license fee and obtain a license. Any dog
turning five months of age during the year shall be licensed within 30 days of attaining the age of five
months. Such dog license fee shall be $3.00 for each neutered male dog or spayed female dog and
$8.00 for each un-neutered male dog or un-spayed female dog per Wisconsin Statute 174.05(2). Each
owner applying for a neutered male dog or spayed female dog license shall at the time of application
present to the license issuing officer a certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian stating that said
dog has been neutered or spayed. A current rabies vaccination certificate from a licensed veterinarian
shall be required at the time of the license purchase. The maximum number of dogs which may be
kept at one household is two.
(b) Individual Cat Licenses. Every owner of a cat more than five months of age on January 1 of any year
shall annually, by April 1 of each year, pay his or her cat license fee and obtain a license. Any cat
turning five months of age during the year shall be licensed within 30 days of attaining the age of five
months. Such cat license fee shall be $2.00 for each neutered male cat or spayed female cat and
$5.00 for each un-neutered male cat or un-spayed female cat. Each owner applying for a neutered
male cat or spayed female cat license shall at the time of application, present the license issuing
officer a certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian stating that said cat has been neutered or
spayed. A current rabies vaccination certificate from a licensed veterinarian shall be required at the
time the license is purchased. The maximum number of cats which may be kept at one household is
two.
(c) The word "owner", as used in this ordinance, includes every person who owns or keeps a dog or cat.
(d) The license year for dogs and cats shall be the calendar year.
(e) Late Fees. Per Wisconsin Statute 174.05(5), a late fee of $5.00 will be assessed from every owner of
a dog 5 months of age or over, if that owner failed to obtain a license prior to April 1 of each year, or
within 30 days of acquiring ownership of a licensable dog.
(3) Dog or Cat Licenses and Collar Tags for Individual Licenses; When Issued. Upon payment of the required
individual dog or cat license fee on any dog or cat, the license issuing officer shall execute and issue to the
owner a license for said dog or cat, which license shall be in the form prescribed by the State Department of
Agriculture and shall state the date of its expiration, shall bear a serial number, the owner's name and address,
and the name, sex, neutered or un-neutered, spayed or un-spayed, breed, and color of the dog or cat licensed.
At the time the license issuing officer shall delivery to the licensee a metal tag which shall bear the same serial
number as the license, the name of the county, and the license year. A new tag with a new number shall be
furnished to the licensee by the license issuing officer in place of the original tag, upon proof of purchase of the
original tag and payment of a fee of $1.00. The license issuing officer shall then endorse the new tag number
on such license and shall keep a record thereof of the register.
(4) Assessment; License Fee. Dog license fees shall be collected by the city treasurer or deputy in the same
manner as provided for in the collection of personal property taxes. Said license fee for dogs shall be
accounted for and disposed of pursuant to Chapter 174 of the Wisconsin Statutes. Cat license fees shall be
collected by the city treasurer or deputy and the money shall be placed in the general fund of the city. The city
treasurer may also designate a representative of the South Wood County Humane Society to collect the license
fees.
(5) Dog and Cat Controls.
(a) No person shall permit any dog which that person owns, or which is in that person's possession or
control, to be at large within the City. Any dog found at large shall be deemed to be so with the
permission of its owner or the person in possession or control of such dog. A dog is not at large when it
is attached to a leash of sufficient strength to restrain the dog, and not more than ten feet in length
where such lease is held by a person competent to govern and control the dog (MC #1215).
(b) No person having the control or care of a dog shall permit such dog to enter or remain in a public
building, in a public park, on school grounds, in a cemetery, in an athletic field, or on a public trail,
EXCEPT (1) dogs specially trained to lead visually or hearing impaired persons, or to provide support
for mobility-impaired persons, or other specially trained service animals dogs shall be allowed in all
areas where the public is allowed; and (2) dogs shall be allowed in the following parks and on the
following trails, provided that they are led by a leash of suitable strength and not more than ten feet in
length, and then only within the following parks and upon the following trails:
1. Ahdawagam Trails:
Formatted: Font: Franklin Gothic Book, 10 pt
Formatted: Font: Franklin Gothic Book, 10 pt
Formatted: Font: Franklin Gothic Book, 10 pt
7
Dogs allowed on all trails and within 10 feet of trails.
2. Ben Hansen Park
Dogs allowed on the trail and in the park, except not in playground areas, volleyball courts,
and the grounds of the State Firefighters Memorial.
3. Henry Demitz Park
Dogs allowed.
4. Legion Park
Dogs allowed on trail and within 10 feet of trail.
5. Lyon Park
Dogs allowed on the trail and in the park, except not in playground areas.
6. Mead Rapids View Park
Dogs allowed on the trail and within 10 feet of the trail.
7. Poplar Springs Park
Dogs allowed.
8. Tails and Trails Dog Park
Dogs allowed.
Dogs allowed without a leash provided park rules are followed.
9. Veterans’ Memorial Park
Dogs allowed on the trail and within 10 feet of trail.
10. Ward Johnson Park
Dogs allowed.
11. East Riverbank Conservancy Area
Dogs allowed on trail and within 10 feet of trail.
12. West River Bank Conservancy Area
Dogs allowed on trail and within 10 feet of trail.
(c) The City shall cause signs to be posted in areas wherein dogs are not permitted, and shall provide
waste stations and signs where dogs are permitted. (MC #1215).
(d) No dog owner or keeper shall permit any dog to defecate upon any property other than that of the dog
owner without immediately causing such defecation to be removed therefrom and properly disposed
of. Proper disposal of dog waste shall be by flushing in the toilet or disposal in a waste receptacle so
designated in a public park or area wherein dogs are permitted. Property owners shall as needed
promptly remove defecation from their own property and appropriately dispose of same. (MC #1215).
(e) A dog or cat which is impounded in accordance with Section 174.042, Wisconsin Statutes, and which
is not released to its owner or to a person other than its owner within the impoundment period, is
deemed an unclaimed dog or cat. The minimum impoundment period is for seven days after the dog
or cat is delivered to the officer or humane society. The officer or humane society may extend the
impoundment period if release of the dog or cat to the owner or a person other than the owner,
appears likely. The office or humane society may dispose of an unclaimed dog or cat by releasing it as
provided under Section 174.13, Wisconsin Statutes, or if the dog or cat is not released, as provided
under Section 174.13, Wisconsin Statutes, by disposing of the dog or cat in the proper and humane
manner. (MC #1215).
(f) No dogs or cats, except for seeing eye dogs, shall be allowed in restaurants, fast food restaurants, and
stores where food is sold. Watch dogs in taverns shall not be allowed behind the bar or in food
preparation areas at any time day or night.
(g) (1) Dogs or cats shall be restrained by means of a pen or tether from approaching nearer than
five feet to adjacent property lines. Dogs shall be considered adequately restrained when kept
in a rear or side yard on a tether or fenced in. Dog fence shall not be over six feet in height.
Formatted: Font: Franklin Gothic Book, 10 pt
Formatted: Font: Franklin Gothic Book, 10 pt
Formatted: Font: Franklin Gothic Book, 10 pt
Formatted: Font: Franklin Gothic Book, 10 pt
Formatted: Font: Franklin Gothic Book, 10 pt
Formatted: Font: Franklin Gothic Book, 10 pt
Formatted: Font: Franklin Gothic Book, 10 pt
Formatted: Font: Franklin Gothic Book, 10 pt
8
(2) Dog owners shall provide some type of screening for dog pens that are hard surfaced and
fenced in, which create an unsightly view from any neighbors' kitchen or living area. The
owner of dogs shall provide screening acceptable to health officer.
(3) Animal wastes shall be removed from the pens and the premises on a daily basis.
(h) A dog or cat which is impounded in accordance with Section 174.046, Wisconsin Statutes, and which
is not released to its owner or to a person other than its owner within the impoundment period, is
deemed an unclaimed dog or cat. The minimum impoundment period is for seven days after the dog
or cat is delivered to the officer or humane society. The officer or humane society may extend the
impoundment period if release of the dog or cat to the owner or a person other than the owner,
appears likely. The office or humane society may dispose of an unclaimed dog or cat by releasing it as
provided under Section 174.13, Wisconsin Statutes, or if the dog or cat is not released, as provided
under Section 174.13, Wisconsin Statutes, by disposing of the dog or cat in the proper and humane
manner.
(6) Every licensed dog or cat over the age of five months on January 1 of any year shall at all times wear a
substantial durable collar to which shall be attached securely the license tag required. No license tag shall be
used on the collar of any dog or cat other than the one for which it is issued. No person shall remove the collar
or tag or both from any dog or cat without the consent of the person to whom the license is issued. If a dog or
cat is retained in a fence, kennel, or pen, it need not have its collar on.
(7) Any dog or cat acquired from the South Wood County Humane Society shall be spayed or neutered according to
the contract policy established by the humane society.
(8) Nuisance; Inhumane Treatment. No person shall keep or harbor or own any dog or cat which by loud or
frequent or habitual barking, meowing, yelping or howling, or by constant threat of attacking and biting shall
cause annoyance to the neighborhood or to people passing upon the street. No person shall refuse to deliver
up to a policeman or authorized South Wood County Humane Society employee a dog or cat when properly
requested to do so under the provisions of this section. No person shall be cruel and/or inhumane to a dog or
cat. Said cruelty and inhumanity consisting of cruelly beating, torturing, mutilating, cruelly killing, and clear
failure to provide food, drink and shelter; and abandoning an old, sick or disabled dog or cat.
25.04 CONTROL OF RABIES AND BITING DOGS OR CATS (MC#505)
(1) (a) Any dog or cat having rabies or suspected of having rabies shall be reported to the police department
or South Wood County Humane Society within 24 hours by any person having a knowledge of the
same. Whenever a dog or cat shall bite any person, notice thereof shall be reported to the police
department within 24 hours giving, if possible, the name and address of the owner of the dog or cat
and the circumstances under which the bite occurred. The police department shall report the incident
to the humane society.
(b) The statutory provisions set forth in Section 95.21 of the Wisconsin Statutes entitled "Rabies Control
Program" and any amendments thereto are hereby incorporated by reference.
25.05 EXEMPTION PERMIT (MC#602)
(1) The City of Wisconsin Rapids shall issue an exemption permit to persons who desire to keep three or more
sterilized dogs or cats. The permit fee shall be $20.00 annually. Each individual dog or cat shall be licensed, in
addition to the permit, per city ordinance. Prior to the issuance of an exemption permit, the city building
inspector, in conjunction with a representative of the South Wood County Humane Society, shall inspect and
approve the premises where the dogs or cats are kept. Conditions to be considered in granting the permit shall
include, but not be limited to:
(a) Unregistered dogs or cats shall be sterilized;
(b) properly groomed and fed;
(c) provided adequate housing;
(d) have received the necessary vaccinations.
(2) Persons owning two or more intact (unsterilized) registered dogs or cats shall be issued an exemption permit.
The number shall not exceed three adult animals of breeding age (six months). The permit fee shall be $35.00
annually. Each individual dog or cat shall be licensed, in addition to the permit, per city ordinance. Prior to the
issuance of an exemption permit, proof of registration must be presented to a representative of the South
Wood County Humane Society. The city building inspector, in conjunction with a representatives of the South
Wood County Humane Society, shall inspect and approve the premises where the dogs and cats are to be kept.
Other inspections may be done on an annual basis, but at least every four years. Conditions to be considered
in granting the permit shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) the dogs or cats be properly groomed and fed
(b) provided adequate housing
(c) have received the necessary vaccinations
9
(d) Failure to comply with any dog or cat ordinance provision may or could cause the exemption permit to
be revoked.
At such time that all registered dogs or cats are sterilized, they will revert to 25.05(1) status.
25.06 COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS (MC#505)
(1) Any person who keeps or operates a commercial animal establishment shall take reasonable care to release
for sale, trade, or adoption only those animals which are free of disease, injuries, or abnormalities. The law
enforcement officer may request an examination by a veterinarian. The following shall deem an animal unfit for
sale or release:
(a) Obvious signs of infectious diseases such as distemper, hepatitis, leptospirosis, rabies, or other
similar disease.
(b) Obvious signs of nutritional deficiencies which may include rickets, emaciation, etc.
(c) Obvious signs of severe parasitism - extreme enough to be influencing general health.
(d) Obvious fractures or congenital abnormalities affecting general health of animals.
(2) All commercial animal establishments shall comply with the following standards:
(a) All animals, birds, or fish shall be displayed in a health condition, or, if ill, removed from display and
shall be given appropriate treatment immediately.
(b) All animals shall be quartered, and the quarters in which the animals are kept shall be maintained in a
clean condition and in a good state of repair.
(c) There shall be sufficient clean, dry bedding to meet the needs of each individual animal. Litter and/or
bedding material shall be changed as often as necessary and there shall be adequate ventilation to
prevent an odor nuisance.
(d) Feces shall be removed from pens and enclosures as often as necessary to prevent unsanitary
conditions and odor nuisance.
(e) All cages and enclosures are to be of a nonporous material for easy cleaning and disinfecting and
shall have secure latches in good repair. Each cage must be of sufficient size that the animal will have
room to stand, turn, and stretch out to its full length.
(f) The floor and walls of any room in which animals are kept shall be covered with impervious, smoother,
cleanable surface. The floors and walls shall be cleaned and disinfected as often as necessary to
prevent an odor nuisance.
(g) The premises shall be kept free of insect and rodent infestations. Food supplies shall be stored in
rodent-proof containers.
(h) Water. There shall be available hot water for washing cages. Fresh drinking water shall be available to
all species at all times. All water containers shall be mounted so the animals cannot easily turn them
over and be removable for cleaning.
(I) Feeding. Food for all animals and birds shall be served in a clean dish so mounted that the animal
cannot readily tip it over or defecate or urinate in same.
(j) All animals must be fed and watered according to the accepted procedures for that species and cages
cleaned every day.
(k) Fish. The water temperature shall be maintained at a temperature that is healthful.
(l) Shade Required. Shade from the direct rays of the sun shall be provided for all animals.
(m) Each bird must have sufficient room to sit on a perch. Perches shall be placed horizontal to each other
in the same cage. Cages must be cleaned every day and cages must be disinfected when birds are
sold. Parrots and other large birds shall have separate cages from smaller birds.
25.07 ENFORCEMENT, INVESTIGATION, AND PENALTY (MC#505)
(1) The City of Wisconsin Rapids may authorize employees of the South Wood County Humane Society to
investigate possible violations of Section 25.03 through 25.06 of this chapter and Section 95.21, Chapter
174, and Chapter 951 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The authorized representative of the South Wood County
Humane Society shall report to the Wisconsin Rapids Police Department any violations. The police department
shall review the reported violations and issue citations or take any other action deemed appropriate to the
circumstances. The police department may also enforce the above referenced ordinances and statutes without
prior investigation by the humane society.
(2) Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this ordinance or rule or regulation adopted or issued in relation
to it shall be, upon conviction or plea of guilty or not contest, be subject to forfeiture of not less than $25.00
and not more than $200.00 and costs of prosecution. The provisions of this ordinance do not apply to a blind
person who uses a dog for assistance when said provisions would prohibit said person from using his dog to
assist him in normal manner.
25.08 CURFEW (MC#820)
10
(1) No person under 17 years of age shall be on, remain in or upon any of the streets, alleys, or public places in
the City of Wisconsin Rapids between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless a person is accompanied
by a parent, guardian, or some person of lawful age having the legal custody of such person, or unless he is
going home from school activities, or unless his employment makes it necessary for him to be upon said
streets, alleys, or public places, in which case this ordinance shall not apply.
(2) Any such minor shall have reasonable time after school activities, church programs, approved organizational
activities, not to exceed one hour after termination of such meeting to be within the definition of the term
"going home".
(3) No minor between the ages of six and under the age of 17 years shall remain in or about any public place,
street, highway, or any establishment between the hours of 7:45 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. during any school day.
(4) The provisions of the daylight curfew do not apply when the minor has written proof from school authorities
excusing him/her from attendance at that particular time or accompanied by a parent or guardian or going to
school or has completed his or her school day.
(5) Any parent or guardian who permits his child or children to violate the provisions of this ordinance shall pay a
forfeiture of:
(a) $25.00, plus costs for the first offense
(b) $50.00 plus costs for the second offense
(c) $100.00 plus costs for any subsequent offense.
(d) Any parent or guardian who fails to pay said forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail
not to exceed five days.
(6) Penalty. Any person under 17 years of age violating any provision of this ordinance or rule or regulation
adopted or issued in relation to it shall be, upon conviction or plea of guilty or no contest, be subject to
forfeiture of not less than $25.00 and not more than $100.00 and costs of prosecution.
25.09 MISDEMEANOR CRIMES
(1) The following enumerated sections of the Wisconsin Statutes excluding all penalty provisions therein in
connection with the herein described offenses are hereby incorporated by reference and any subsequent
amendments thereto, are made a part of this code as if fully set forth herein, to-wit:
(a) 943.01(1) - Damage to Property - Less than $200 in value
(b) 943.13 - Trespass to Land
(c) 943.14 - Trespass to Dwelling
(d) 943.20 - Theft-Less than $100 value
(e) 943.50 - Retail Theft
(f) 943.61 - Theft of Library Materials
(g) 947.01 - Disorderly Conduct
(h) 947.013 - Harassment (MC#544)
(I) 167.32 - Safety at Sporting Events (MC#544)
(j) 943.21 - Fraud on Hotel or Restaurant Keeper (MC#597)
(k) 134.66 - "Restrictions on Sale or Gift of Cigarettes or Tobacco Products"(MC#783)
(l) 938.983 - "Purchase or Possession of Tobacco Products Prohibited" (MC#783)
(2) Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this ordinance, except Section 25.09(1)(k),
shall upon conviction be required to pay a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $400, together with the
costs of the action, and in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment in the county jail for a
period not to exceed 30 days. (MC#744)
(3) Enforcement. This ordinance shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of Section 66.12 of the
Wisconsin Statutes. (MC#744)
(a) Stipulation of guilt or no contest. Stipulation of guilt or no contest may be made by persons arrested
for violations of this ordinance in accordance with Section 66.12(1)(b), Wisconsin State Statutes; and
may be accepted within 10 days of the date of the alleged violation.
(b) Deposits. Any person stipulating guilt or no contest under subsection (1) of this section must make a
deposit of 50 percent of the maximum penalty plus costs for violations of sections (a) through (g).
Deposits may be brought or mailed to the office of the clerk of courts or may be received by the
Wisconsin Rapids Police Department. Any deposit accepted by the police department shall be mailed
or brought to the clerk of courts as soon as possible after receipt thereof. (MC#288)
25.10 NOXIOUS FUMES AND SMOKE
No person or persons, firm or corporation shall cause, permit or allow the escape from any smoke stack, chimney, or
open fire, within the corporate limits of the City of Wisconsin Rapids or within one mile therefrom, into the open air, or
such quantities of smoke, ash, dust, soot, cinders, acid, or other fumes, dirt or other material or noxious gases in such
place or manner as to cause injury, detriment or nuisance to any person or persons or to the public, or in such manner
11
as to cause injury or damage to business or property and such is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the same
is hereby prohibited. If applicable the assistance of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources shall be utilized to
assist the city in monitoring and resolving any emission problem.
25.11 GRAFFITI. (MC#711)
(1) Definitions.
(a) Graffiti is defined as writing, symbols, words, pictures, or markings that are placed on a surface for
which the owner of the surface has not given permission, and approval of the city authorities for
compliance with the municipal sign ordinances.
(b) Graffiti Removal is defined as removing all traces of the graffiti from the surface it was applied.
(c) Graffiti Covering is defined as painting over all traces of the graffiti on the surface it was applied.
(d) Public Property is any property owned or under the direct care and control of a taxing authority.
(e) Private Property is any property not owned by or under the direct care and control of a taxing authority.
(2) Graffiti on public property shall be removed or covered by the affected taxing authority, within 10 working days
of discovery.
(3) (a) Graffiti on private property shall be removed or covered by the property owner within 10 working days
of notification of discovery. Notification by an official of the City of Wisconsin Rapids may be in person
or by certified United States mail, return receipt. This section, and Section 25.11(3)(b) shall not apply
to owner-occupied private residences, which are exempt from this ordinance.
(b) Graffiti on private property not removed or covered by the property owner within the 10 working days
of notification shall have the graffiti removed or covered by the City of Wisconsin Rapids. The cost of
removal or covering shall include labor, transportation, and supplies. Labor shall be at the cost of
municipal employees supervising and performing the work assignment in not less that one-half-hour
increments. The property owner shall be invoiced for the graffiti removal or covering. Failure to pay the
invoice within 30 days shall result in the invoice being added to the property tax roll of the City of
Wisconsin Rapids. The City of Wisconsin Rapids shall remove or cover the graffiti on private property
within 48 hours of the property owners notification and failure to remove or cover the graffiti, except if
the 48 hour time falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, then the removal or covering shall be
completed on the first municipal work day following that Saturday, Sunday, or holiday.
(4) The following enumerated sections of the Wisconsin Statutes and any subsequent amendments thereto, as
said statutes relate to regulations concerning property damage caused by graffiti, are hereby incorporated by
reference as if fully set forth herein, to wit:
(a) Section 895.035 - Parental Liability for Acts of Minor Child
(b) Section 943.012 - Graffiti on Religious and Other Property
(c) Section 943.017 - Graffiti
(5) Municipal or private property owner may have the time elements stated in this ordinance extended upon
proper appeal to the clerk of the City. Under no circumstances should the extension exceed 7 days.
25.12 POSSESSION OF FIREARMS AND WEAPONS (MC#1123)
(1) Firearms Restricted. Notwithstanding Section 25.12 (3) herein, any person who enters or remains in any
building or part of a building that is owned, occupied, or controlled by the City of Wisconsin Rapids, or any of its
departments, authorities, or commissions while carrying a firearm is guilty of trespassing unless:
(a) The person leases residential or business premises therein,
(b) The person is a peace officer, or
(c) The building is not posted in accordance with Wisconsin Statute 943.13(2).
(2) No dealer or other person shall sell, loan or give any pistol or revolver to any minor. It shall be the duty of all
police officers to take from any minor any pistol or revolver found in his or her possession.
(3) (a) Weapons Restricted . No person, except a peace officer, may carry any weapon on public land or
within any buildings or vehicles owned, occupied, or controlled by the City of Wisconsin Rapids, or any
of its departments, authorities, or commissions.
(1) For the purposes of Section 25.12(3), the following terms and phrases are defined below.
(a) “Public land” means land, excluding any building thereon, that is not public right of
way and that is owned, occupied or controlled by the City of Wisconsin Rapids, or any
of its departments, authorities, or commissions.
(b) “Weapon” means a firearm, knife, billy club, electronic weapon, martial arts weapon,
slingshot, bow, or crossbow.
(2) Exceptions. Notwithstanding Section 25.12(3)(a), a person may carry a weapon on public land
if:
(a) The weapon is a firearm, and the person is possessing the firearm is authorized to
possess it pursuant to Wisconsin Statute 175.49.
12
(b) The weapon is a handgun, and the person possessing the handgun is licensed
pursuant to Wisconsin Statute 175.60.
(c) The person is allowed to carry the weapon pursuant to Wisconsin Statute 167.31.
(d) The person carrying the weapon is permitted by law to hunt on the public land and
the weapon is used for hunting.
25.13 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS UNLAWFUL
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or fire any shotgun, rifle, pistol, fowling piece, or firearm of any
description from which shot, ball or balls, bullets or any missile of any kind is or are expelled therefrom by the
force of powder or other combustible matter within the territorial limits of the City of Wisconsin Rapids, except
that this section shall not apply to any officer of the City of Wisconsin Rapids or State of Wisconsin or the
United States while in the performance of his duties in enforcing any ordinance of said city or law of said State
or United States. (142)
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, injure, or destroy any kind of bird, bird nest, or animal, or to throw
stones or shoot or use any implements or means with the intention of killing or injuring any animal or bird, or to
discharge or shoot any airgun or airpistol of any description, or to shoot or discharge any slingshot, bow and
arrow, or other similar device within the City of Wisconsin Rapids without first having obtained a permit
therefore. (MC#46)
(3) A permit for hunting animals or birds or to discharge or shoot a firearm, airgun, pellet gun, slingshot, or bow
and arrow in the City of Wisconsin Rapids may be obtained from the Chief of Police upon showing that the
intended use is in the public interest and under circumstances consistent with the public safety. (MC#46)
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to set and leave open or open any single or double spring trap larger than
#1 " in size, with or without saw teeth or jagged edges at or in any place or position within the territorial limits
of the City of Wisconsin Rapids, where it is possible for any person, domestic animal or fowl to be mashed or
trapped and held in any manner whatsoever in such steel trap. (142-A)
(5) Each of the articles or instruments mentioned in subsections (1), (2), and (4) is hereby declared to be a
dangerous weapon and the use thereof in the manner stated in said sections is declared to be against public
policy and that such use is prohibited under the power of the common council to act for the health, safety and
welfare of the public within the territorial limits of said City of Wisconsin Rapids. (142)
(6) It shall be the duty of any police officer of the City of Wisconsin Rapids to arrest, with or without warrant, any
person found violating any of the provisions of this section, and to seize and confiscate, with or without
warrant, any article or instrument declared herein to be a dangerous weapon which he finds being used in
violation of the provision of this ordinance. Upon such seizure such officer will hold said articles or instruments
until they are ordered destroyed by the court hearing the matter of the violation. (142)
(7) Any air gun, slingshot, bow and arrow, bow gun or any firearm seized by the police department under the terms
of this section may be confiscated and destroyed by the police department in any manner they see fit after the
expiration of one year after the initial seizure of said article, unless an appeal is pending regarding said case; if
an appeal is pending such article shall not be destroyed until the Court has ruled in the matter; and then only if
the finding is in favor of the city, and not until an additional six months elapse from date of such favorable
decision.
25.14 LOITERING - GENERAL AND SCHOOLS
(1) No person shall loiter, loaf or lounge in or about any park, parkway, school ground, or other public ground or
place in the City of Wisconsin Rapids between the hours of 11:00 in the evening and 6:00 the next morning
and no person or persons shall idly lounge, loiter, hang about or loaf or in such manner congregate or
assemble upon any street, sidewalk, corner, bridge or alley or in or about any bus or railroad depot as to
obstruct, hinder or delay public travel or so as to disturb or annoy others.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person, not in official attendance, or on official school business, to enter into,
congregate, loiter, wander, stroll, stand, or play in any school building in the City of Wisconsin Rapids or in or
about any school grounds adjacent thereto, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. official city time, on
official school days) (MC#977)
(3) It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to enter into, use, or congregate, loiter, wander, stroll, stand,
or play in any park and recreational facility in the City of Wisconsin Rapids between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 5:00 a.m. if it is determined by police that such person constitutes a likely threat to the safety or peace of
the public. (MC#665)
25.15 ABANDONED AND DISABLED VEHICLES (MC#725)
(1) No person shall leave unattended any motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer or mobile home on any highway or
private or public property for such circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear to have been
13
abandoned. Whenever any vehicle has been left unattended without permission of the property owner for more
than 48 hours the vehicle is deemed abandoned and constitutes a public nuisance.
(2) Section 342.40 of the Wisconsin Statutes entitled "VEHICLE ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED; REMOVAL,
DISPOSAL" is hereby incorporated by reference.
(3) The open storage or outdoor parking of wrecked or disabled motor vehicles of more than 10 days is prohibited.
For the purposes of this section, the words "wrecked or disabled motor vehicles" is defined as follows: Motor
vehicles in such a state of physical or mechanical ruin as to be incapable of self-propulsion or being operated
upon the public streets and highways. (MC#910)
(4) The police department shall inspect the property for violations of this ordinance. If a violation is observed by
the police, a written notice of the violation shall be served upon the owner or occupant of the property. The
notice shall describe the violation, location, date, and upon whom it was served.
(5) Failure to comply with the ordinance within 10 days of having been served the notice shall be cause for a
citation to be issued to the party named on the notice. The citation shall include the penalty (deposit) amount
and a court date.
(6) Any person violating this ordinance shall pay a forfeiture of $100.00 and in addition shall pay any cost incurred
by the City of Wisconsin Rapids for towing, impounding, or disposal of the vehicle.
(7) The remedies set forth in Sections 25.15(1) through (6) of the Municipal Code shall authorize the removal of a
vehicle after following the procedure set forth therein.
25.16 RESISTING AN OFFICER
No person shall knowingly resist any police officer while engaged in the lawful execution of his duties or counsel, aid,
advise or procure any person to resist any such officer so lawfully engaged. Section 946.41 of the Wisconsin Statutes
and any amendments thereto is hereby incorporated by reference.
25.17 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA (MC#545)
(1) Definitions. In this section, "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products, and materials of any kind that
are used or solely intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body, a
controlled substance in violation of this chapter. "Drug paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to, any of the
following:
(a) Kits used or solely intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any
species of plant that is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.
(b) Kits used or solely intended for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, or preparing controlled substances.
(c) Isomerization devices used or solely intended for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant
that is a controlled substance.
(d) Testing equipment used or solely intended for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength,
effectiveness, or purity of a controlled substance.
(e) Scales and balances used or solely intended for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances.
(f) Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose
used or solely intended for use in cutting controlled substances.
(g) Separation gins and sifters used or solely intended for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in
otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana.
(h) Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used or solely intended for use in
compounding controlled substances.
(I) Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used or solely intended for use in packaging
small quantities of controlled substances.
(j) Containers and other objects used or solely intended for use in storing or concealing controlled
substances.
(k) Objects used or solely intended for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana,
cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
(1) Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes, with or without screens,
permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls
(2) Water pipes
(3) Carburetion tubes and devices
(4) Smoking and carburetion masks
(5) Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as marijuana cigarette, that
has become too small or too short to be held in the hand
(6) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials
14
(7) Chamber pipes
(8) Carburetor pipes
(9) Electric pipes
(10) Air-driven pipes
(11) Chilams
(12) Bongs
(13) Ice pipes or chillers
(2) Exclusions. "Drug paraphernalia" excludes hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects used or intended
for use in parenterally injecting substances into the human body.
(3) Determination. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority shall
consider, in addition to all other legally relevant factors, the following:
(a) Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use.
(b) The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this chapter.
(c) The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
(d) The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
(e) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to
deliver it to persons whom he or she knows intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this
chapter; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this
chapter shall not prevent a finding that the object is solely intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
(f) Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use.
(g) Descriptive materials accompanying the object that explain or depict its use.
(h) Local advertising concerning its use.
(I) The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
(j) Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items
to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
(k) The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community.
(l) Expert testimony concerning its use.
(4) Possession of Drug Paraphernalia. No person may use or possess with the sole intent to use, drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise
introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this chapter. Any person who violates this
section may be fined not more than $1,500.00. Any person who violates this section, who is under 18 years of
age, is subject to disposition under Section 48.344 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(5) Manufacture or Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia. Any person 18 years of age or over who violates Section
25.17(4) of this ordinance by delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under 18 years of age may be fined not
more than $500.00. Any person who violates this section who is under 18 years of age is subject to a
disposition under Section 48.344 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(6) Advertisement of Drug Paraphernalia. No person may place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other
publication any advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to
promote the sale of objects solely intended for use as drug paraphernalia in violation of this chapter. Any
person who violates this section may be fined not more than $500.00.
25.18 NOISE ORDINANCE
(1) Declaration of Findings and Policy.
(a) Whereas excessive noise from light motor vehicles is a serious hazard to the public health and
welfare, safety, and the quality of life; and
(b) Whereas a substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive noise from light
motor vehicles may be substantially abated; and
(c) Whereas the people have a right to and should be ensured an environment free from excessive noise
that may jeopardize their health or welfare or safety or degrade the quality of life
(d) Now, therefore, it is the policy of the City of Wisconsin Rapids to prevent excessive noise which may
jeopardize the health and welfare or safety of its citizens or degrade the quality of life.
(2) Scope. This ordinance shall apply to the control of all noise caused by light motor vehicles and originating
within the limits of the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
(3) Definitions.
(a) Terminology. All terminology used in this ordinance, not defined below, shall be in conformance with
the applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.
(b) A-weighted Sound Level This means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound
level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA.
(c) Noise level. This shall refer to the A-weighted sound level produced by a light motor vehicle.
15
(d) Person. This means any individual, association, partnership or corporation, and includes any officer,
employee, department, agency, or instrumentality of a state or any political subdivision of a state.
(e) Residential Area. This means R-1 and R-2 zoning districts as set forth in the zoning portion of the
Municipal Code.
(f) Sound Level Meter. This means an instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector,
integrator or time averager, output meter, and weighing networks used to measure sound pressure
levels. The instrument shall comply with the standards for Type 1 or Type 2 sound level meters as
specified in American National Standards Institute Standard ANSI S1.4-1971 or its successor.
(g) Sound Pressure Level. This means 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the RMS
sound pressure to the reference pressure of 20 micropascals. The sound pressure level is expressed
in decibels.
(h) Noise. This means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an
adverse psychological or physiological effects on humans.
(i) Light Motor Vehicle. For the purpose of this ordinance a "light motor vehicle" shall mean any
automobile, van, motorcycle, motor driven cycle, motor scooter; or light truck with gross vehicular
weight of less than 8,000 pounds.
(j) Modified Exhaust System. It is an exhaust system in which:
(1) The original noise abatement devices have been physically altered causing them to be less
effective in reducing noise, or
(2) The original noise abatement devices have been either removed or replaced by noise
abatement devices which are not as effective in reducing noise as the original devices, or
(3) Devices have been added to the original noise abatement devices, such that noise levels are
increased.
(4) 80 dBA Noise limit. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause noise levels from the operation of a light motor
vehicle in excess of 80 dBA at any location within the corporate limits of the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
Measurement can be made at any distance greater than or equal to 15 feet from the closest approach to the
vehicle at any suitable site in accordance with procedures outlined in the code of recommended practices on
file with the city clerk.
(5) Excessive Noise. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a light motor vehicle such as to cause excessive
noise levels as a result of a defective or modified exhaust system, or as a result of unnecessary rapid
acceleration, deceleration, revving, or tire squeal, or as the result of the operation of audio devices such as but
not limited to, radios, phonographs, tape players, etc.
(6) Stationary Test. At the request of the operator of the light motor vehicle, the officer can administer a stationary
motor vehicle test as outlined in the Code of Recommended Practices on file with the city clerk. If the officer
cannot administer the test at the time of the request, he will notify the operator when and where the operator
may have his vehicle tested. The stationary motor vehicle noise test can provide information as to the extent of
defectiveness of the exhaust system or as to whether excessive noise levels were caused by improper
operation of the light motor vehicle.
(7) Signaling Devices. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any horn or other audible signaling device on
any motor vehicle except in an emergency or when required by law. Burglar alarms on light motor vehicles shall
only be of the electronic signaling type which transmit a non-audible signal to a receiver which can be carried
by the owner or operator of the vehicle.
(8) Severability. If any provision of this ordinance is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalidated by any
court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of the ordinance shall not be invalidated.
(9) Penalties. Every person convicted of a violation of this ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not less than
$20.00 or more than $200.00.
(10) Stationary Noise
(a) In all zoning districts, noise from a stationary source shall not exceed the following standards for
maximum sound pressure levels measured at the property line.
OCTAVE BAND CENTER
FREQUENCY (Hz)
MAXIMUM SOUND PRESSURE LEVELS
(dB) AT PROPERTY BOUNDARY
31.5
63
125
250
500
1,000
2,000
4,000
72
71
65
57
51
45
39
34
16
8,000 32
"A" Scale Levels (for monitoring purposes) 55 dB(A) in residential zones.
(11) Construction Noise. Construction equipment in any zone may be operated between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m. provided that said equipment does not exceed a maximum sound pressure level of 80 dB(A)
measured at the property line of the location at which said equipment is in use.
(12) Residential Zones. In residential zones, it shall be unlawful for any person to make or engage in any
unreasonably loud and raucous noise, yelling, screaming, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. A noise shall be presumed to be unreasonably loud and raucous, if it is
plainly audible within a residence, which is not the building, structure, or property from which the sound
originates, or from a distance of 50 feet in the case of noise originating on public property or a public right-ofway.
There shall be excepted from this provision any organized sporting events, fairs, carnivals, or similar
activities. The person(s) in violation of this ordinance shall be ordered to reduce the noise to acceptable levels
immediately by the monitoring officer. (MC#625)
(13) Lawnmowers, chain saws, powered garden equipment, electric insect killing/repelling devices, and other
non-construction maintenance equipment shall be operated only during the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. unless within the specified noise levels measured at the property line of the location at which said
equipment is in use.
(14) Enforcement. Enforcement of this ordinance shall be on the basis of complaints filed with the Wisconsin
Rapids Police Department.
(15) In all other zones, the violator shall be given 30 days from written notice of his violation to reduce the sound
pressure levels to acceptable levels.
(16) Exceptions. Operation of emergency equipment shall be exempt from this ordinance. Snowblowers not
operated on a commercial basis shall be exempt from this ordinance when used to gain access to a city street.
(Emergency equipment shall include ambulance, police, fire, snow removal, civil defense sirens, etc.,
necessary for the health, safety, and protection of the citizens of Wisconsin Rapids.)
(17) Appeals. The Common Council may grant an exemption to individuals proving evidence of substantial hardship.
Evidence that reasonable technological attempts have been made to correct the problem shall be considered
grounds for granting an exemption to this ordinance for existing industries. (MC#920)
(18) Failure to comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall be punished by a minimum fine of $20.00, not to
exceed $200.00. Each day the condition exists shall constitute a new offense.
25.19 POSTING ON POLES - PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach, paste or post any hand bill, poster, picture, cartoon or other advertising
matter, or to print, paint or inscribe any advertising matter on any telegraph pole, telephone pole, electric light pole or
lamp post or pole, or on any walk, public or private, or on any dwelling house, store, barn, shop or other building, either
private, municipal or public, or on any fence, bridge, or on any other building or structure, except on a duly licensed
billboard. This section shall not apply to official or public notices given by public authority.
25.20 FIRE ALARM BOXES
It shall by unlawful for any person to give or cause to be given a false alarm with intent to deceive, or to turn the key in
the signal box except in case of fire, or to tamper, meddle or interfere in any manner with said boxes or any part
thereof, or to cut, break, injure or deface or remove any said boxes or any of the wire or supports thereof connected
with any part of the fire alarm telegraph system in the City of Wisconsin Rapids, or to make any connection or
communication therewith so as to interfere with the proper working of said system or with evil intent to injure, break or
destroy any machinery or fixtures connected with said system. No person shall make or cause to be made, or have in
his possession, knowing it to be such, an impression or duplicate of any signal box keys of said fire alarm telegraph
system without the permission of the chief of the fire department of said city. (71)
25.21 ELECTRIC POLES AND APPARATUS, TELEGRAPH AND TELEPHONE POLES
It shall be unlawful for any person to intermeddle, tamper with, injure, break, cut, take down or disarrange any
telegraph, telephone or electric light tower or mast, pole, fire alarm pole or box, or any wire, cord, lamp or other
apparatus or appurtenances used in operating or maintaining any telegraph, telephone, electric light or fire alarm
system, or any lantern or glass used in connection with any such poles, mast or tower, or post any bills or posters of any
kind whatever upon such poles or posts within the limits of the City of Wisconsin Rapids, provided, however, this section
shall not apply to the owners of any such poles or apparatus, or their agents or servants, or to the officers or the
employees of the City of Wisconsin Rapids in pursuance of any ordinance or regulation of said city relating to such
matters. (33)
25.22 DISORDERLY CONDUCT WITH A MOTOR VEHICLE (MC#192)
17
No person shall, within the City of Wisconsin Rapids, on public or private property, by or through the use of a motor
vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile or minibike, under circumstances which tend to cause or provoke a disturbance or
annoy one or more persons, engage in violent, abusive, unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly conduct, including
but not limited to unnecessary or deliberate or intentional: spinning of wheels, squealing of tires, revving of the engine,
blowing the horn(s), causing the engine to backfire, or cause the vehicle, while commencing to move or in motion, to
raise one or more of its wheels off the ground. Such conduct is hereby declared to be both unlawful and nuisance, and
whosoever is a adjudged guilty of such conduct shall forfeit no less than $25.00, nor more than $200.00 and the
person or persons may also be enjoined from engaging in such conduct in the future.
25.23 PEDESTRIAN AND SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS (MC#167)
Pedestrian and school crossing guards are authorized to direct and guide pedestrians and school children and other
traffic at pedestrian and school crossings to which they may be assigned from time to time. No pedestrian or school
crossing guard shall have the power of arrest. Training and supervision shall be under the direction of the Wisconsin
Rapids Police Department.
25.24 HARBOR A RUNAWAY (MC#468)
(1) No person shall knowingly allow, permit, or board any minor child at his/her residence, property, or place of
business, where the person knows, or should have known, the child to be a runaway from his or her parents,
guardian, or legal custodian.
(2) Penalty. Any person who violates this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be required to forfeit not less than
$20.00 nor more than $200.00, together with the costs of the action and in default of payment thereof shall
be subject to imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
25.25 SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLER SKIS, INLINE SKATES AND OTHER PLAY VEHICLES (MC#948)
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates, roller skis, inline skates or
other play vehicles on any public property where signs prohibit it.
(2) Operators or riders of skateboards, roller skates, roller skis, inline skates or play vehicles shall yield the rightof-
way to other pedestrians using city sidewalks, and shall not otherwise endanger or interfere with pedestrian
traffic on those sidewalks.
(3) City Facility for skateboards, aggressive skates and BMX bicycles.
(a) The city has designated a facility at Witter Field for recreational use of skateboards, aggressive skates
and BMX bicycles, in accord with Section 895.52 of Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) The facility in (a) above will be maintained and operated by the city’s park and recreation commission
for recreational purposes. The city may, at its discretion, specify rules or guidelines for its operation.
25.26 TRUANCY (MC#866)
(1) Definitions:
(a) Truant: shall mean a pupil who is absent from school without an acceptable excuse for part or all of
any day on which school is held during a school semester.
(b) Habitual Truant: shall mean a pupil who is absent from school without an acceptable excuse for part
or all of five or more days on which school is held during a school semester.
(c) Dropout: shall mean a child who ceases to attend school, does not attend a public or private school,
technical college, or home-based private education system on a full-time basis, has not graduated
from high school, and does not have an acceptable excuse under Section 118.15(1)(b) to (d) or (3) of
the Wisconsin Statutes, and who is at least 16 years of age but less than 18 years of age.
(d) Acceptable Excuse: shall mean an acceptable excuse as defined in Section 118.15 and Section
118.16(4) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) Any person under the age of 18 years enrolled in school or home-based private education system shall not be
a truant, a habitual truant, or a dropout.
(3) Penalty (Truant). Any person who is deemed to be a truant may be subject to one or more of the following
dispositions by the court(MC#907)
(a) An order for the person to attend school.
(b) A forfeiture of not more than $50.00 plus costs for the first violation, or a forfeiture of not more than
$100 plus costs for any 2nd or subsequent violation committed within 12 months of a previous
violation subject to Section 938.37 and subject to a maximum cumulative forfeiture amount of not
more than $500 for all violations committed during the school semester. All or part of the forfeiture
plus costs may be assessed against the person, the parents or guardian of the person, or both.
(4) Penalty (Habitual Truant). Any person who is deemed to be a habitual truant may be subject to one or more of
the following dispositions by the court:
18
(a) The suspension of the habitual truant's operating privilege for not more than one (1) year. The court
shall immediately take possession of the suspended license and forward it to the Department of
Transportation of the State of Wisconsin, together with a notice stating the reason for and the duration
of the suspension.
(b) An order for the habitual truant to participate in counseling, a suspended work program, or other
community service work as described in Section 938.34(5g) of the Wisconsin Statutes. The costs of
any such counseling, supervised work program, or community service work may be assessed against
the habitual truant, the parents or guardian of the habitual truant, or both.
(c) An order for the habitual truant to remain at home except during the hours in which the habitual truant
is attending religious worship or a school program, including travel time required to get to and from
the school program or place of worship. The order may permit a habitual truant to leave his or her
home if the habitual truant is accompanied by a parent or guardian.
(d) An order for the habitual truant to attend an educational program as described in Section 938.34(7d)
of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(e) An order for the habitual truant to be placed in a teen court program as described in Section
938.342(1g)(f) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(f) An order for the habitual truant to attend school.
(g) A forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00, plus costs, subject to Section 938.37 of
the Wisconsin Statutes. All or part of the forfeiture, plus costs, may be assessed against the habitual
truant, the parents or guardian of the habitual truant, or both.
(h) Any other reasonable condition consistent with this ordinance, including a curfew, restrictions as to
going to or remaining on specified premises and/or restrictions on associating with other children
and/or adults.
(i) An order placing the habitual truant under formal or informal supervision as described in Section
938.34(2) of the Wisconsin Statutes for up to one year.
(j) An order for the habitual truant's parent, guardian, or legal custodian to participate in counseling at
the parent's, guardian's, or legal custodian's own expense, to attend school with the habitual truant, or
both.
(5) Penalty (Dropout). Any person who is deemed to be a dropout may be subject to the court suspending the
person's operating privileges until the person reaches the age of 18. The court shall immediately take
possession of any suspended license and forward it to the Department of Transportation of the State of
Wisconsin, together with a notice stating the reason for and the duration of the suspension.
(6) The court may order a school district to provide to the court a list of all persons who are known to the school
district to be dropouts and who reside within the city limits of Wisconsin Rapids.
(7) Any parent, guardian, or other adult who knowingly allows a child to absent himself or herself from attendance
at school without an acceptable excuse shall be in violation of this section of the ordinance and may be subject
to a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 or more than $100.00 for the first offense, and not less than $50.00
nor more than $300.00 for any subsequent offense within a one-year period.
25.27 RESIDENTIAL PICKETING (MC#564)
(1) Declaration. It is declared that the protection and preservation of the home is the keystone of democratic
government; that the public health and welfare and the good order of the community require that members of
the community enjoy in their homes and dwellings a feeling of well-being, tranquility, and privacy, and when
absent from their homes and dwellings, carry with them the sense of security inherent in the assurance that
they may return to the enjoyment of their homes and dwellings; that the practice of picketing before or about
residences and dwellings causes emotional disturbance and distress to the occupants; obstructs and
interferes with the free use of public sidewalks and public ways of travel; that such practice has as its object
the harassing of such occupants; and without resort to such practice full Opportunity exists, and under the
terms and provisions of this chapter will continue to exist for the exercise of freedom of speech and other
constitutional rights; and that the provisions hereinafter enacted are necessary for the public interest to avoid
the detrimental results herein set forth and are enacted by the Wisconsin Rapids Common Council pursuant to
the provisions of Section 62.11(5) of the Wisconsin Statutes, which statute give powers to the common council
to enact these regulations.
(2) Picketing Residence or Dwelling Unlawful. It is unlawful for any person to engage in picketing before or about
the residence or dwelling of any individual in the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
(3) Penalty for Violations. Any person violating the provisions of this section of the municipal code of the City of
Wisconsin Rapids shall, upon conviction for the first offense, forfeit not less than $25.00 nor more than
$200.00, together with the costs of prosecution.
19
Any person who shall be guilty of violating this section of the municipal code of the City of Wisconsin Rapids,
who has previously been convicted of a violation thereof within one year, shall upon conviction thereof forfeit
not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 for each such offense, together with the costs of prosecution.
25.28 CEMETERY RESTRICTIONS (MC#592)
(1) (a) (1) No person, except authorized personnel, shall be allowed on Forest Hill Cemetery property
from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise. (MC#607)
(2) A copy of a written authorization from the Cemetery Association to be in the cemetery after
hours must be carried on the person(s) to whom the authorization was granted, and posted in
the window of his/her vehicle. (MC#607)
(b) No persons using snowmobiles, skateboards, all-terrain vehicles, or cross country skis shall be allowed
in the cemetery.
(c) No unattended pets shall be allowed on cemetery grounds and the person in control of the pet shall
be responsible for clean up of any feces.
(d) No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed on cemetery grounds.
(e) No hunting shall be allowed on cemetery property.
(f) Minors are not allowed in the cemetery except for the express purpose of visitation of grave sites,
attendance at burials, attendance or participation in cemetery-related ceremonies, and authorized
school, church, or educational projects subject to notification of Forest Hill Association Manager.
(2) Penalty. Every person convicted of a violation of this ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not less than
$25.00 or more than $200.00.
25.29 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED
(1) Public Nuisances Prohibited. No person shall erect, contrive, cause, maintain, or permit to exist any public
nuisance within the City of Wisconsin Rapids. This section shall apply in all instances not enumerated in all
previous sections of this chapter.
(2) Definitions.
(a) Public Nuisance: A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property which shall
continue for such length of time as to:
(1) Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public
(2) In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property
(3) Greatly offend the public morals or decency
(4) Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous
for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of water or other public way or the use
of public property.
(b) Public Nuisances Affecting Health: The following acts, omissions, places conditions and things are
hereby declared to be public health nuisances, but such enumeration shall not be construed to
exclude other health nuisances coming within the definitions of subsection (1) of this section.
(1) All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink.
(2) Carcasses of animals, birds, fish or fowl not intended for human consumption or food which is
not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death.
(3) Accumulation of decayed animal waste or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber,
bedding, packing material, scrap metal or any material whatsoever in which flies, mosquitoes,
disease carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed.
(4) All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can multiply.
(5) The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash, industrial dust or
other atmospheric pollutants within the city limits or within one mile therefrom in such
quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or
cause substantial injury to property in the city.
(c) Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety: The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and
things are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming within the
provisions of subsection (1) of this section.
(1) All signs and billboards, awnings and other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks,
public grounds or places frequented by the public, so situated or constructed as to endanger
the public safety.
(2) All trees, hedges, signs, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons driving
vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when
approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.
(3) All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe,
unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use.
20
(4) All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung less than 15 feet above the
surface thereof.
(5) All loud, discordant and unnecessary noises or vibrations of any kind.
(6) The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl which by frequent or habitual howling, yelping,
barking, crowing or making other noises shall greatly annoy or disturb a neighborhood or any
considerable number of persons within the city.
(7) All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the
same, except as permitted by the ordinances of the city or which, although made in
accordance with such ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable or illegal
length of time after the purpose thereof has been accomplished.
(8) All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused basements freely accessible from
any public street, alley or sidewalk.
(9) All abandoned refrigerators, freezers, or iceboxes from which the doors and other covers have
not been removed or which are not equipped with a device for opening from the inside.
(10) The use of semi-trailers for storage purposes for any goods, materials, supplies, merchandise
or waste materials is hereby prohibited.
(11) Unauthorized parking or driving of vehicles within public parks and athletic fields. (MC#527)
(12) Parking of a vehicle on property designated for a senior citizen center unless as an authorized
user or visitor to the center. (MC#660)
(13) (a) Installation of delivery tubes or mounting apparatuses without the owner or
occupants consent shall constitute a nuisance and will be subject to the provisions
for penalty and abatement listed in this code. (MC#769)
(b) The delivery of papers, advertisers, shoppers, or flyers in such a way that these
publications accumulate (more than one) on the ground, steps, or sidewalk of any
property shall constitute a nuisance and will be subject to the provisions for penalty
and abatement listed in this code. (MC#769)
(14) The placement of objects such as collection or delivery racks on city boulevards without
permission of the traffic engineer or the Public Works Committee shall constitute a nuisance
and will be subject to the provisions for penalty and abatement listed in this code. (MC#769)
(MC#920)
(3) Abatement of Public Nuisances
(a) Inspection of Premises. Whenever complaint is made to the mayor that a public nuisance exists within
the City of Wisconsin Rapids, he shall promptly notify the chief of police, health officer, or building
inspector who shall forthwith inspect or cause to be inspected the premises complained of and shall
make a written report of his findings to the mayor. Whenever practicable, the inspecting officer shall
cause photographs to be made of the premises and shall file the same in the office of the city clerk.
(b) Summary Abatement.
(1) Notice to Owner. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists within
the city and that there is great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace,
morals or decency, the mayor may direct the chief of police to serve notice on the person
causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance or upon the owner or occupant of the
premises where such nuisance is caused, permitted or maintained and to post a copy of said
notice on the premises. Such notice shall direct the person causing, permitting or maintaining
such nuisance or the owner or occupant of the premises to abate or remove such nuisance
within 24 hours and shall state that unless such nuisance is so abated, the city will cause the
same to be abated and will charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be.
(2) Abatement by City. If the nuisance is not abated within the time provided or if the owner,
occupant or person causing the nuisance cannot be found, the health officer, in case of
health nuisances, and the chief of police, in other cases, shall cause the abatement or
removal of such public nuisance.
(c) Abatement by Court Action. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists on
private premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate
danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he shall file a written report of his
findings with the mayor who shall cause an action to abate such nuisance to be commenced in the
name of the city in the Circuit Court of Wood County in accordance with the provisions of Section
146.14 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(d) Other Methods Not Excluded. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as prohibiting the
abatement of public nuisances by the City of Wisconsin Rapids, or its officials in accordance with the
laws of the State of Wisconsin.
21
(4) Cost of Abatement. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this ordinance for the erection, contrivance,
creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the city
shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such cost shall be assessed against
the real estate as a special charge.
(5) Penalty Provisions.
(a) General Penalty. Any person who will violate any provision of this section shall upon conviction of such
violation, be subject to a penalty, which shall be as follows:
(1) First Offense - Penalty. Any person who will violate any provision of this ordinance shall, upon
conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $25 nor more than $100.00, together with the costs
of prosecution and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be
imprisoned in the county jail until said forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90
days.
(2) Second Offense - Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating this section who shall previously
have been convicted of a violation of the same ordinance shall upon conviction thereof, forfeit
not less than $25 nor more than $200 for each such offense, together with the costs of
prosecution and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the
county jail until said forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid, but not to exceed 6 months.
(b) Execution Against Defendant's Property. Whenever any person fails to pay any forfeiture and costs of
prosecution upon the order of the court for violation of this section, the court may, in lieu of ordering
imprisonment of the defendant, or after the defendant has been released from custody issue an
execution against the property of the defendant for said forfeiture and costs.
25.30 JUVENILE DISPOSITIONS/MUNICIPAL COURT (MC#758)
(1) The Municipal Court is authorized to impose alternative juvenile dispositions and sanctions listed in Sections
938.343 and 938.344 of the Wisconsin State Statutes in accordance with the provisions of those statutes for
a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance.
(2) For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance who violates a condition of a disposition order of the
court under Sections 938.343 or 938.344 of the Wisconsin State Statutes, the municipal court is authorized to
impose any of the sanctions listed in Section 938.355(6)(d) of the Wisconsin Statutes in accordance with the
provisions of those statutes.
25.31 POSSESSION/USE OF LASER POINTING DEVICES. (MC#847)
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to focus, point, or shine a laser beam directly or indirectly on another person
or animal in such a manner as to harass, annoy, or injury said person or animal.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess a laser pointing device. A person shall
not be in violation of this section if his possession of a laser pointing device is necessary for his employment,
trade or occupation, and it is necessary for the pointer to be carried on his person.
25.32 EXPLOSIVE AND OTHER MATERIAL CLEANUP (MC#87)
(1) Any person found guilty of placing an explosive, chemical or biological device without a permit and/or violating
Section 943.02 of the Wisconsin Statutes or similar laws, or who falsely reports an explosive, chemical or
biological device shall be charged for any and all costs incurred by the City of Wisconsin Rapids or its
contractors to mediate, remove, mitigate or make safe the device or investigate the report of a device. These
charges shall include all labor, equipment, vehicle and ancillary costs associated with the incident involving an
actual or reported explosive, chemical or biological device.
(2) The invoice for services shall be provided to the person(s) found guilty of such an offense or their legal
guardians/representative(s).
(3) Definitions:
(a) Guilty: Found to have committed or participated in the offense by a court of legal jurisdiction, or a
board/commission of legal jurisdiction, i.e. school board, etc.
(b) Legal Guardian/Representative: Any person(s), firm(s), company(ies) or corporation(s) who has (have)
legal financial responsibility, interest and/or guardianship of the guilty persons(s).
(c) Device: Mechanism, ruse, apparatus, appliance, plan, trick, device or symbol.
25.33 FRAUDULENT TAPPING OF ELECTRIC WIRES OR GAS OR WATER METERS OR PIPES (MC#1016)
(1) No person may, without permission and for the purpose of obtaining electrical current, gas or water with intent
to defraud any vendor of electricity, gas or water, do any of the following:
(a) Connect or cause to be connected by wire or any other device with the wire, cables or conductors of
any such vendor.
22
(b) Connect or disconnect the meters, pipes or conduits of the vendor or in any other manner tamper or
interfere with the meters, pipes or conduits, or connect with the meters, pipes or conduits by pipes,
conduits or other instruments.
(c) Knowingly take, receive, use or convert to such person’s own use, or the use of another, any
electricity, water, or gas which has not been measured or authorized.
(d) Cut, remove or in any manner make ineffective any seal, locking band or lock on an electric, gas or
water meter.
(2) The existence of any of the conditions with reference to meters, pipes, conduits or attachments, described in
this section, is presumptive evidence that the person to whom gas, electricity or water is at the time being
furnished by or through the meters, pipes, conduits or attachments has, with intent to defraud, created or
caused to be created the conditions. The presumption does not apply to any person furnished with gas,
electricity or water for less than 31 days or until there has been at least one meter reading.
(3) Any person violating this section may be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $200 nor more than $500.
Each day that a violation continues is a separate violation.
(4) Any person violating this section will be required to make full restitution to the utility company for the cost of
services obtained in violation of the ordinance, and the cost of any damage to the equipment of a utility
company as a result of the violation.
25.34 DEER AND WATERFOWL FEEDING BAN (MC#1059)
(1) Feeding of Deer Prohibited. No person may feed deer through the placement of any salt, mineral, grain, fruit, or
vegetable material outdoors on any public or private property.
(a) Definition of Deer Feeding. The following acts shall constitute deer feeding:
(1) The placement of salt, mineral, grain, fruit, or vegetable material in an aggregate quantity of
greater than one-half gallon at the height of less than 6 feet off the ground.
(2) The placement of salt, mineral, grain, fruit, or vegetable material in an aggregate quantity of
greater than one-half gallon in a drop feeder, automatic feeder, or similar device regardless of
the height of the grain, fruit, or vegetable material.
(3) Any other method of placing salt, mineral, grain, fruit, or vegetable material out of doors, or
allowing salt, mineral, grain, fruit, or vegetable materials to remain out of doors in a manner
that would encourage consumption by deer.
(4) Any feeder placed 50 feet or more from any deeded residence.
(b) Exception. This section shall not apply to the following situations:
(1) Hunting. The placement of bait for the purpose of hunting deer subject to all other laws,
ordinances, rules, and regulations governing hunting and the discharge of hunting weapons.
(2) Naturally Growing Materials. Naturally growing grain, fruit, or vegetable material, including
gardens.
(3) Bird Feeders. Unmodified commercially purchased bird feeders or their equivalent.
(4) Authorized by the City of Wisconsin Rapids. Deer feeding may be authorized on a temporary
basis by the Common Council for a specific purpose as determined by the Common Council.
(2) Feeding of Waterfowl Prohibited. No person may feed, provide, or give any food or edible item to any waterfowl
in public parks or public property, including streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, or public lands within the City of
Wisconsin Rapids.
(a) Definition of Waterfowl: Any wild bird that frequents the water, or lives about rivers, lakes, ponds, etc.,
including but not limited to ducks, geese, and gulls.
(b) Exception: This Section shall not prohibit the feeding of waterfowl at the Wisconsin Rapids Zoo if there
is an area or areas specifically designated and posted to allow for waterfowl feeding.
25.35 SMOKING REGULATIONS.
Section 101.123, Wisconsin Statutes, is adopted by reference and incorporated as though fully set forth herein.
101.123 Smoking prohibited.
(1) Definitions. In this section:
(ab) "Assisted living facility" means a community-based residential facility, as defined in s. 50.01
(1g), a residential care apartment complex, as defined in s. 50.01 (1d), or an adult family
home, as defined in s. 50.01 (1) (b).
(abm) "Child care center" has the meaning given in s. 49.136 (1) (ad).
(ac) "Correctional facility" means any of the following:
1. A state prison, as defined or named in s. 302.01, except a correctional institution
under s. 301.046 (1) or 301.048 (4) (b) if the institution is the prisoner's place of
residence and no one is employed there to ensure the prisoner’s incarceration.
23
2. A juvenile detention facility, as defined in s. 938.02 (10r), or a juvenile correctional
facility, as defined in s. 938.02 (10p), except a juvenile correctional facility
authorized under s. 938.533 (3) (b), 938.538 (4) (b), or 938.539 (5) if the facility is a
private residence in which the juvenile is placed and no one is employed there to
ensure that the juvenile remains in custody.
3. A jail, as defined in s. 165.85 (2) (bg), a Huber facility under s. 303.09, a work camp
under s. 303.10, a reforestation camp under s. 303.07, or a lockup facility under s.
302.30.
(ae) "Educational facility" means any building used principally for educational purposes in which a
school is located or a course of instruction or training program is offered that has been
approved or licensed by a state agency or board.
(aj) Notwithstanding s. 101.01 (5), "employment" means any trade, occupation, or process of
manufacture or any method of carrying on such trade, occupation, or process of manufacture
in which any person may be engaged.
(ak) "Enclosed place" means a structure or area that has all of the following:
1. A roof.
2. More than 2 substantial walls.
(ar) "Immediate vicinity of the state capitol" means the area directly adjacent to the state capitol
building, as determined by rule of the department of administration. "Immediate vicinity of the
state capitol" does not include any location that is more than six feet from the state capitol
building.
(b) "Inpatient health care facility" means a hospital, as defined in s. 50.33 (2), a county home
established under s. 49.70, a county infirmary established under s. 49.72, a nursing home,
as defined in s. 50.01 (3), a hospice, as defined in s. 50.90 (1), a Wisconsin veterans home
under s. 45.50, or a treatment facility.
(bn) "Lodging establishment" means any of the following:
1. A bed and breakfast establishment, as defined in s. 254.61 (1).
2. A hotel, as defined in s. 254.61 (3).
3. A tourist rooming house, as defined in s. 254.61 (6).
(d) "Person in charge" means the person, or his or her agent, who ultimately controls, governs or
directs the activities aboard a public conveyance or at a location where smoking is prohibited
or regulated under this section.
(dj) Notwithstanding s. 101.01 (11), "place of employment" means any enclosed place that
employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including an office, a work
area, an elevator, an employee lounge, a restroom, a conference room, a meeting room, a
classroom, a hallway, a stairway, a lobby, a common area, a vehicle, or an employee cafeteria.
(dn) "Private club" means a facility used by an organization that limits its membership and is
organized for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic
purpose.
(e) "Public conveyance" means a mass transit vehicle as defined in s. 340.01 (28m), a school
bus as defined in s. 340.01 (56), or any other device by which persons are transported, for
hire, on a highway or by rail, water, air, or guidewire within this state, but does not include
such a device while providing transportation in interstate commerce.
(eg) "Public place" means any enclosed place that is open to the public, regardless of whether a
fee is charged or a place to which the public has lawful access or may be invited.
(f) "Restaurant" means an establishment as defined in s. 254.61 (5).
(g) "Retail establishment" means any store or shop in which retail sales is the principal business
conducted.
(gg) "Retail tobacco store" means a retail establishment that does not have a "Class B" intoxicating
liquor license or a Class "B" fermented malt beverages license and that generates 75 percent
or more of its gross annual income from the retail sale of tobacco products and accessories.
(h) "Smoking" means burning or holding, or inhaling or exhaling smoke from, any of the following
items containing tobacco:
1. A lighted cigar.
2. A lighted cigarette.
3. A lighted pipe.
4. Any other lighted smoking equipment.
(hm) "Sports arena" means any stadium, pavilion, gymnasium, swimming pool, skating rink,
bowling center, or other building where spectator sporting events are held.
24
(i) "State institution" means a mental health institute, as defined in s. 51.01 (12), a center for
the developmentally disabled, as defined in s. 51.01 (3), or a secure mental health facility at
which persons are committed under s. 980.06.
(id) "Substantial wall" means a wall with an opening that may be used to allow air in from the
outside that is less than 25 percent of the wall's surface area.
(im) "Tavern" means an establishment, other than a restaurant, that holds a "Class B" intoxicating
liquor license or Class "B" fermented malt beverages license.
(in) "Tobacco bar" means a tavern that generates 15 percent or more of its annual gross
income from the sale on the tavern premises, other than from a vending machine, of cigars
and tobacco for pipes.
(io) "Tobacco product" means any form of tobacco prepared in a manner suitable for smoking but
not including a cigarette.
(ip) "Treatment facility" means a publicly or privately operated inpatient facility that provides
treatment of alcoholic, drug dependent, mentally ill, or developmentally disabled persons.
(j) "Type 1 juvenile correctional facility" has the meaning given in s. 938.02 (19).
(2) Prohibition against smoking.
(a) Except as provided in sub. (3), no person may smoke in any of the following enclosed places:
1g. The state capitol.
1m. Residence halls or dormitories owned or operated by a college or university.
1r. Child care centers.
2. Educational facilities.
3. Inpatient health care facilities.
4. Theaters.
5m. Correctional facilities.
5t. State institutions.
7. Restaurants.
7m. Taverns.
7r. Private clubs.
8. Retail establishments.
8d. Common areas of multiple-unit residential properties.
8g. Lodging establishments.
8r. State, county, city, village, or town buildings.
9. All enclosed places, other than those listed in subds. 1g. to 8r. that are places of
employment or that are public places.
(d) No person may smoke at any of the following outdoor locations:
1. In the immediate vicinity of the state capitol.
2. Anywhere on the premises of a child care center when children who are receiving
child care services are present.
3. Anywhere on the grounds of a Type 1 juvenile correctional facility.
4. A location that is 25 feet or less from a residence hall or dormitory that is owned or
operated by the Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System.
(e) No person may smoke in any of the following:
1. A sports arena.
2. A bus shelter.
3. A public conveyance.
(2m) Responsibility of persons in charge.
(a) No person in charge may allow any person to smoke in violation of sub. (2) at a location that
is under the control or direction of the person in charge.
(b) A person in charge may not provide matches, ashtrays, or other equipment for smoking at the
location where smoking is prohibited.
(c) A person in charge shall make reasonable efforts to prohibit persons from smoking at a
location where smoking is prohibited by doing all of the following:
1. Posting signs setting forth the prohibition and providing other appropriate notification
and information concerning the prohibition.
2. Refusing to serve a person, if the person is smoking in a restaurant, tavern, or private
club.
3. Asking a person who is smoking to refrain from smoking and, if the person refuses to
do so, asking the person to leave the location.
25
(d) If a person refuses to leave a location after being requested to do so as provided in par. (c)
3., the person in charge shall immediately notify an appropriate law enforcement agency of
the violation.
(e) A person in charge may take measures in addition to those listed in pars. (b) and (c) to
prevent persons from being exposed to others who are smoking or to further ensure
compliance with this section.
(3) Exceptions. The prohibition against smoking in sub.(2) (a) does not apply to the following:
(h) A private residence.
(i) A room used by only one person in an assisted living facility as his or her residence.
(j) A room in an assisted living facility in which 2 or more persons reside if every person who lives
in that room smokes and each of those persons has made a written request to the person in
charge of the assisted living facility to be placed in a room where smoking is allowed.
(l) A retail tobacco store that is in existence on June 3, 2009, and in which only the smoking of
cigars and pipes is allowed.
(m) A tobacco bar that is in existence on June 3, 2009, and in which only the smoking of cigars
and pipes is allowed.
(4m) Local authority. This section does not limit the authority of any county, city, village or town to enact
ordinances or of any school district to adopt policies that, complying with the purpose of this section,
protect the health and comfort of the public. If a county, city, village, or town enacts an ordinance, or if
a school district adopts a policy, regulating or prohibiting outside smoking in certain areas as
authorized under this subsection, the ordinance may apply only to public property under the
jurisdiction of the county, city, village, town, or school district.
Such ordinance shall provide that the person in charge of a restaurant, tavern, private club, or
retail establishment located in an area subject to the ordinance may designate an outside area that is
a reasonable distance from any entrance to the restaurant, tavern, private club, or retail
establishment where customers, employees, or persons associated with the restaurant, tavern, private
club, or retail establishment may smoke. Such ordinance may not define the term "reasonable
distance" or set any specified measured distance as being a "reasonable distance."
(6) Uniform signs. The department shall, by rule, specify uniform dimensions and other characteristics of
the signs required under sub. (2m). These rules may not require the use of signs that are more
expensive than is necessary to accomplish their purpose.
(7) Signs for state agencies. The department shall arrange with the department of administration to have
signs prepared and made available to state agencies for use in state facilities that set forth the
prohibition against smoking.
(8) Penalties.
(a) Any person who violates sub. (2) shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100 nor
more than $250 for each violation.
(d) Except as provided in par. (dm) or (em), any person in charge who violates sub. (2m)(b) to (d)
shall be subject to a forfeiture of $100 for each violation.
(dm) For violations subject to the forfeiture under par. (d), if the person in charge has not
previously received a warning notice for a violation of sub. (2m) (b) to (d), the law enforcement
officer shall issue the person in charge a warning notice and may not issue a citation.
(em) No person in charge may be required under par. (d) to forfeit more than $100 in total for all
violations of sub. (2m) (b) to (d) occurring on a single day.
(9) Injunction. Notwithstanding s. 165.60, state or local officials or any affected party may institute an
action in any court with jurisdiction to enjoin repeated violations of this section.
25.36 NUISANCE ORDINANCE
(a) Chronic Nuisance Premises
Findings. The Wisconsin Rapids Common Council finds that certain premises within the City require and receive
a disproportionate amount of Police Department services and Community Development Department inspection
and zoning services, place an undue and inappropriate burden on City taxpayers, and constitute public
nuisances. Nuisance activity contributes to the general decay of an affected neighborhood and negatively
impacts law-abiding residents in these neighborhoods, as well as the economic values of all properties in the
vicinity of this activity. Often this disproportionate devotion of City resources is due to a property owner’s own
actions or failure of the property owner to accept and exercise sufficient responsibility for and over the actions
of occupants, guests, agents or employees that reside in or frequent the premises. This ordinance is
enacted to encourage property owners to recognize their responsibility to ensure that activities occurring on
their premises conform to the law and do not unduly burden the City’s Police Department and Community
Development Department and to provide a mechanism for the City to take action against property owners who
26
chronically, routinely, actively, consistently, or often fail to ensure their premises do not require a
disproportionate devotion of City resources. This section is not intended to discourage crime victims or a
person in legitimate need of police services from requesting them.
(b) No property owner shall maintain a chronic nuisance premises. Chronic nuisance premises means a premises
that meets any of the following criteria:
(1) Is a premises which has nuisance activity occurring on the premises three times during a
one hundred twenty (120) day period and resulting in enforcement action;
(2) Is a premises which has had one enforcement action resulting from the manufacture or
delivery of controlled substance or related offenses, as defined in Chapter 961 of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
(c) Definitions. The following terms shall be defined as follows in this section.
(1) Chief. The Chief of Police or his or her designee.
(2) Chief Inspector. The Chief Building Inspector or his or her designee.
(3) Chronic Nuisance Abatement Plan. A plan that is required for any owner whose
property has been declared a chronic nuisance premises.
(4) Enforcement Action. An arrest, the issuance of a citation, the issuance of a summons
and complaint, the issuance of a written warning, an order to abate a code violation, or
a notice of violation from the City’s Police Department, the City’s Community
Development Department, or a local or state law enforcement agency.
(5) Nuisance Activity. Any of the following activities, behaviors, or conduct occurring on a
premises:
(A) An act of harassment, as defined in Section 947.013 of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
(B) Disorderly conduct, as defined in Section 947.01 of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
(C) Crimes of violence, as defined in Chapter 940 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(D) Crimes against sexual morality including, but not limited to, lewd and
lascivious behavior and prostitution, as defined in Chapter 944 of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
(E) Obstructing or resisting an officer, as defined in Section 946.41 of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
(F) Damage to property, as defined in Section 943.01 of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
(G) Theft, as defined in Section 943.20 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(H) Receiving stolen property, as defined in Section 943.34 of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
(I) Arson, as defined in Section 943.02 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(J) Possession, manufacture, or delivery of controlled substance or related
offenses, as defined in Chapter 961 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(K) Gambling, as defined in Section 945.02 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(L) Animal violations, as defined in Chapter 25 of the Wisconsin Rapids
Municipal Code.
(M) Trespassing, as defined in Section 943.13 and Section 943.14 of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
(N) Loitering or curfew violations, as defined in Chapter 25 of the Wisconsin
Rapids Municipal Code
(O) Weapons violations, as defined in Chapter 25 of the Wisconsin Rapids
Municipal Code.
(P) Noise violations, as defined in Chapter 25 of the Wisconsin Rapids
Municipal Code.
(Q) Any conspiracy to commit, as defined in Section 939.31 of the Wisconsin
Statutes, or attempt to commit, as defined in Section 939.32 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, any of the activities, behaviors, or conduct
enumerated in subsections 5. (A) through (P) above.
(R) Violations of the Building, Plumbing, and Electrical Codes, as defined in
Chapters 14, 15, and 17, respectively, of the Wisconsin Rapids Municipal
Code.
(S) Violations of the Fire and Safety Code as defined in Chapter 18 of the
Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code.
27
(T) Violations of the International Property Maintenance Code, as defined
in Chapter 36 of the Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code
(U) Public nuisance violations, as defined in Chapter 25 of the Wisconsin
Rapids Municipal Code.
(V) Alcohol violations, as defined in Chapters 22 and 23 of the Wisconsin
Rapids Municipal Code and Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(W) Social host violations as provided in Section 23.7 of the Wisconsin
Rapids Municipal Code.
(X) County or state health code violations.
(Y) Landfill Waste violations as defined in Chapter 7 of the Wisconsin Rapids
Municipal Code.
(6) Nuisance Activity. Does not include activities, behaviors or conduct that result in a call
for assistance made by the owner or occupant requesting law enforcement services
related to any of the following:
(A) Domestic abuse as defined in Section 813.12(1)(am) of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
(B) Sexual assault as described in Sections 940.225, 948.02 and 948.025 of
the Wisconsin Statutes.
(C) Stalking as defined in Section 940.32 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(7) Owner. The owner of the premises and his or her agent.
(8) Premises. An individual dwelling unit; an individual apartment in an apartment building;
a unit in a mobile home park; or an individual business premises and associated
common areas.
(d) Notices and Designation of Chronic Nuisance Premises
(1) Whenever a premises has a second nuisance activity within the previous 120 days that
results in an enforcement action, the owner of the premises shall be notified via first
class mail at the owner’s last known address. The notice shall contain the street address
of the premises and a description of the nuisance activity that has occurred at the
premises. The notice shall also contain a link to the City’s Chronic Nuisance Ordinance,
and shall state that if the premises has three nuisance activities resulting in enforcement
action during a 120 day period, the cost of future enforcement may be assessed as a
special charge against the owner.
(2) Whenever the Chief or Chief Inspector finds that a premises meets the definition of a
chronic nuisance premises, such official shall notify the premises owner in writing that
the premises are declared a chronic nuisance premises. In reaching this determination,
the police shall not count nuisance activities that were reported by the owner of the
premises. In calculating the nuisance activities, the official may count separate
qualifying nuisance activities occurring on the same day (as long as they are distinct in
time) or different days. The notice shall contain the street address or legal description
sufficient to identify the premises, a description of the nuisance activities that have
occurred at the premises, and a statement indicating that the cost of future
enforcement may be assessed as a special charge against the premises, and a notice as
to the appeal rights of the owner. The notice shall further provide a statement that the
owner shall, within 10 days of receipt of the notice, provide the Chief or Chief Inspector
in writing, a course of action that will be taken to abate the nuisance activities, as
provided for in Section (e).
(3) Delivery of Notice. The notices in Section (d)(2) above shall be deemed to be properly
delivered if sent either by certified mail to the property owner's last known address,
or if delivered in person to the property owner. If the property owner cannot be
located, the notice shall be deemed properly delivered if left at the property owner's
usual place of residence in the presence of a competent family member at least 14
years of age, or a competent adult currently residing there and who shall be informed of
the contents of the notice. If a current address cannot be located, it shall be deemed
sufficient if a copy of the notice is sent by certified mail to the last known address of the
owner as identified by the records of the tax roll.
(e) Chronic Nuisance Abatement Plan. If the owner responds to the notice in Sections (d)(2) and (d)(3) within 10
days of the receipt of notice or posting and mailing of the notice with a nuisance abatement proposal for any
premises designated as chronic nuisance premises, the Chief or Chief Inspector or his or her designee may
accept, reject, or work with the owner to modify the proposal in his or her discretion. The designated Chronic
Nuisance abatement proposal shall include steps that shall be undertaken to mitigate chronic nuisances,
28
which may include, but are not limited to, landlord tenant screening, tenant education, tenant eviction
procedures, property maintenance plan, ordinance education, community resource assistance, server/alcohol
licensing education, and other preventative practices to improve the premises. The Chief or Chief Inspector
shall provide written notice to the owner of the acceptance or rejection of the nuisance abatement proposal.
(f) Additional Nuisance Activity. Whenever the Chief or Chief Inspector determines that additional nuisance activity
has occurred at a premises for which notice has been issued pursuant to Section (d), that this nuisance
activity has occurred not less than fifteen days after notice has been issued nor more than one hundred eighty
days after the last enforcement action, and that reasonable efforts have not been made to abate the nuisance
activity, the Chief or Chief Inspector may calculate the cost of police or other staff response and enforcement
for this and any subsequent nuisance activities and cause such charges and administrative costs to be
assessed against the premises as a fee for current service authorized by Wis. Stats. §§ 62.11 and 66.0628
and collected as a special charge which the City may impose as a lien against the real estate upon which the
premises is located. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this section shall authorize charges for calls for
assistance described in Wis. Stats. § 66.0627(7) and collected as a special charge.
(g) Appeal. The owner of any premises determined to be a chronic nuisance premises by the Chief or Chief
Inspector pursuant to Section (d) may appeal the determination, or the rejection of the owner’s abatement
plan submitted under Section (e), to the Common Council within 30 days of the date of notice issued pursuant
to Sections (d), (e) or (f) by providing written notice to the City Clerk, with a copy to the City Attorney and Police
Chief. The Common Council shall set a hearing on such appeal and provide written notice of the hearing to the
owner. The Common Council shall hear any and all evidence it deems relevant and shall affirm or reverse the
determination of the Chief or Chief Inspector. Chapter 68 of the Wisconsin Statutes shall not apply to such an
appeal or hearing. (MC #1223)
25.37 Anti-Bullying (MC # 1254)
(1) Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context
clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
(a) Bullying: "Bullying" is a form of harassment and is defined as an intentional course of conduct which is
reasonably likely to intimidate, emotionally abuse, slander or threaten another person and which
serves no legitimate purpose.
(b) Course of Conduct: "Course of conduct" is defined as a pattern of conduct composed of a series of
acts over a period of time however short, evidencing a continuity of purpose.
(c) Harassment: "Harassment" is defined as any conduct, whether verbal, physical, written, or by means
of any mode of communication, which:
(1) Is prohibited by Wis. Stats., §§ 947.01, 947.012, 947.0125, or 947.013; or
(2) Is any intentional course of conduct which is likely to create an intimidating, hostile or
offensive environment, and which serves no legitimate purpose.
(2) Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any bullying or harassment of a person or induce
another person to engage in such bullying or harassment.
(3) Retaliation Prohibited. No person shall retaliate against any person who reports any conduct which is
prohibited by this Section.
(4) Constitutionally Protected Activity. This Section shall not be construed to apply to any constitutionally protected
activity or speech.
(5) Parental Responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any custodial parent or guardian of any un- emancipated person
under eighteen (18) years of age to allow or permit such person to violate the provisions of Subsections (2)
and (3) above. The fact that prior to the present offense a parent, guardian or custodian was informed in
writing by a law enforcement officer of a separate violation of Subsections (2) and (3) by the same minor
occurring within ninety (90) days prior to the present offense shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that
such parent, guardian or custodian allowed or permitted the present violation.
(6) Any person who shall violate any provision of this Section shall be subject to a forfeiture of $50 plus costs for
the first offense, $100 plus costs for the second offense, and $250 plus costs for subsequent offenses.
SECTION II All ordinances, or parts of ordinances, in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
SECTION III This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication.
1
Chapter 26 Code of Ethics
26.01 Declaration of Policy
26.02 Responsibility of Public Office
26.03 Dedicated Service
26.04 Fair and Equal Treatment
26.05 Conflict of Interest
26.06 Campaign Contributions
26.07 Ethics Board
26.08 Applicability of Code
26.09 Severability
26.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY
It is declared that high moral and ethical standards among city officials and employees are essential to the conduct of
good representative government and that a code of ethics for the guidance of public officers and employees will help
them avoid conflicts with improved standards of public service and will promote and strengthen the confidence of the
residents of this city in their public officers and employees.
26.02 RESPONSIBILITY OF PUBLIC OFFICE
Public officials and employees are agents of public purpose and hold offices for the benefit of the public. They are
bound to uphold the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of this state and carry out impartially the
laws of the nation, state, and municipality and to observe in their official acts the highest standards or morality and to
discharge faithfully the duties of their office regardless of personal considerations, recognizing that the public interest
must be their prime concern. Their conduct in their affairs should be such as to foster respect for all government.
26.03 DEDICATED SERVICE
(1) All officials and employees of the City of Wisconsin Rapids should be loyal to the objectives expressed by the
electorate. Appointed officials and employees should adhere to the rules of work and performance established
as the standard for their positions by the appropriate authority.
(2) Officials and employees should not exceed their authority or breach the law or ask others to do so, and they
should work in full cooperation with other public officials and employees unless prohibited from so doing by law
or conscience or by officially recognizing confidentiality of their work.
(3) This section is not intended in any way to prohibit free and open discussion and expression of opinions on
controversial matters while discussing programs and objectives of the city.
26.04 FAIR AND EQUAL TREATMENT
(1) Use of Public Property. No official or employee shall request or permit the unauthorized use of city-owned
vehicles, equipment, materials, or property for personal convenience or profit.
(2) Obligations to Citizens. No official or employee shall grant any special consideration, treatment, or advantage
to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen.
26.05 CONFLICT OF INTEREST
(1) (a) Financial and Personal Interest Prohibited. No official or employee, whether paid or unpaid shall
engage in any business or transaction in which he or she has a personal, direct or indirect, financial
interest which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties.
(b) Citizens who serve as public officials or public employees retain their rights as citizens to interests of
a personal or economic nature; standards of ethical conduct for public employees and public officials
need to distinguish between those minor and inconsequential conflicts that are unavoidable in a free
society, and those conflicts which are substantial and material.
(2) Definitions.
(a) Financial Interest. Any interest which shall yield directly or indirectly a monetary or other material
benefit to the officer or employee or to any person employing or retaining the services of the office or
employee.
(b) Persons. Any person, corporation, partnership, or joint venture.
(3) Specific Conflicts Enumerated.
2
(a) Incompatible Employment. No official or employee shall engage in or accept private employment or
render service, for private interest, when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper
discharge of his or her official duties or would tend to impair said official or employee's independence
or judgement or action in the performance of his or her official duties, unless otherwise permitted by
law and unless disclosure is made as hereinafter provided.
(b) Disclosure of Privileged Information. No official or employee may use or disclose privileged
information in the course of or by reason of his or her official position or activities in any way that
could result in financial gain for himself or herself or for any other person.
(1) Definitions:
(a) Privileged Information. Information obtained under government authority which has
not become a part of the body of public information.
(c) Gifts and Favors. Discretion and the judgement of a reasonable, prudent person should be exercised
in the acceptance or giving of gifts that may tend to influence such official or employee in the
discharge of his or her duties, or grant in the discharge of his or her duties any improper favor,
service, or thing of value, except campaign contributions.
(4) Contracts with the City. No city officer or employee who in his or her capacity as such officer or employee
participates in the making of a contract in which such officer or employee has a private pecuniary interest,
direct or indirect, or performs in regard to that contract some function requiring the exercise of discretion on
the part of such official or employee, shall enter into any contract with the city unless, within the confines of
Section 946.13 of the Wisconsin Statutes, the contract is awarded through a process of public notice and
competitive bidding.
(5) Disclosure of Interest in Legislation. To the extent know, any member of the common council who has a
financial interest in any proposed legislation before the common council shall disclose on the records of the
common council the nature and extent of such interest, prior to or during the initial discussion on said
legislation. Any other official or employee who has a financial interest in any proposed legislative action of the
common council and who participates in discussion with or gives an official opinion or recommendation to the
common council, shall disclose on the records of the common council the nature and extent of such interest.
26.06 CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS
Campaign contributions shall be reported by all candidates for city office in strict conformity with the provisions of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
26.07 ETHICS BOARD
(1) There is hereby created an ethics board to consist of seven members. The membership of the ethics board
shall consist of five citizens, one city employee, and one alderperson, with one alternate alderperson to be
appointed by the common council. The human resources director shall provide necessary staff assistance to
the board. The city attorney shall furnish the board whatever legal assistance is necessary to carry out its
function. (MC#920)
(2) The members of the ethics board shall be appointed by the common council from a list of the names provided
by the community. The board will be drawn from as broad a base as possible. Terms of office shall be three
years except that when the initial appointments are made, two members shall be appointed for one year, two
for two years, and three for three years.
(3) The ethics board shall elect its own chairman and vice-chairman and shall develop written rules of procedure
which shall be submitted to the common council for approval.
(4) The ethics board may make recommendations with respect to amendments of this code of ethics ordinance.
(a) Duties of the board and power of subpoena. (MC#360)
(1) The board shall adopt guidelines and procedures necessary to carry out the provisions of this
ordinance. The board shall give prompt notice of the contents of such guidelines and
procedures to officers and employees of the City of Wisconsin Rapids affected thereby.
(2) The board shall accept from any person, or make upon its own motion, a verified complaint in
writing which shall state the name of the officer or employee alleged to have committed a
violation of this chapter and which shall set forth the particulars thereof. The board shall
forward within 10 days a copy of the complaint to the officer or employee who is accused. If
no action on the verified complaint is taken by the board within six months, the complaint
shall be void.
(3) Following the receipt of a verified complaint or upon the receipt of other information, whether
or not under oath, that provides a reasonable basis for the belief that a violation of the code
of ethics has been committed or that an investigation of a possible violation is warranted, the
board, may investigate the circumstances concerning the possible violation. Such
investigation shall be initiated by a resolution of the board and shall state the nature and
3
purpose of the investigation and the actions or activities to be investigated. The board, during
such investigation, is authorized to examine the income tax returns under the provisions of
Section 71.11(44) of persons required to file economic interest statements under Section
9.03 of the ordinance. No preliminary investigation of the activities of any officer or employee
may be initiated unless such officer or employee is notified in writing. The notice shall state
the exact nature and purpose of the investigation and a statement of such person's due
process rights. After the preliminary investigation, the ethics board chairperson shall prepare
a staff recommendation to the board for further action.
(4) If after such recommendation and investigation, the board finds that probable cause exists for
believing the allegations of the complaint, it shall conduct a hearing on the matter which shall
be held not more than 30 days after such finding. The board shall give the accused at least
20 days' notice of the hearing date. Such hearings shall be at closed session unless the
accused petitions for a hearing open to the public. The rules of criminal evidence shall apply
to such hearings. All evidence, including certified copies of records and documents which the
board considers, shall be fully offered and made part of the record in the case. Every party
shall be afforded adequate opportunity to rebut or offer countervailing evidence.
(5) During all stages of any investigation or proceeding conducted under this section, the
accused or any person whose activities are under investigation shall be entitled to be
represented by counsel of his own choosing.
(6) The accused or his representative shall have an adequate opportunity to examine all
documents and records to be used at the hearing under Section 26.07(4)(a)(4) at a
reasonable time before the date of the hearing as well as during the hearing, to bring
witnesses, to establish all pertinent facts and circumstances, and to question or refute any
testimony or evidence, including opportunity to confront and cross-examine adverse
witnesses.
(7) After an investigation has been completed, the board shall in written findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon, make a determination of whether or not probable cause exists
concerning any violation of the code of ethics. If the board determines that no probable cause
exists, it shall immediately send written notice of such determination to the accused and to
the party who made the complaint. If the board determines that there is probable cause, that
there has been an intentional violation of the code of ethics, it shall proceed as provided in
Section 26.07(4)(c) of this ordinance after giving written notice of its action to the accused.
(8) The board shall have the same power to compel the attendance of witnesses and to issue
subpoenas and summary processes as is granted to boards and commissions under Section
885.01, Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) Date to Meet. No later than June 1 of each year the board shall report to the mayor and the common
council concerning its actions in the preceding calendar year, including a summary of its
determinations and the current and complete text of all guidelines issued by the board.
(c) Penalties.
(1) Employees. Where the board has determined that there is probable cause that the code of
ethics has been violated by an employee the determination shall be referred to the officer by
whom such employee was appointed, together with copies of any records, reports, and
transcripts, in its possession or other relevant evidence, with a recommendation that such
officer shall take such disciplinary action as in his judgement the facts may warrant, including:
reprimand, suspension, or discharge. If the employee is in a certified bargaining unit,
immediate disciplinary actions shall be made pursuant to the provisions of the labor
agreement applicable to such employee or non-elected officer.
(2) Elected city officers. Where the board has determined that there is probable cause that the
code of ethics has been violated by any elected city official, the determination shall be
reported to the mayor and common council, together with copies of any records, reports, and
transcripts in its possession or other relevant evidence, with a recommendation that the
officer be reprimanded or that such elected officer be removed for cause by the common
council, as provided for under Section 17.12, Wisconsin Statutes.
(3) Appointive Officers. Where the board has determined that there is probable cause that the
code of ethics has been violated by any appointive officers, the determination shall be made
to the mayor and common council, together with copies of any records, reports, and
transcripts in its possession or other relevant evidence, with a recommendation that the
appointive officers be reprimanded, or the board shall recommend that such appointive
officer be suspended or removed for the cause (except officers appointed or elected by the
common council who may be removed by the body at pleasure). Removal of any appointive
4
officer for cause by the common council may be made only by an affirmative vote of threefourths
of the members thereof.
(4) Police and Firemen. When the board has determined there is probable cause that the code
of ethics has been violated by any policeman, or fireman, or the chief of either of the police or
fire department, the determination shall be made to the Police and Fire Commission, with a
request that proceedings be had in accordance with provisions of Section 62.13, Wisconsin
Statutes.
(5) If charges are filed by the board with the common council, such charges shall be referred to
the Finance and Property Committee for a report. If the Finance and Property Committee
recommends a hearing be held on the charges, a summons shall be issued to the officer
reciting the violation or violations and notifying him to appear before the common council
upon a day and place to be fixed by the common council and set forth in a summons, and file
his answer to the charges to stand and abide the order and judgement of the common
council thereon. At least 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing, the summons shall be
served by a process service officer on the accused, as provided in Chapter 801 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, for the service of a summons. The officer may within 10 days from the
service of the summons file with the common council his verified answer to the charges. At
the hearing, evidence in support of the charges shall be presented on behalf of the board of
ethics by the city attorney or a member of his staff. The accused may appear in person to
answer the charges or he may appear by an attorney and shall be entitled to present such
evidence in support of his position as may be relevant, competent, and material to the
charges before the board. Upon completion of the hearing, judgement shall be entered
finding the accused guilty or not guilty of the charges. If found guilty, he may be removed
from office by a vote of three-fourths of the alderpersons entitled to seats on the common
council. (MC#920)
26.08 APPLICABILITY OF CODE
When an official or employee has doubts as to the applicability of the provision of this Code, he or she should apply to
the ethics board for an advisory opinion and will be guided by that opinion when given. The official or employee shall
have the opportunity to present his interpretation of the facts at issue and at the applicable provisions of the code
before such advisory decision is made. This code shall be operative in all instances covered by its provisions except
when superseded by an applicable statutory provision and statutory action is mandatory, or when the application of a
statutory provision is discretionary but determined by the ethics board to be more appropriate or desirable.
26.09 SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this ordinance is invalid or unconstitutional, or if the application of this ordinance to any person or
circumstances is invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or
application of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provision or application.
1
Chapter 27 Parking
27.01 Definitions
27.02 Coins to be Deposited
27.03 Hours of Operation of Meters
27.04 Presumptive Violation
27.05 Violations
27.06 Duty of Police Department
27.07 Displaying Violation Tickets
27.08 Public Works Department to Install Meters
27.09 Collection of Parking Meter Revenue
27.10 Use of Parking Meter Revenue
27.11 Downtown Limited Time Parking
27.12 Parking by Permit
27.13 Parking Regulations
27.14 Handicapped and Physically Disabled Parking Regulations
27.15 Unlawful Removal of Parking Citations
27.16 Removal of Illegally Parked Vehicles
27.17 Penalties for Meter Violations
27.18 Penalties for Parking Violations
27.19 Parking Citations
27.01 DEFINITIONS (AS USED IN THIS SECTION)
(1) Parking Meter: means any mechanical device or meter placed or erected for regulation of parking and
designed to accept coins of the United States Mint in payment for parking privileges, equipped with at
timing device which registers on a visible face or dial the amount of time purchased.
(2) Parking Meter Space: means a space officially designated for vehicular parking indicated by painted
lines or other markings or dividers, adjacent to which a parking meter is installed.
(3) East Side Downtown Area: means that portion of the city on the east side of the Wisconsin River
bounded by and including Maple Street extended from the river to 3rd Street South; 3rd Street South
and North from Maple Street to Jackson and Market Streets; Market Street from Jackson Street to
Baker Street; and Baker Street extended from Market Street to the river.
(4) West Side Downtown Area: means that portion of the city on the west side of the Wisconsin River
bounded by Goggins Street extended from the river to 3rd Avenue South; 3rd Avenue South from
Goggins Street to Johnson Street; Johnson Street from 3rd Avenue South to 4th Avenue South; 4th
Avenue South from Johnson Street to West Grand Avenue; West Grand Avenue from 4th Avenue to
West Jackson Street and 6th Avenue North; 6th Avenue North from West Grand Avenue to McKinley
Street; McKinley Street from 6th Avenue North to 4th Avenue North; 4th Avenue North from McKinley
Street to West Jackson Street; and West Jackson Street to the river.
27.02 COINS TO BE DEPOSITED IN METERS.
No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle in a parking meter space unless the timing mechanism on the
adjacent parking meter has been activated by the deposit of proper coins in accordance with directions
appearing on the meter. Failure to deposit the proper coin to set the timing mechanism in operation when so
required is a violation of this code.
27.03 HOURS OF OPERATION OF METERS
(1) The hours of operation of the parking meters are the following except for legal holidays:
2
(a) 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday
(2) The hours of operation are made exempt when authorized by the Common Council except as stated
below.
(a) Funerals
(b) Construction projects.
(c) On adjacent property when pre-payment for metered spaces has been received at the rate of
$2.50 per meter stall per day.
(d) On- and off-street parking meter stalls at a rate of $1.00 per week per bag to cover the
meters.
(e) Official municipal/county/state business, with an official city business card signed by the
chief of police and displayed on the vehicle.
(f) Conventions and other official business with an official courtesy parking permit displayed on
the vehicle.
(g) Temporary parking permits issued with a prepayment for metered spaces has been received
at the rate of $2.50 per meter stall per day. Temporary parking permits are not valid in onehour
time limit zones.
27.04 PRESUMPTIVE VIOLATION
The fact that the timing device on any parking meter is not in operation and the mechanical indicator
registered "EXPIRED" or "VIOLATION" shall be presumptive evidence that the owner or driver of the vehicle then
parked in the space regulated by such parking meter failed to deposit or cause to be deposited the required
coin or coins.
27.05 VIOLATIONS
It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this ordinance, for any person to:
(1) Cause, allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of, or operated by such person, to be
parked overtime, or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking space or any
parking meter as shown on the meter or to deposit in any parking meter any coin for the purpose of
parking beyond the maximum legal parking time for the particular parking meter zone. The parking
time that any car shall occupy a parking meter zone cannot be further extended by an operator by
further deposits of coins or by allowing a parking ticket to remain on the car and parked vehicles shall
be removed promptly by the operator on the expiration of the parking period as provided for by this
ordinance of the City of Wisconsin Rapids regulating parking.
(2) Permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space adjacent to any parking meter while
said meter is displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already
been parking beyond the period prescribed for such parking space.
(3) To park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking space or in such position that the vehicle
shall not be entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings. When a parking space in
any parking meter zone is parallel with adjacent curb and sidewalk, any vehicle parking in such
parking space shall be parked so that the foremost part of such vehicle shall be along side of and next
to the parking meter. When a parking space in any parking meter zone is diagonal or perpendicular to
the curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked with the foremost part
of such vehicle directed at the next such meter.
There shall be no diagonal or perpendicular parking of trucks, the overall length is more than
18 feet on streets in the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
(4) To deface, injure, tamper with, open, or willfully break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking
meter installed under the provisions of this section.
(5) To deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter, any slug, device, or thing whatsoever other
than the coin or coins of the United States of America.
27.06 DUTY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT
(1) It shall be the duty of the department of police, under the direction of the City Council, to keep account
of all violations of this chapter.
(2) It shall keep an account of an report the number of each parking meter which indicates that the
3
vehicle occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or has been parked in violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter, the date and hour of such violation, to make and to state
license number of such vehicle, and any other facts which are necessary to a thorough understanding
of the circumstances attending such violation.
(3) The officer or meter attendant shall attach to such vehicle a notice stating that it has been parked in
violation of this chapter, and instructing the owner or operator to report to the department of police in
regard to such violation.
27.07 DISPLAYING VIOLATION TICKETS
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a motor vehicle, upon which a parking meter violation has been
placed, from one parking space to another parking space without first removing the parking violation ticket
thereon, or to display on a motor vehicle parking with a parking space a parking meter violation ticket from a
previous period, or to remove a parking meter violation ticket from one vehicle and place it upon another,
different vehicle.
27.08 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT TO INSTALL METERS
The public works department shall procure, install, and maintain parking meters and mark off individual
parking spaces in the parking zones designated in Section 27.01 and 27.02 and in such other zones as may
be hereafter established by the Common Council.
27.09 COLLECTION OF PARKING METER REVENUE
It shall be the duty of the department of police to designate some person(s) to make regular collections of the
money deposited in said parking meters, and deliver the money to the city treasurer, and it shall be the duty of
the city treasurer to count the money and place it in a special fund to be known as the "parking meter fund",
which fund shall be used exclusively for the purposes specified in Section 27.13. Such person(s) making such
collections shall be bonded in the sum of $1,000.00 to insure the faithful performance of his/her/their duties.
27.10 USE OF PARKING METER REVENUE
Parking meter revenues will be used as determined by the Common Council in its yearly budget.
27.11 DOWNTOWN LIMITED TIME PARKING
No person shall park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, for more than two
hours from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., Monday through Friday, in the East Side Downtown Area or West Side Downtown
Area, except in areas designated for permit parking where vehicles displaying proper permits may park for
periods of longer than two hours and except as may otherwise be designated in this chapter.
27.12 PARKING BY PERMIT
Parking by Permit. Persons whose vehicles display an appropriate permit issued by the city engineer
or his designee shall be entitled to park beyond the usual two-hour limit, subject to the restrictions
provided herein, in the following designated places in the East Side Downtown Area and West Side
Downtown Area.
(1) Areas where permit parking is allowed are:
(a) the city-owned parking area lying between 3rd Avenue and 4th Avenue and north of
West Grand Avenue (Dixon Lot, Lot W-2), however the seven parking spaces facing
West Grand Avenue shall be two-hour parking and not permit parking.
(b) the city-owned parking lot at the southwest corner of 3rd Street North and East
Jackson Street from. (Lot E-2)
(c) in the city-owned lot located on the south side of East Jackson Street adjacent to the
north/south alley between Oak Street and East Jackson Street, the 5 spaces in the
southern-most row.
(d) the first ten (10) spaces south of West Grand Avenue on the west side of 1st Avenue
South between West Grand Avenue and Johnson Street.
(e) the west side of 1st Street North between East Jackson Street and Baker Street.
4
(2) The permit will be a yearly permit, issued on an annual basis; however, the City may decide at any
time to cease permit parking at any location, and permittees will be refunded fees on a prorated
basis. The fee shall be $156.00, for space rental, plus a $4.00 charge for the decal, per year.
Subject to earlier termination by the City, the permit will be in effect for one year, beginning
September 1 of each year.
(3) Permit parking as designated above shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
(4) The Department of Public Works shall maintain policies and application materials consistent
with this ordinance which address how spaces are allocated as well as other administrative
matters.
27.13 PARKING REGULATIONS
(1) No Parking.
(a) Parking Prohibited at all Times
(1) Streets beginning with the letter "A":
(a) Airport Avenue, both sides, from 100 feet east of 8th Street South to 100
feet west of 8th Street South (MC#565)
(b) Alton Street, the north side, from 16th Avenue South to 17th Avenue South
(MC#1035)
(c) Apple Street, both sides, from 8th Street South to 100 feet west of 8th
Street South (MC#488)
(d) Apple Street, the south side, from the west line of 6th Street South to 100
feet east of 6th Street South
(e) Avon Street, the north side, from 34 feet west of 5th Street North to 126 feet
east of 5th Street North
(f) Avon Street, the north side, from 120 feet east of Market Street to 184 feet
east of Market Street
(g) Avon Street, the south side, from Market Street to 5th Street North
(2) Streets beginning with the letter "B":
(a) Badger Street, both sides, west end, west of Lincoln Street
(b) Baker Street, both sides, from Market Street to 17th Street North
(MC#1181)
(d) Baker Street, the south side, from Market Street to (MC#1181)
(f) Birch Street, the north side, from 140 feet east of Garfield Street to Lincoln
Street
(g) Birch Street, the south side, from Garfield Street to Lincoln Street
(h) Birch Street, both sides, from 2nd Street South to Garfield Street
(i) Brianwood Avenue, the north side, from Lincoln Street to the west city limits
(MC#589)
(j) Broadway Street, the west side, from Plover Street to 350 feet north
(MC#373)
(k) Brown Street, the south side, from 1140 feet west of 17th Avenue to 1260
feet west of 17th Avenue (MC#940)
(l) Burt Street, from 6th Street South to 120 feet east of 6th Street South
(MC#959)
(3) Streets beginning with the letter "C":
(a) Chase Street, the north side, from 10th Avenue South to 50 feet west of
12th Avenue South
(b) Chase Street, the north side, from 3rd Avenue South to 7th Avenue South
(c) Chase Street, the south side, from 155 feet west of West Riverview
Expressway to 50 feet west of 12th Avenue South
(d) Chestnut Street, both side, from 50 feet east of 12th Street South to 50 feet
west of 12th Street South (MC#611)
(e) Chestnut Street, both sides, from 50 feet north of Hill Street to 50 feet south
5
of Hill Street (MC#998)
(f) Chestnut Street, the north side, from 3rd Street South to Garfield Street
(g) Chestnut Street, the south side, from 8th Street South to 9th Street South
(h) Chestnut Street, the south side, from 180 feet west of 8th Street South to
8th Street South
(i) Chestnut Street, the south side, from 276 feet west of Hill Street south to
345 feet west of Hill Street, which is 20' either side of the driveway into 440
Chestnut Street (MC#1060)
(j) Chestnut Street, from 8th Street South to 162 feet west of 8th Street South
(7parking spaces) until November 1, 2010 (MC#1099)
(k) Clyde Avenue, both sides, from 16th Street South to 50 feet west of 16th
Street South (MC#532)
(4) Streets beginning with the letter "D":
(a) D Street, the cul-de-sac (MC#390)
(b) Dale Street, the north end, in the cul-de-sac (MC#1108)
(c) Daly Avenue, the north side, from 100 feet east of 9th Street South to 10th
Street South
(d) Daly Avenue, the south side, from 9th Street South to 10th Street South
(e) Dewey Street, both sides, from 8th Street South to 50 feet west of 8th Street
South
(f) Dewey Street, the north side, from 3rd Street South to 50 feet east of 3rd
Street South, and from 4th Street to Hill Street (MC#970)
(g) Dewey Street, the south side, from 3rd Street to 430’ east of 4th Street
(MC#757) (MC#1160)
(h) Dewey Street, the south side, from 40' west of Garfield Street to 25' east of
Garfield Street (MC#802)
(i) Dewey Street, the south side, from 8th Street South to 9th Street South
(j) Dewey Street, the south side, from Elm Street to 50 feet west of Elm Street
(k) Dewey Street, the south side, from 126 feet east of 4th Street South to 144
feet east of 4th Street South, which is 9 feet either side of the center of the
entrance into Riverview Hospital. (MC#1060)
(l) Dura Beauty Lane, the south side, from 207 feet east of the centerline of the
eastern-most railroad track to 416 feet east of the centerline of the easternmost
railroad track east of Rainbow Drive
(5) Streets beginning with the letter "E":
(a) 8th Street North, both sides, from Wisconsin Street to Baker Street
(b) 8th Street North, the east side, from Oak Street to Saratoga Street
(c) 8th Street North, the west side, from Baker Street to 20 feet north of Baker
Street (MC#465)
(d) 11th Avenue North, the east side, from 70' south of Fremont Street to 85'
feet south of Fremont Street (MC#944)
(e) East G Street, the south side, between 8th Street South and 350 feet west
of 8th Street South, including the cul-de-sac at the end of the street
(MC#956)
(f) East Grand Avenue, both sides, from 50 feet east of 3rd Street to the Grand
Avenue Bridge
(g) East Grand Avenue, the north side, from 50 feet west of Garfield Street to
100 feet east of Garfield Street(MC#1263)
(h) East Grand Avenue, the north side, from 6th Street South to 9th Street
South(MC#1263)
(i) East Grand Avenue, the north side, from East Jackson Street to 150 feet
east(MC#1263)
(j) Elm Street, the east side, from Birch Street to Maple Street
(k) Elm Street, the west side, from Sherman Street to Dewey Street
6
(6) Streets beginning with the letter "F":
(a) 1st Avenue South, the east side, from Johnson Street to 3rd Avenue South
(b) 1st Avenue South, from 2nd Avenue South to 3rd Avenue South (MC#893)
(c) 1st Avenue South, the west side, from Goggins Street to 100 feet south of
Goggins Street
(d) 1st Avenue South, the west side, from Goggins Street to 3rd Avenue South
(MC#897)
(e) 1st Street North, the east side, from 25 feet south of Plover Street to Plover
Street (MC#741)
(f) 1st Street North, both sides, between Baker Street and Drake Street
(MC#1225)
(g) 1st Street North, the east side, from LaVigne Street to Spring Street
(h) 1st Street North, the east side, from East Jackson to Market Street
(MC#419)
(i) 1st Street South, both sides, from East Riverview Expressway to 50 feet
south of Daly Avenue
(j) 1st Street South, the west side, from Pepper Avenue to 300 feet south of
Clyde Avenue (MC#938)
(k) 4th Avenue North, both sides, from 20 feet south of southern-most railroad
track north of Grant Street to Bonow Avenue
(l) 4th Avenue North, the east side, from West Grand Avenue to 271 feet north
of West Grand Avenue
(m) 4th Avenue South, the west side, from Johnson Street to 87 feet north of
Johnson Street
(n) 4th Street, the east side, from 50 feet south of Birch Street to East Grand
Avenue (MC#1184)
(o) 4th Street South, the west side, from Birch Street to Dewey Street
(MC#1066)
(p) 5th Avenue North, the east side, from High Street to 175 feet north of High
Street (MC#510)
(q) 5th Street North, the west sides, from Avon to Baker Street (MC#398)
(r) 5th Street North, the west side, from 140 feet north of Avon Street to Avon
Street
(s) 5th Street South, the east side, from Dewey Street to Chestnut Street
(t) 5th Street North, the cul-de-sac adjacent to East Jackson Street, south of
Saratoga Street (MC#850)
(u) 14th Street North, the west side, from 55 feet north of Wylie Street to 117
feet north of Wylie Street
(v) Fremont Street, the north side, from 9th Avenue North to 10th Avenue North
(w) Fremont Street, the south side, from S.T.H. 34 right-of-way to 4th Avenue
North (MC#850)
(x) 1st Street North, east side, between Spring Street and north corporate limits
(MC#1225)
(y) 1st Street North, west side, between Riverview Drive and north corporate
limits (MC#1225)
(7) Streets beginning with the letter "G":
(a) Gardner Street, both sides, from 3rd Avenue South to 8th Avenue South
(b) Garfield Street, the east side, from East Grand Avenue to Witter Street
(MC#1096) (MC#1206)
(c) Gaynor Avenue, the south side, from 17th Avenue South to 25th Avenue
South, except from the former railroad right-of-way to 400 feet west of 17th
Avenue South. (MC#1181) (MC#1187) (MC#1206)
(d) Goggins Street, the south side, from 8th to 10th Avenue South (MC#326)
(e) Grape Street, the north side, from 8th Street South to 9th Street South
7
(f) Grove Avenue, both sides, from Lincoln Street to 65 feet west of Lincoln
Street (MC#771)
(g) Grove Avenue, the north side, from a point 320 feet west of Lincoln Street to
a point 420 feet west of Lincoln Street. (MC1206)
(8) Streets beginning with the letter "H":
(a) Hale Street, the north side, from West Riverview Expressway to 175 feet east
of West Riverview Expressway
(b) Hale Street, the south side, from West Riverview Expressway to 100 feet
east of West Riverview Expressway
(c) High Street, both sides, from 4th Avenue North to 7th Avenue North
(MC#673)
(d) Hill Street, both sides, from 50 feet east of Chestnut Street to 50 feet west
of Chestnut Street (MC#998)
(e) Huntington Avenue, both sides, from 16th Street South to 50 feet west of
16th Street South (MC#490)
(f) Huntington Avenue, the south side, from 10th Street South to 50 feet east of
10th Street South (MC#632)
(g) Huntington Avenue, the north side, from 66 feet west of 12th Street South
to 257 feet west of 12th Street South) (MC#1066)
(h) Hill Street, the east side, from Spruce Street to Dewey Street (MC#650)
(i) Hill Street, the west side, from Mead Street to Garfield Street
(9) Streets beginning with the letter "I":
(10) Streets beginning with the letter "J":
(a) Johnson Street, the north side, from 3rd Avenue South to 4th Avenue South
(b) Johnson Street, the south side, from 4th Avenue South to 61 41 feet east of
4th Avenue South (MC#1109)
(c) Johnson Street, the south side, from 3rd Avenue South to 53 feet west of 3rd
Avenue South
(11) Streets beginning with the letter "K":
(a) Kuhn Avenue, both sides, from 8th Street South to 420 feet east of 8th
Street South (MC#902)
(12) Streets beginning with the letter "L":
(a) LaVigne Street, the south side, from 2nd Street North to 3rd Street North
(b) Lee Street, the south side, from 7th Street South extended to 8th Street
South (MC#384)
(c) Lincoln Street, the east side, from Chestnut Street to 150 feet north of Witter
Street
(d) Lincoln Street, the west side, from D Street to Chestnut Street
(e) Lincoln Street, both sides, from Dewey Street to 200 feet south of Daly
Avenue
(f) Lincoln Street, the west side, from four feet north of the driveway at 1960
Lincoln Street to 115 feet south
(g) Lincoln Street, both sides, from East Grand Avenue to the Peach Street-Birch
Street intersection
(h) Lincoln Street, the east side, from Peach Street to 100 feet south of Peach
Street
(i) Lincoln Street, the west side, from 72 feet south of Witter Street to 200 feet
north of Witter Street (MC#606)
(j) Lincoln Street, both sides, from Grove Avenue to 65 feet north of Grove
Avenue (MC#771)
(k) Locust Street, both sides, from 2nd Street South to 3rd Street South
(l) Locust Street, the south side, from 3rd Street South to 4th Street South
(13) Streets beginning with the letter "M":
(a) Maple Manor Drive, the south side, from Lincoln Street to 100 feet west of
8
8th Street South (MC#438)
(b) Maple Street, the north side, from 2nd Street South to 3rd Street South
(c) Maple Street, the south side, from 2nd Street South to Garfield Street
(d) Market Street, the west side, from Jackson Street to Baker Street
(e) McKinley Street, the south side, from 4th Avenue North to 50 feet west of
4th Avenue North
(f) Mead Circle, the east side (MC#601)
(g) Mead Street, the north side, from Hill Street to Garfield Street
(h) Miller Avenue, the south side, from Lincoln Street to 5th Street South
(MC#598)
(14) Streets beginning with the letter "N":
(a) 9th Avenue North, the east side, 87 feet south of McKinley Street to 173
feet south of McKinley Street (MC#348)
(b) 9th Street South, the east side, from Grove Avenue to 190 feet north of
Sweat Avenue (MC#896)
(c) North Strawberry Lane cul-de-sac
(15) Streets beginning with the letter "O":
(a) Oak Street, the north side, from Jackson Street to 6th Street
(b) Oak Street, the south side, from Jackson Street to 7th Street
(c) Oak Street, the south side, from 2nd Street to 3rd Street
(d) Oak Street, the north side, from 3rd Street to 4th Street (MC#1184)
(16) Streets beginning with the letter "P":
(a) Peach Street, both sides, from 6th Street South to 7th Street South
(b) Peach Street, the south side, from Lincoln Street to 66 feet east of Lincoln
Street (MC#419)
(c) Pepper Avenue, both sides, from 8th Street South to 200 feet east of 8th
Street South (MC#705)
(d) Pepper Avenue, the south side, from 8th Street South to 110 feet west of
8th Street South
(e) Pepper Avenue, the south side, from 16th Street South to 100 feet west of
16th Street South (MC#398)
(f) Pepper Avenue, the north side, from 7th Street South to 8th Street South
(g) Pepper Avenue, the south side, from 50 feet west of 14th Street South to 50
feet east of 14th Street South (MC#771)
(h) Pine Street, both sides, from 2nd Street South to 3rd Street South (MC#1066)
(i) Plover Street, the south side, from 2nd Street North to Broadway Street
(j) Prospect Street, the south side, from 8th Street North to 150 50 feet east of
8th Street North (MC#1111)
(k) Prospect Street, the north side, from 39 feet west of 11th Street North to 53
feet west of 11th Street North (MC#938)
(17) Streets beginning with the letter "Q":
(18) Streets beginning with the letter "R":
(a) Ruby Avenue, the north side, from 8th Street South to 50 feet west of 8th
Street South (MC#589)
(19) Streets beginning with the letter "S":
(a) 2nd Avenue South, both sides, from 1st Avenue South to 10th Avenue South
(b) 2nd Avenue South, both sides, from May Street to Moyer Street (MC#326)
(c) 2nd Avenue South, both sides, from 1,000 feet south of Park Street to 200
feet north of West Riverview Expressway (MC#870)
(d) 2nd Avenue South, the east side, from 200 feet north of Gaynor Avenue to
350 feet south of Gaynor Avenue
(e) 2nd Avenue South, the west side, from 200 feet north of Gaynor Avenue to
1,000 feet south of Gaynor Avenue
(f) 2nd Street North, the west side, from LaVigne Street to the Green Bay and
9
Western Railroad property
(g) 2nd Street North, the west side, from Oak Street to 227 feet north of
Jackson Street
(h) 2nd Street South, the east side, from East Grand Avenue to 50 feet south of
East Grand Avenue(MC#1263)
(i) 6th Avenue North, both sides, from West Grand Avenue to 130 feet north of
West Grand Avenue (MC#551)
(j) 6th Street cul-de-sac off of Oak Street (MC#479)
(k) 6th Street South, the east side, from East Grand Avenue to Apple
Street(MC#1263)
(l) 6th Street South, the east side, from Dewey Street to 40 feet north of Dewey
Street
(m) 7th Avenue South, the east side, from Goggins Street to Hale Street
(MC#436)
(n) 7th Street North, the west side, from Saratoga Street 200 feet north of
Baker Street (MC#479)
(o) 7th Street South, the east side, from East Grand Avenue to Oak Street
(MC#342)
(p) 7th Street South, the east side from Pepper Avenue to 100 feet south of
Pepper Avenue (MC#1140)
(q) 7th Street South, the east side, from Daly Avenue to Pepper Avenue
(MC#1137)
(s) 16th Avenue North, from West Grand Avenue to 50 feet north of West Grand
Avenue (MC#419)
(t) 16th Street South, both sides, from 100 feet north of Chestnut Street to 100
feet south of Chestnut Street
(u) 16th Street South, both sides, from 350 feet north of East Riverview
Expressway to 300 feet south of East Riverview Expressway
(v) 16th Street South, east side, from 300 feet south of East Riverview
Expressway to 336 feet north of Pepper Avenue except from 650 feet south
of East Riverview Expressway to 995 feet south of East Riverview Expressway
(MC#930)
(w) 16th Street South, both sides, from Wisconsin Street to Baker Street
(x) 16th Street South, the east side, from 140 feet north of Peach Street to 340
feet north of Peach Street
(y) 16th Street South, the west side, from 50 feet north of Huntington Avenue to
50 feet south of Huntington Avenue (MC#490)
(z) 16th Street South, the west side, from 50 feet north of Clyde Avenue to
Clyde Avenue (MC#1013)
(aa) 17th Avenue, the east side, from 150 feet south of West Grand Avenue to
50 feet north of West Grand Avenue
(ab) 17th Avenue, the west side, from 150 feet south of West Grand Avenue to
100 feet north of West Grand Avenue
(ac) Sherman Street, the south side, from 4th Street to Garfield Street (MC#953)
(ad) Spencer Street, the north side, between 17th Avenue South and 100 feet
west of 17th Avenue South (MC#817) (MC#953)
(ae) Strawberry Lane, the north end and the south end, in the cul-de-sac
(MC#1108)
(pa) 7th Street South, the west side from Apple Street to East Grand Avenue
(MC#1263)
(20) Streets beginning with the letter "T":
(a) 3rd Avenue North, the west side, from 100 feet south of West Jackson
Street to 375 feet north of West Jackson Street
(b) 3rd Avenue South, both sides, from south-bound 8th Avenue South to 1st
10
Avenue South
(c) 3rd Avenue South, both sides, from 100 feet north of Johnson Street to 150
north of Chase Street (MC#436)
(d) 3rd Avenue South, the east side, from Johnson Street to 77 feet north of
Johnson Street
(e) 3rd Avenue South, the west side, from 240 feet south of May Street to 310
feet south of May Street (MC#844)
(f) 3rd Street North, the west side, from LaVigne Street to 89 feet south of
LaVigne Street
(g) 3rd Street North, both sides, from Oak Street to East Riverview Expressway
(h) 10th Avenue, the west side, from West Grand Avenue to 148 feet north of
West Grand Avenue (MC#344)
(I) 10th Avenue, the east side, from West Grand Avenue to 50 feet north of
West Grand Avenue (MC#861)
(j) 12th Avenue North, both sides, north end of the street to the cul-de-sac
(k) 12th Street South, the west side, from East Grand Avenue to 100 feet south
of East Grand Avenue (MC#998)
(l) 12th Street South, the east side, from 50 feet north of Chestnut Street to
120 feet south of Chestnut Street (MC#919)
(m) 12th Street South, the west side, from 21 feet south of Chestnut Street to
71 feet north of Chestnut Street (MC#930)
(n) 12th Street South, the east side, from 64 feet north of East Riverview
Expressway to 240 feet south of East Riverview Expressway
(o) 12th Street South, the west side, from 150 feet north of the East Riverview
Expressway to 240 feet south of East Riverview Expressway
(p) 20th Avenue South, the west side, 84 feet south of Clark Street to 114 feet
south of Clark Street (MC#347)
(q) 23rd Avenue South, the west side, from 43 feet south of Wickham Avenue to
83 feet south of Wickham Avenue (MC#921)
(r) 24th Street South, the west side, from 140’ south of Oak Street to 160’
south of Oak Street (MC#932)
(s) 25th Avenue North, both sides, from West Grand Avenue to the CN railroad
tracks (MC#937)
(t) 26th Street North, the west side, from STH 54 (Plover Road) to 100 feet
south of STH 54 (Plover Road) (MC#961)
(u) 26th Street North, the east side, from STH 54 (Plover Road) to 250 feet south
of STH 54 (Plover Road) (MC#961)
(v) 29th Avenue South, both sides, from 100 feet north to 100 feet south of
Pioneer Road (MC#773)
(w) 29th Street North right-of-way, between Norton Street and Amundson Street
(MC#457)
(x) Two Mile Avenue, the north side, from 7th Street South to 100 feet east of
8th Street South (MC#584)
(y) Two Mile Avenue, the north side, from Cliff Street to Murwin Circle (MC#855)
(z) Two Mile Avenue, the south side, from 100 feet east of 8th Street South to
the east side of the westerly city limits on the city's east side (MC#565)
(aa) Two Mile Avenue, the north side, from 720 feet west of 8th Street South to
630 feet west of 8th Street South. (MC#1209)
(21) Streets beginning with the letter "U":
(22) Streets beginning with the letter "V":
(23) Streets beginning with the letter "W":
(a) Walnut Street, the north side, from 2nd Street South to Garfield Street
(b) Washington Street, the south side, from 334 feet west of 32nd Street North
to 386 feet west of 32nd Street North (MC#599)
11
(c) Washington Street, the south side, from 559 feet west of 32nd Street North
to 644 feet west of 32nd Street North (MC#601)
(d) Washington Street, the south side, from 1008 feet west of 32nd Street to
1075 feet west of 32nd Street North (MC#601)
(e) Webb Avenue, the cul-de-sac (MC#450)
(f) West Grand Avenue, the north side, from 2nd Avenue to the Grand Avenue
Bridge
(g) West Grand Avenue, both sides, from 2nd Avenue South to 50 feet west of
2nd Avenue South (MC#916)
(h) Wisconsin Street, both sides, from 5th Street North to 100 feet east of 5th
Street North
(i) Witter Street, the north side, from Lincoln Street to 50 feet west of Lincoln
Street (MC#1064)
(j) Witter Street, both sides, from Mead Street to Lincoln Street (MC#1066)
(k) Witter Street, the south side, from 2nd Street South to 3rd Street South
(l) Witter Street, the north side, from 3rd Street South to 50' west (MC#1068)
(m) Wood Avenue, the north side, between Sampson Street and Cliff Street
(MC#995)
(24) Streets beginning with the letter "X":
(25) Streets beginning with the letter "Y":
(26) Streets beginning with the letter "Z":
(27) All Alleys.
(b) Parking, Stopping, or Standing Prohibited. No person shall park, stop, or leave standing, any
vehicle for any purpose upon the following streets, or parts of street at any time:
(1) 2nd Avenue South, both sides, from Hurley Street to Seneca Road (MC#349)
(2) 4th Avenue North (State Highway 34), both sides, from Bonow Avenue to the north
city limits
(3) 4th Avenue North, both sides, from West Jackson Street to Fremont Street
(4) 4th Avenue South, the east side, from Johnson Street to West Grand Avenue
(5) 6th Street South, the east side, from Peach Street to Apple Street, between
6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on school days. “School days” is defined as
September 1 to June 15. (MC #1142)
(6) 7th Street North west side, from 200 feet north of Baker Street to Drake Street
(MC#547)
(7) 8th Street South, both sides, from Oak Street to the south city limits
(8) 11th Street North, the east side, from Oak Street to Prospect Street (MC#764)
(9) Alley located between 16th Avenue North and 15th Avenue North, north of West
Grand Avenue and south of High Street, from 96 feet east of 16th Avenue North to
154 feet west of 15th Avenue North (MC#796)
(10) Alton Street, the south side, from 17th Avenue South to 130’ east of 17th Avenue
South, on school days, from 7:30 AM to 4:30 PM. (MC#1053)
(11) Alton Street, the south side, from 130’ east of 17th Avenue South to 220’ east of 17th
Avenue South, on school days from 9:00 AM to 4:30 PM (mc#1053)
(12) Alton Street, the south side, from 220’ east of 17th Avenue South to 30’ east of 16th
Avenue South. (MC#1053)
(13) Alton Street, the south side, from 30’ east of 16th Avenue South to 50’ east of 16th
Avenue South, on school days, from 9:00 AM to 4:30 PM. (MC #1053)
(14) Baker Drive, both sides, from 17th Street North to Washington Street
(15) East Grand Avenue, the south side, from Lincoln Street to 160 feet east of 6th Street
South(MC#1263)
(a) East Grand Avenue, the south side, from 7th Street South to 9th Street South
(MC#1263)
(16) East Jackson Street, both sides, from the Jackson Street Bridge to East Grand Avenue
(17) Grand Avenue Bridge, both sides, entire length of the bridge
12
(18) Oak Street, the south side, the 700 block (MC#364)
(19) Oak Street, both sides, from 50 feet east of 11th Street to 50’ wets of 11th Street
(MC#913)
(20) Peach Street, from S.T.H. 54 (East Riverview Expressway) to 32nd Street South
(MC#852)
(21) Riverview Expressway, both sides, and including the entire length of the bridge
(22) West Grand Avenue, both sides, from 4th Avenue to the west city limits
(23) West Grand Avenue, the south side, from 3rd Avenue South to 130 feet west of 3rd
Avenue South
(24) West Jackson Street, both sides, from West Grand Avenue through the entire length
of the Jackson Street Bridge
(c) Parking Prohibited During Certain Periods. No person shall park or leave standing, any vehicle
upon any of the following streets or parts of streets at the time indicated, except temporarily
for the purpose of and while actually engaging in receiving or discharging passengers:
(1) 3rd Street North, the west side, from Plover Street to 89 feet south of LaVigne Street,
except Sundays and holidays
(2) 6th Street South, the east side, from Dewey Street to Dale Street, from 3:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m. (MC#1024)
(3) 6th Street South, the west side, from Peach Street to Apple Street, between 6:40 a.m.
and 7:30 a.m. and 2:15 p.m. to 3:00 p.m. on school days, with 5 minutes for loading
and unloading. “School days” is defined at September 1 to June 15 (MC#1142)
(4) 7th Street South, the west side, from Peach Street to Apple Street, from 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
(5) 8th Street North, the west side, from 200 feet north of Oak Street to Saratoga Street,
from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on school days.
(6) 10th Avenue North, the east side, Fremont Street north to the railroad tracks,
Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
(7) 10th Avenue North, the west side, Butler Street north to the railroad tracks, Monday
through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
(8) 12th Street South, the west side, from Chestnut Street to East G Street, from 7:30
a.m. to 4:30 p.m., on school days (MC#730)
(9) 14th Avenue South, the west side, between Alton Street and Chase Street, from May 1
to September 1 except Sunday between 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon (MC#1021)
(10) 16th Street South, the west side, from 300 feet south of East Riverview Expressway
to Clyde Avenue, between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., on school days (MC#844)
(11) 17th Avenue, the west side, from Alton Street to Essex Street, from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m., on school days (MC#677)
(12) Alton Street, the south side, from 17th Avenue South to 50 feet east of 16th Avenue
South, from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on school days.
(13) Clyde Avenue, the south side, from a point 250 feet west of Lincoln Street to a point
350 feet west of Lincoln Street.
(14) Cindy Court, Michael Court to the cul-de-sac, between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on
school days (MC#878)
(15) East G Street, the south side, from 9th Street South to 135 feet west, between 8:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#352)
(16) Essex Street, the north side, from 17th Avenue South to 75 feet west of 17th Avenue
South, between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., on school days (MC#937)
(17) Fremont Street, the south side, from 10th Avenue North to 11th Avenue North,
between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., on school days
(18) James Court, both sides, from the south cul-de-sac to the north cul-de-sac, between
7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., on school days (MC#881)
(19) Lincoln Street, the east side, between 2021 Lincoln Street and 2011 Lincoln Street,
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(20) Lincoln Street, the west side, from Birch Street to 135 feet South of Birch Street,
13
7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., on school days (MC#354)
(21) Maple Street, the north side, from 3rd Street South to 4th Street South, from 7:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m. (MC#432)
(22) Michael Drive, from 16th Street South to Michael Drive, from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.,
on school days (MC#878)
(23) Oak Street, the north sides, from 8th Street to 80 feet east of 8th Street, between
7:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. (MC#382)
(24) Oak Street, the south side, from 8th Street to 145 feet east of 8th Street, between
7:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. (MC#382)
(25) Pepper Avenue, the north side, from 15th Street South to 16th Street South, between
7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., on school days (MC#398)
(d) No Parking Except Authorized Vehicles. Except as herein permitted, no person shall park,
stop, or leave standing, any vehicle, in the following places unless authorized by permit issued
by the City of Wisconsin Rapids or by any official traffic control sign.
(1) 1st Street North, both sides, the first spaces south of East Jackson Street, except for
handicapped parking (MC#782)
(2) 1st Street North, the east side, the first space north of Oak Street, except for
handicapped parking (MC#782)
(3) 1st Street North, the west side, the first two spaces north of Oak Street, except for
handicapped parking (MC#782)
(4) 2nd Avenue North, west side, the first space north of West Grand Avenue, except for
handicapped parking for a time limit of 25 minutes (MC#975)
(5) 2nd Street North, the east side, the first space north of Oak Street, except for
handicapped parking (MC#782)
(6) 2nd Street South, the west side, the first space north of Birch Street, except for
handicapped parking (MC#687)
(7) 2nd Street South, both sides, the first space north of East Grand Avenue, except for
handicapped parking (MC#782)
(8) 2nd Street South, both sides, the first space south of Oak Street, except for
handicapped parking (MC#782)
(9) 2nd Street South, the west side, the first two spaces south of Maple Street, except for
emergency vehicles. (MC#1122)
(10) 4th Avenue North, the west side, the 14th and 15th spaces north of West Grand
Avenue, except for handicapped parking. (MC#614)
(11) 4th Street South, the west side, the first parking space south of East Grand Avenue,
except for handicapped parking. (MC#1098)
(12) 8th Avenue South, from 80 feet north of Goggins Street to 105 feet north of Goggins
Street, except for loading and unloading passengers and materials (MC#531)
(13) 10th Avenue North, the east side, the first two spaces south of Fremont Street,
except handicapped parking (MC#434)
(14) 10th Avenue North, the west side, from the 5th parking space north of Van Buren
Street to the 12th parking space north of Van Buren Street, shall be 24 hour parking
for the Family Center, Inc. Vehicles must be registered with the city police
department. (MC#601)
(15) 11th Street North, the west side, from 103 feet north of Oak Street to 117 feet north
of Oak Street, except for handicapped parking (MC#377)
(16) Avon Street, the north side, the first paring space east of Market Street, except
handicapped parking for “jurors only”. (MC#1131)
(17) Baker Street, both sides, between 17th Street South and 18th Street South, except
for vehicles under five tons (MC#373)
(18) Chestnut Street, the north side, from 365 feet east of Hill Street to 405 feet east of
Hill Street, except handicapped parking (MC#731)
(19) City hall parking lot adjacent to the west side of city hall, bounded by West Jackson
Street and West Grand Avenue. On the east side, the first four southern-most spaces
14
are assigned to city police department employees' vehicles. The next three spaces
shall be assigned as follows: police administrator, police administrator, and chief of
police. The remaining spaces shall be for official police vehicles. The west side, the
three southern-most spaces assigned to city police department employees' vehicles;
the next space is motorcycle parking; the next five spaces are official police vehicles;
the next space is motorcycle parking; and the next two are assigned to city police
department employees' vehicles. All private vehicles must have tan-colored "City
Employee Parking Permit" tags. (MC#556)
(20) City hall parking lot adjacent to the north side of the city hall, bounded by West
Jackson Street, except the 5th through 8th spaces from the east end for loading zone
for city proposes between 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except
holidays. The remaining spaces for the police department employees' vehicles All
private vehicles must have "City Employee Parking Permit" tags. (MC#765)
(21) Dewey Street, the south side, between 110 feet and 130 feet north of 4th Street
South and 280 feet and 300 feet north of 4th Street South, except for handicapped
parking (MC#649)
(22) Fremont Street, the south side, the first two spaces east of 10th Avenue North,
except handicapped parking (MC#434)
(23) Garfield Street, the west side, from 15 feet south of Chestnut Street to 40 feet south
of Chestnut Street, except for handicapped parking (MC#743)
(24) Johnson Street, the south side, from 41 feet east of 4th Avenue South to 61 feet east
of 4th Avenue South, except for handicapped parking. (MC#1109)
(25) Market Street, the east side, the 4th and 5th spaces south of Baker Street, except
handicapped parking, for a time limit of 25 minutes (MC#980)
(26) Market Street, the east side, the 3rd space south of Baker Street, except for taxicab
pickup and delivery only for a time limit of 25 minutes (MC#980)
(27) Peach Street, the south side, from 66 feet east of Lincoln Street to 90 feet east of
Lincoln Street, except handicapped parking (MC#419)
(28) West Grand Avenue, the north side, the first space west of 1st Avenue S, except for
taxicab pickup and delivery only (MC#1239)
(e) Parking Prohibited During Certain Periods Except for Authorized Vehicles. No person shall park
or leave standing, any vehicle upon any of the following streets or parts of street at times
indicated, except authorized vehicles, or by authorized permit issued by the City of Wisconsin
Rapids, or by an official traffic control sign.
(1) 2nd Avenue South, the west side, from 65 feet south of West Grand Avenue to 89
feet south of West Grand Avenue, between 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except Sundays
and holidays, except used as a loading zone
(2) 2nd Street North, the east side, the 18th space north of Oak Street, between 5:00
p.m. and 2:00 a.m., except for taxi cab pickup and delivery (MC#442)
(4) 9th Street South, the west side, from Pear Street to 50 feet south of Pear Street,
between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., on school days, except for school bus loading
(MC#636)
(5) 10th Avenue South, the west side, from 300 feet north of 2nd Avenue South to 600
feet north of 2nd Avenue South, between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., on school days,
except school bus loading
(6) 11th Street North, the west side, from 117 feet north of Oak Street to Prospect
Street, between 7:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., on school days, except school bus loading
(7) 12th Street South, the west side, from Huntington Avenue to 140 feet north of
Huntington Avenue, from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., except used as a loading zone
(MC#650)
(8) 12th Street South, the east side, from 120 feet south of Chestnut Street to 350 feet
south of Chestnut Street, between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., on school days, except
school bus loading
(9) 13th Avenue South, the west side, from 420 feet south of Alton Street to 625 feet
15
south of Alton Street, between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., on school days, except
school bus loading (MC#747)
(10) Alton Street, the south side, from 50 feet east of 16th Avenue South to 100 feet east
of 16th Avenue South, between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., on school days, except for
taxicab pickup and delivery only. (MC#953)
(11) Chestnut Street, the north side, from Hill Street to 255 feet east of Hill Street,
between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., on school days, except for school bus loading.
(MC#934)
(12) Chestnut Street, the north side, from 8th Street South to 35 feet east of 8th Street
South, between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., on school days, except school crossing
guard's vehicle. (MC#387)
(13) City hall parking lot adjacent to the west side of city hall bounded by West Jackson
Street and 4th Avenue North, except authorized city employee vehicles, between
7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays. (MC#914)
(MC#923)
(14) City-owned parking lot north of city-owned Dixon Parking Lot, adjacent to 4th Avenue,
the second row north of the Dixon Lot from the 1st space east of 4th Avenue to 9
spaces east of 4th Avenue. This is designated reserved parking for authorized city
employees parking, between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
except holidays. (C#923)
(15) City-owned parking lot north of city-owned Dixon Parking Lot, east of 4th Avenue,
South of West Jackson Street, not including the first 9 spaces east of 4th Avenue in
the second row north of the Dixon Lot, except authorized city employee's vehicles,
persons transacting business at city hall, or at businesses located at 320 West
Grand Avenue, between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except
holidays. (MC#765)
(16) Hill Street, the east side, from Chestnut Street to Mead Street, between 7:30 a.m.
and 4:30 p.m., on weekdays
(17) Lincoln Street, the east side, from 150 feet north of Witter Street to 100 feet south of
Peach Street, from 7:00 a.m. to 7:45 a.m. and 2:15 p.m. to 2:45 p.m., on school
days, except school bus loading (MC#953)
(18) Oak Street, the north side, from 2nd Street to 70 feet east of 2nd Street, between
8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays, except used as a loading
zone
(19) Pear Street, the south side, from 208 feet east of 17th Street South to 18th Street
South, between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., on school days, except school bus and
handicapped loading (MC#675)
(20) Prospect Street, the south side, from 11th Street North to 147 feet west of 11th
Street North, from 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and from 3:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m., on school
days, except school bus loading (MC#621)
(21) 17th Avenue South, the east side, from Essex Street to Alton Street, between 7:30
a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on school days, except school bus loading (MC#930)
(22) 28th Street North, both sides, from 485 feet north of Washington Street to 980 feet
north of Washington Street, between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on school days, except
for school bus loading (MC#1081)
(f) No parking in City Park Areas. No person shall operate, park, or leave standing any motor
vehicle in city park areas or city-owned property zoned conservancy, except where operation or
parking a motor vehicle is specifically allowed. The restriction of this ordinance shall also
apply to snowmobiles.
(1) Except vehicles carrying persons unable to walk within Robinson Park (because of
age, infirmity, or physical handicap) may be permitted to enter the park at the Apricot
Street entrance and park.
(2) Except vehicles carrying food, beverage, or equipment may be permitted to use the
service road between the Apricot Street parking area and the shelter house for the
16
purpose of unloading and loading such materials, but shall not be permitted to park
at the shelter house for a greater period of time than that required for such
operations.
(g) No parking in city park areas during certain periods except for authorized vehicles. No motor
vehicle may be parked in a city park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(MC#557)
(1) Except the police department may grant permission for parking a vehicle in a city
park between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. for special events previously approved by
the Park and Recreation Commission.
(2) Except fishermen may park their vehicles between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in the
south parking lot of Ben Hanson Park for use of the Ben Hanson Park boat landing.
(h) Parking, Stopping, or Standing Prohibited During Certain Periods Except for Authorized
Vehicles. No person shall park, stop, or leave standing, any vehicle for any purpose upon the
following streets or parts of streets at the times indicated, except the noted authorized
vehicles, or by authorized permit issued by the City of Wisconsin Rapids, or by an official
traffic control sign. (MC #1097)
(1) 8th Street North, the west side, from 50 feet north of Prospect Street to the vision
triangle 30 feet north of Oak Street, between 8:00 a.m. and 8:40 a.m., and between
3:20 p.m. and 3:50 p.m., on school days, except for the following authorized vehicles
who may load and unload passengers during those times: school buses, vehicles for
persons with disabilities, taxicabs, Boys and Girls Club vans, and other School
District-approved vehicles.
(2) Limited Time Parking. When official traffic control devices are erected in any block, giving notice
thereof, no person shall park, stop, or leave standing, any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, for
more than the following time periods between the specified hours of days, on all days except specified
days, on any of the following streets or parts thereof:
(a) 5-minute parking
(1) Alton Street, the south side, from 130’ east of 17th Avenue South to 220’ east of 17th
Avenue South, on school days, from 7:30 AM to 9:00 AM for student drop-off.
(MC#1053)
(2) Alton Street, the south side, from 30’ east of 16th Avenue South to 50’ east of 16th
Avenue South, on school days, from 7:30 AM to 9:00 AM for student drop-off. (MC
#1053)
(b) 10-minute parking:
(1) East Grand Avenue, the south side, from 3rd Street to 4th Street, between 8:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays
(2) Chestnut Street, the south side, from 140 feet east of 12th Street to 170 feet east of
12th Street (MC#731)
(3) 2nd Avenue North, the west side, the second space north of West Grand Avenue,
from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#950)
(c) 15-minute Parking:
(1) 4th Street South, the west side, from East Grand Avenue to Birch Street, between
8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#1066)
(3) 8th Street North, the west side, from 50 feet north of Prospect Street to Saratoga
Street, from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., on school days, for student pickup (MC#495)
(4) Baker Street, the south side, from 17th Street South to 18th Street South, from 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays (MC#373)
(5) Chestnut Street, the north side, from 255’ east of Hill Street to 325’ east of Hill
Street, during school hours () (MC#1066)
(6) Lincoln Street, the east side, from 100 feet south of Peach Street to 150 feet south
of Peach Street, 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m., on school days, except authorized vehicles
(MC#373)
(7) Mead Street, the south side, from Hill Street to 80 feet east of Hill Street (MC#934)
(8) Oak Street, the north side, from 80 feet east of 8th Street to 120 feet east of 8th
17
Street (MC#382)
(9) Oak Street, the north side, from 7th Street to 8th Street, from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.,
on school days, for student pickup (MC#373)
(11) Saratoga Street, the south side, from 7th Street South to 8th Street South, from 7:30
a.m. to 4:30 p.m., on school days, for student pickup (MC#373)
(12) 16th Street South, the east side, from 650 feet south of East Riverview Expressway
to 995 feet south of East Riverview Expressway (MC#930)
(ca) 30-Minute Parking
East Grand Avenue, the north side, from 150 feet east of East Jackson Street to 6th Street
South, from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. (MC#1263)
(d) One-hour parking:
(1) East Grand Avenue, the north side, from 3rd Street to 4th Street (MC#519)
(2) Harrison Street, both sides, from 4th Avenue North to 5th Avenue (MC#520)
(3) Saratoga Street, both sides, from Jackson Street to 5th Street North, between 8:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays
(e) 90-minute Parking:
(1) 10th Avenue, the east side, from West Grand Avenue to McKinley Street, between
8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays
(2) 17th Avenue, the east side, from 50 feet north of West Grand Avenue to 150 feet
north of West Grand Avenue, between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and
holidays
(f) Two-hour Parking
(1) Streets beginning with the letter "A":
(b) Apple Street, the south side, from 70 feet east of 8th Street to 9th Street
(MC#975)
(c) Avon Street, the north side, from 184 feet east of 5th Street North of 8th
Street North, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#860)
(d) Avon Street, the north side, from Market Street to 5th Street, from 9:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#848)
(e) Avon Street, the south side, from 5th Street North to 8th Street North, 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#860)
(2) Streets beginning with the letter "B":
(a) Birch Street, the north side, from Garfield Street to 140 feet east of Garfield
Street, between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays
(3) Streets beginning with the letter "C":
(a) Chase Street, both sides, from 1st Avenue South to 3rd Avenue South, 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#860)
(b) Clyde Avenue, both sides, from 14th Street south to 16th Street South,
between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., on school days (MC#812)
(4) Streets beginning with the letter "D":
(a) Dewey Street, both sides, from 50 feet west of 8th Street South to 6th Street
South, between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(b) Dewey Street, the north side, from 50 feet east of 3rd Street to 4th Street
(MC#970)
(c) Dewey Street, the north side, from 80 feet west of 5th Street South to 5th
Street South (MC#1024)
(d) Dewey Street, the south side, from 430’ east of 4th Street South to Hill
Street
(e) Dura Beauty Lane, the north side, from 487 feet east of the center line of the
eastern-most railroad track to 613 feet east of the center line of the easternmost
railroad track from Rainbow Drive, between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
except Sundays and holidays
(f) Dura Beauty Lane, the south side, from 416 feet east of the center line of
the eastern-most railroad track to 613 feet east of the center line of the
18
eastern-most railroad track from Rainbow Drive, between 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays
(5) Streets beginning with the letter "E":
(a) East G Street, the north side, 8th Street South to 350 feet west of 8th Street
South (MC#373)
(b) East Grand Avenue, the south side, from 4th Street South to Lincoln Street
from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday (MC#1263)
(c) Elm Street, the east side, from Dewey Street to Sherman Street (MC#970)
(d) Elm Street, the west side, between Maple and Birch Street (MC#370)
(ba) East Grand Avenue, the south side, from 160 feet east of 6th Street South to
7th Street South, from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday.(MC#1263)
(bb) East Grand Avenue, the north side, from 4th Street South to 50 feet west of
Garfield Street, from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday.(MC#1263)
(bc) East Grand Avenue, the north side, from 75 feet east of Garfield Street to
East Jackson Street.(MC#1263)
(6) Streets beginning with the letter "F":
(a) 1st Avenue South, the west side, from West Grand Avenue to Goggins Street,
from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC #1075)
(b) 1st Street North, both sides, from Oak Street to East Jackson Street,
between 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#789)
(c) 4th Avenue North, the west side, from West Grand Avenue to the 25 spaces
north of West Grand Avenue, except the 14th and 15th spaces north of West
Grand Avenue, between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and
holidays (MC#765)
(d) 4th Avenue South, both side, West Grand Avenue to Johnson Street, from
9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#848)
(e) 4th Street South, the east side, from Birch Street to Maple Street, 9:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#860)
(f) 4th Street South, the east side, from Dewey Street to Sherman Street
(MC#970)
(g) 4th Street South, the west side, from East Grand Avenue to Oak Street
(MC#419)
(h) 5th Street North, both sides, Saratoga Street to Avon Street, 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#860)
(i) 14th Street South, both sides, from Pepper Avenue to James Court, between
7:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., on school days (MC#742)
(j) 14th Street South, both sides, from Pepper Avenue to Huntington Avenue
(MC#785)
(k) 14th Street South, both sides, from Huntington Avenue to Grove Avenue,
from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., on school days (MC#799)
(l) Fremont Street, the south side from 8th Avenue North to 10th Avenue North,
between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays
(7) Streets beginning with the letter "G":
(a) Garfield Street, the east side, from 75 feet north of Dewey Street to Sherman
Street, between 4:00 p.m. and 3:00 a.m. (MC#909)
(b) Goggins Street, both sides, from 7th Avenue South to 8th Avenue South,
9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#860)
(c) Garfield Street, the east side, from Dewey Street to 75 feet north of Dewey
Street (MC#909)
(8) Streets beginning with the letter "H":
(a) Huntington Avenue, the north side, from 14th Street South to 50 feet west of
16th Street South (MC#507)
19
(b) Huntington Avenue, the north side, from 12th Street South to 14th Street
South (MC#714)
(c) Huntington Avenue, the south side, from 14th Street South to 50 feet west
of 16th Street South, from 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday
(MC#432)
(e) Huntington Avenue, the south side, from 12th Street South to 14th Street
South (MC#714)
(9) Streets beginning with the letter "I":
(10) Streets beginning with the letter "J":
(a) Johnson Street, the north side, from 1st Avenue to 3rd Avenue, from 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#848)
(b) Johnson Street, the south side, from 1st Avenue to 3rd Avenue, from 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#848)
(c) Johnson Street, the south side, from 3rd Avenue to 4th Avenue, from 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#848)
(11) Streets beginning with the letter "K":
(12) Streets beginning with the letter "L":
(a) LaVigne Street, the south side, from 1st Street North to 2nd Street North,
between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays (MC#950)
(b) LaVigne Street, the north side, from 2nd Street North to 3rd Street North,
between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays (MC#950)
(c) Lee Street, the south side, from 6th Street South to 7th Street South
extended (MC#384)
(d) Lee Street, the north side, from 6th Street South to 8th Street South
(MC#384)
(e) Lily Lane, from 16th Street South to 400 feet west of 16th Street South,
between 7:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., on school days (MC#488)
(f) Lincoln Street, the east side, from 150 feet north of Witter Street to Peach
Street, between 7:45 a.m. and 2:15 p.m. on school days. (MC#953)
(g) Lincoln Street, the west side, from 200 feet north of Witter Street to 135 feet
south of Birch Street, on school days (MC#970)
(h) Love Street, both sides, from 1st Street North to 2nd Street North, between
8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays
(13) Streets beginning with the letter "M":
(a) Maple Street, the north side, between Elm Street and 4th Street South, 9:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m. (MC#950)
(14) Streets beginning with the letter "N":
(a) 9th Avenue North, both sides, from Van Buren Street to Fremont Street,
except Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays
(b) 9th Avenue South, both sides, from Chase Street to Goggins Street, except
Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays
(15) Streets beginning with the letter "O":
(a) Oak Street, the north side, from 70 feet east of 2nd Street to 4th Street
(MC#623)
(16) Streets beginning with the letter "P":
(a) Peach Street, the south side, from 65 feet west of 6th Street South to 6th
Street South
(b) Pepper Avenue, the south side, from 50' east of 14th Street South, to 100'
west of 16th Street South (MC#785)
(c) Pepper Avenue, the north side, from 14th Street South to 15th Street South
(MC#785)
(d) Pepper Avenue, both sides, from 10th Street South to 14th Street South,
from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., on school days (MC#805)
(17) Streets beginning with the letter "Q":
20
(18) Streets beginning with the letter "R":
(19) Streets beginning with the letter "S":
(a) 2nd Street North, both sides, from Plover Street to LaVigne Street, between
9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays (MC#950)
(b) 2nd Street North, the east side, between Oak Street and East Jackson Street
(MC#822)
(c) 2nd Street South, the east side, from Walnut Street to Witter Street, between
9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays (MC#950)
(d) 2nd Street North, the east side, from Oak Street to East Jackson Street, from
9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#848)
(e) 2nd Street North, the east side, from East Jackson Street to Market Street,
from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#848)
(f) 2nd Street South, the east side, from Oak Street to East Grand Avenue
(MC#623)
(g) 2nd Street South, the east side, from Birch Street to Maple Street (MC#716)
(h) 2nd Street South, the west side, from Birch Street to ten parking spaces
south of Birch Street (MC#808)
(i) 2nd Street South, the west side, from East Grand Avenue to Oak Street,
between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#789)
(j) 2nd Street South, the west side, from East Grand Avenue to Birch Street,
from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#848)
(k) 2nd Avenue North, the west side, from two parking spaces north of West
Grand Avenue to Jackson Street, from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday (MC#888)
(l) 2nd Avenue South, the west side, from Johnson Street to West Grand
Avenue, from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#848)
(m) 2nd Avenue south, the east side, from Johnson Street to West Grand
Avenue, from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#848)
(n) 6th Street South, the west side, from East Grand Avenue to Oak Street,
between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays
(o) 6th Street South, the west side, from East Grand Avenue to Peach Street,
between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays
(q) 16th Street South, both sides, from 350 feet north of East Riverview
Expressway to Daly Avenue, between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on school
days. (MC#899)
(r) 7th Avenue South, both sides, from Chase Street to Hale Street, except east
side between Goggins and Hale Streets, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday (MC#860)
(t s) 7th Street South, the east side, from Peach Street to Apple Street, between
9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays (MC#950)
(t) 7th Street South, the west side, from Pepper Avenue to 100’ south of Pepper
Avenue (MC#1140)
(u) 16th Street South, the west side, from 50 feet south of Huntington Avenue
to 50 feet north of Clyde Avenue, from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., on weekdays
(MC#732)
(v) 16th Street South, the west side, from Pepper Avenue to Grove Avenue,
between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., on school days (MC#812)
(20) Streets beginning with the letter "T":
(a) 3rd Avenue South, both sides, from Chase Street to 150 feet north of Chase
Street, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#860)
(b) 3rd Avenue North, both sides, West Grand Avenue to Jackson Street, from
9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#848)
(c) 3rd Avenue South, both sides, West Grand Avenue to Johnson Street, from
9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday
21
(d) 3rd Street North, the east side, from Plover Street to 200 feet north of Plover
Street, from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
(e) 3rd Street North, both sides, from Oak Street to Market Street, from 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#848)
(f) 10th Avenue North, the west side, from Fremont Street to Butler Street,
between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. except Sundays and holidays
(h) 12th Street South, the east side, from Pepper Avenue to Clyde Avenue
(MC#714)
(i) 12th Street South, the west side, from Pepper Avenue to 140 feet north of
Huntington Avenue (MC#714)
(21) Streets beginning with the letter "U":
(22) Streets beginning with the letter "V":
(23) Streets beginning with the letter "W":
(a) Wisconsin Street, both sides, from 100 feet east of 5th Street North to 7th
Street North, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#860)
(b) West Grand Avenue, both sides, from 2nd Avenue to 4th Avenue, from 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#848), except on the south
side from 3rd Avenue to 130 feet west of 3rd Avenue
(c) West Grand Avenue, the south side, from 1st Avenue to 2nd Avenue, from
9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#848)
(24) Streets beginning with the letter "X":
(25) Streets beginning with the letter "Y":
(26) Streets beginning with the letter "Z":
(g) 25 minute parking.
(1) Market Street, the east side, from Baker Street to Avon Street, from 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (MC#980)
(h) 30 minute parking
(1) 7th Street South, the west side, from Daly Avenue to Pepper Avenue (MC#1137)
(3) Angle Parking. No person shall park, stop, or leave standing, any vehicle not parallel to the curb line or
edge of any city street except in the properly marked spaces designated as follows below:
(a) 1st Street North, the north side, from East Jackson Street to Market Street
(b) 1st Street North, both sides, from Oak Street to East Jackson Street
(c) 1st Avenue South, the west side, from West Grand Avenue to Johnson Street
(d) 2nd Avenue South, both sides, from West Grand Avenue to West Jackson Street
(e) 2nd Avenue South, the west side, from Johnson Street to West Grand Avenue
(f) 2nd Street North, the east side, from Oak Street to the city-owned parking lot bounded by
Market Street and 1st Street North
(g) 2nd Street North, the east side, from a point 208 feet south of the extension of the south curb
line of Love Street to the Green Bay and Western Railroad property line
(h) 2nd Street South, the west side, from Birch Street to 129 feet north of Walnut Street. except
from 15’ south of Maple Street to 33’ south of Maple Street (MC#1122)
(i) 2nd Street South, both sides, from West Grand Avenue to Oak Street
(j) 4th Avenue North, the west side, from West Grand Avenue to the city hall parking lot bounded
by West Jackson Street
(k) 4th Avenue South, the west side, from Johnson Street to West Grand Avenue
(l) 5th Street North, the west side, from 140 feet north of Avon Street to Baker Street
(TEMPORARILY REPEALED) (MC#398)
(m) 10th Avenue North, the east side, from Fremont Street to 177 feet south of Fremont Street
(n) 10th Avenue North, the west side, from Fremont Street to 139 feet south of Fremont Street
(o) 10th Avenue South, the west side, from 325 feet south of Gardner Street to 2nd Avenue
South
(p) 10th Street South, the east side, from 105 feet south of Wood Avenue to 318 feet south of
Wood Avenue
(q) 11th Street North, the west side, from 15 feet north of Oak Street to 93 feet north of Oak
22
Street
(r) 14th Street South, the west side, from Clyde Avenue to 263 feet south of Clyde Avenue
(s) 16th Street South, the east side, from Peach Street to 135 feet north of Peach Street
(t) Apple Street, the south side, from 100 feet east of 6th Street South to 150 feet west of 8th
Street South
(u) Clyde Avenue, the south side, from 138 feet west of 14th Street South to 14th Street South
(v) Dewey Street, the south side, from 3rd Street South to 4th Street South
(w) Johnson Street, the north side, from 4th Avenue South to 109 feet east of 4th Avenue South
(x) Johnson Street, the south side, from 1st Avenue South to 2nd Avenue South
(y) Oak Street, the north side, from 25 feet east of 10th Street to 25 feet west of 11th Street
(MC#779)
(z) Pine Street, the north side, from Garfield Street to Elm Street
(aa) West Grand Avenue, the north side, from 2nd Avenue to 3rd Avenue
(4) Miscellaneous Parking Restrictions.
(a) Street maintenance. Whenever it is necessary to clear or repair a city street, or any part
thereof, the city traffic department shall post such highways, or parts thereof, with signs
bearing the words "NO PARKING-STREET MAINTENANCE WORK". Such signs shall be erected
at least two hours prior to the time that street maintenance work is to be commenced. No
person shall park a motor vehicle in violation of such signs.
(1) The city-leased parking area lying between 2nd Avenue North and 3rd Avenue North
and south of West Jackson Street (Mead-Witter lot), no parking between 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., for maintenance (MC#793)
(b) Parking in driveways. No person shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle in any private
driveway without the permission of the owner of lessee of the property upon which such
driveway is located, whether or not such driveway is posted to limit or restrict parking.
(c) Parking heavy vehicles in residential districts. No operator or owner of a motor truck, truck
tractor, trailer, or semi-trailer, or any other vehicle or combination of vehicles, other than
motor busses weighing more than five tons shall park such vehicle on any highway other than
a routes state trunk highway, county trunk highway, or designated truck route, in any
residential district except for such time as is reasonably necessary to facilitate the loading or
unloading of the vehicle.
(d) Snow emergency parking restrictions.
(1) When the mayor, or his designated representative, shall by reason of heavy snow
storm or blizzard, proclaim a snow emergency pursuant to Section 66.325, Wisconsin
State Statutes, no person shall park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle upon the
streets or any portions of the streets during the hours set forth in such proclamation.
(2) The common council hereby declares that an emergency exists in the city whenever a
snowfall, during any period of 24 hours or less, reaches a depth of four inches or
more. Such emergency is declared to be a serious public hazard impairing
transportation and public health, safety, and welfare for a period of 48 hours or until
such earlier time as snow removal operations have been declared completed by the
public works superintendent.
(3) Whenever an emergency exists and the mayor, or his designated representative, shall
have caused an announcement thereof to be made by not less than two radio
stations, whose normal operating range covers the City of Wisconsin Rapids, no
person shall park, or allow to be parked, any vehicle of any kind or description upon
the streets of the City of Wisconsin Rapids during said emergency. Vehicles may be
parked for a period of time not longer than three minutes for actually loading or
unloading of passengers, or 30 minutes for actually loading or unloading of property
and provided further that no other regulation restricting parking as to place, time, or
manner is violated thereby.
(4) Authorization of erection of no parking signs. Pursuant to the provisions of Section
66.325, Wisconsin State Statutes, the chief of police, or his designated
representative is authorized to erect temporary "NO PARKING" signs during the
23
existence of an emergency created by a snowstorm or excessive snowfall which
impairs or prevents the full use of any highway, street, or roadway for transportation.
(5) Snow tow-away zones. The chief of police, or his designated representative, is hereby
authorized to cause the towing away of vehicles parking in violation of this ordinance.
(e) Night parking restrictions. When signs have been erected at, or reasonably near, the
corporate limits, alternate side parking will be allowed from 2:00 a.m. until 5:00 a.m. on all
streets in the City of Wisconsin Rapids unless otherwise posted or exempted by this
ordinance. On even-numbered calendar days, all vehicles shall be parked on the evennumbered
side of the street. On odd-numbered calendar days, all vehicles will be parking on
the odd-numbered side of the street. No person shall park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle
in violation of this subsection. In the even of an emergency police order or snow emergency
designated by the public works director, chief of police, or their designee(s), alternate side
parking shall be suspended. (MC#1074)
(f) Overnight Truck Parking. No trucks or trailers in excess of five tons capacity shall be parked
within 175 feet of a residential zone between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except
as follows:
(1) One semi-tractor, stake truck, or van, excluding semi-trailers, may be parked at the
residence of the operator. On-street parking is prohibited. (MC#823)
(2) No motors are left idling, including those necessary for air-conditioning and
refrigeration units.
(3) Trucks and trailers are parked in authorized areas and are not actively engaged in
hook-up or loading activities during the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(4) Operators of commercial trucks in excess of five tons capacity who must keep
refrigeration units or other motors in operation will be directed to take the truck to
the industrial park. (MC#389)
(g) There shall be no parking on the streets in the Woodlands Business Park (MC#723)
(h) There shall be no parking from 3:01 a.m. on July 4 until 6:00 a.m. on July 5, except for
permitted vendors and authorized personnel, on both sides of the following streets:
(MC#1051)
(1) 2nd Street South, between East Grand Avenue and Mead Street.
(2) The Grand Avenue Bridge.
(3) West Grand Avenue, between the Grand Avenue Bridge and 3rd Avenue.
(4) East Grand Avenue, between the Grand Avenue Bridge and 3rd Street.
(5) 2nd Street, between East Grand Avenue and East Jackson Street.
(6) 1st Street North, between Oak Street and East Jackson Street.
(7) All other east-west streets from Oak Street to Mead Street, between 2nd Street and
3rd Street.
(8) 2nd Avenue, between one-half block north of West Grand Avenue and Johnson Street.
(9) Johnson Street, between 2nd Avenue South and 1st Avenue South.
(10) 1st Avenue South, between West Grand Avenue and 100 feet south of Goggins Street.
(11) Goggins Street, between 1st Avenue South and a point 150 feet west of 1st Avenue
South.
Additionally, there shall be no parking as indicated above on any day that the city's 4th of July
fireworks event has been rescheduled to, due to inclement weather or other circumstances.
The no parking shall be from 3:01 a.m. that day until 6:00 a.m. the following day.
27.14 HANDICAPPED AND PHYSICALLY DISABLED PARKING REGULATIONS (MC#946)
(1) Parking in places reserved for the handicapped. When official traffic signs, indicating such restrictions
have been erected in accordance with this ordinance, no person shall park, stop, or leave standing any
vehicle upon any portion of a street, highway, or public or private parking facility reserved for vehicles
displaying special registration plates or identification cards or emblems issued by the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation, or for vehicles registered in another jurisdiction, by such other
jurisdiction designating the vehicle as one used by a physically handicapped or physically disabled
person.
24
(2) Display of cards designating handicap. When in use for a parked vehicle, the card designated by
Wisconsin Statutes as indicating special parking privileges for handicapped persons shall be displayed
so the information on the card is clearly visible outside of the vehicle. If the card is manufactured so
as to be suspended, the card shall be hung from the rear view mirror.
27.15 UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF PARKING CITATIONS
No person other than the owner or operator thereof shall remove a "City Wisconsin Rapids Parking Violation"
ticket from a motor vehicle.
27.16 REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES
(1) Hazard to Public Safety. Any vehicle parking, stopped, or standing upon a highway in violation of any of
the provisions of this ordinance, is declared to be a hazard to traffic and public safety.
(2) Removal by Operator. Such vehicle shall be removed by the operator in charge, upon request of any
traffic officer, to a position where parking is permitted or to a private or public parking or storage
premises.
(3) Removal by Traffic Officer. Any traffic officer, after issuing a citation for illegal parking, stopping, or
standing by an unattended vehicle, in violation of this ordinance, is authorized to remove such vehicle
to a position where parking is permitted.
(4) Removal by Private Service. The officer may order a motor carrier holding a permit to perform vehicle
towing services, a licensed dealer, who performs vehicle towing services, to remove and store such
vehicle in any public storage garage or rental parking grounds of any facility of the person providing the
towing service.
(5) Towing and Storage Charge. In addition to other penalties provided by ordinance, the owner or
operator of a vehicle so removed shall pay reasonable cost of moving, towing, and storage. If the
vehicle is towed or stored by a private motor carrier, motor vehicle salvage dealer, or licensed motor
vehicle dealer, actual charges regularly paid for such services shall be paid. If the vehicle is stored in a
public storage garage or rental facility, customary charges for such storage shall be issued to the
owner of the vehicle for the towing or storage charge.
(6) Registration Record of Vehicle as Evidence. When any vehicle is found upon a street or highway in
violation of any provision of this ordinance regulating the stopping or standing, or parking of vehicles
and the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the owner, as shown by the ownership
registration of the vehicle supplied by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, or a comparable
authority of any other State, shall be deemed to have committed a violation for purposes of
enforcement of this ordinance and shall be subject to the applicable forfeiture penalty; provided the
defenses defined and described in Wisconsin Statutes 346.485(5)(b) shall be a defense for an owner
charged with such violation.
27.17 PENALTIES FOR METER VIOLATIONS
(1) Any person who shall violate Section 27.05(2) of this ordinance and who shall cause, allow, permit, or
suffer any vehicle to be parked overtime, shall pay a forfeiture of $10.00.
(2) Any person who shall violate Section 27.05(1) or 27.05(3) of this ordinance shall pay a forfeiture of
$15.00 if paid within 48 hours and $30.00 if paid thereafter in addition to the forfeiture provided in
Section 27.08(1) of this ordinance.
(3) Any person who shall violate or assist in violation of Section 27.05(4) or 27.05(5) of this ordinance,
upon conviction, shall be punished by a forfeiture of not more than $100.00 or less than $10.00 and
costs of collection, and in default or payment of the forfeiture and costs of collection shall be
imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding 10 days.
27.18 PENALTIES FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS (MC#856)
(1) Forfeitures for uniform state-wide parking, stopping, and standing offenses. Minimum and maximum
forfeitures for violation of non-moving traffic violations adopted by reference in Section One of this
Ordinance described in Wisconsin Statutes, Chapter 340 to 348, shall be as provided in comparable
state non-moving traffic violations.
(2) Penalty for parking violations. The penalty for parking violations shall be a forfeiture of $15.00 if paid
25
within 48 hours and $30.00 if paid after 48 hours.
(3) Handicapped Parking. The forfeiture for violating Section 27.14(1), entitled “Parking In Places
Reserved for the Handicapped,” is the amount set by Wisconsin State Statutes. The forfeiture for
violating Section 27.14(2), entitled “Display of Cards Designating Handicap,” shall be $30. (MC#946)
27.19 PARKING CITATIONS
The chief of police shall provide a citation for use in enforcing parking offenses.
1
Chapter 28 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Ordinance
28.01 Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Statement of Purpose, and Title
28.02 General Provisions
28.03 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District
28.04 Nonconforming Structures and Uses
28.05 Administrative Provisions
28.06 Amending Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Regulations
28.07 Enforcement and Penalties
28.08 Definitions
28.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, STATEMENT OF PURPOSE, AND TITLE
(1) Statutory Authorization. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Sections 61.35, Section
62.23, Section 87.30, and Section 144.26, Wisconsin State Statutes.
(2) Findings of Fact. Uncontrolled use of the shoreland-wetlands and the pollution of the navigable waters of the
City of Wisconsin Rapids would adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare
and impair the tax base. The Legislature of Wisconsin has delegated responsibility to all municipalities to
further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning
grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures, and land uses; and preserve
shore cover and natural beauty.
(3) Purpose. To promote the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare, this ordinance has been
established to:
(a) Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions;
(b) Prevent and control water pollution by filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals, or
organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters and to maintain storm and flood
water capacity;
(c) Protect fish spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, and wildlife by preserving wetlands and other fish and
aquatic habitat;
(d) Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area; and
(e) Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal of natural shoreland cover and
controlling shoreland-wetland excavation, filling, and other earth moving activities.
(4) The title of this ordinance shall be "SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING ORDINANCE" for the City of
Wisconsin Rapids, Wisconsin.
28.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(1) Compliance. The use of wetlands, and the alteration of wetlands within the shoreland area of the City of
Wisconsin Rapids shall be in full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable local, state,
or federal regulations. (However, see Section 28.04 of this ordinance for the standards applicable to
nonconforming uses.) All permitted development shall require the issuance of a building permit, unless
otherwise expressly excluded by a provision of this ordinance.
(2) Municipalities and State Agencies Regulated. Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns,
and counties are required to comply with this ordinance and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are
required to comply if Section 13.48(13), Wisconsin Statutes, applies. The construction, reconstruction,
maintenance, and repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation are
exempt when Section 30.12(4)(a), Wisconsin Statutes applies.
(3) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
(a) This ordinance supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance enacted under
Section 62.23 Section 61.35, or Section 87.30, Wisconsin State Statutes, which relate to shorelandwetlands,
except that where another municipal zoning ordinance is more restrictive than the
provisions contained in this ordinance, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the
extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
(b) This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants,
or easements. However, where this ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this
ordinance shall prevail.
(4) Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be
2
minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the municipality and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where a provision of this
ordinance is required by a standard in Chapter NR 117, Wisconsin Administrative Code, and where the
ordinance provision is unclear, the provisions shall be interpreted in light of the Chapter NR 117 standards in
effect on the date of the adoption of this ordinance or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment
to this ordinance.
(5) Severability. Should any portion of this ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional for any reason, by a
court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected.
28.03 SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING DISTRICT
(1) Purpose. This ordinance is adopted to maintain safe and healthful conditions, to prevent and control water
pollution, to protect fish spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life and wildlife habitat, to preserve shore cover
and natural beauty, and to control building and development in wetlands whenever possible. When
development is permitted in a wetland, the development should occur in a manner which minimizes adverse
impacts upon the wetland.
(2) Official Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Maps. The following maps are hereby adopted and made a part of this
ordinance and are on file in the office of the city clerk for the City of Wisconsin Rapids, Wisconsin: Wisconsin
Wetland Inventory Maps, stamped "FINAL" on November 14, 1985.
(3) District Boundaries.
(a) The shoreland-wetland zoning district includes all wetlands in the City of Wisconsin Rapids,
Wisconsin, which are five acres or more and are shown on the final Wetland Inventory Map that has
been adopted and made a part of this ordinance in Section 28.03(2) and which are:
(1) Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable lakes, ponds, or flowages.
Lakes, ponds, or flowages in the City of Wisconsin Rapids shall be presumed to be navigable
if they are listed in the Department publication "Surface Water Resources of Wood County"
or are shown on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base
maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this ordinance in
Section 28.03(2) of this ordinance.
(2) Within 300 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable rivers or streams, or to the
landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as either
continuous or intermittent waterways on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or
other zoning base maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this
ordinance in Section 28.03(2) of this ordinance. Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, Flood Insurance Rate
Maps, Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps, County Soil Survey Maps, or other existing community
floodplain zoning maps used to delineate floodplain area which have been adopted by the City of
Wisconsin Rapids shall be used to determine the extent of the floodplain areas in the City of
Wisconsin Rapids.
(b) Determinations of navigability and ordinary high-water mark shall initially be made by the zoning
administrator. When questions arise, the zoning administrator shall contact the appropriate district
office of the Department for a final determination of navigability or ordinary high-water mark.
(c) When an apparent discrepancy exists between the shoreland-wetland district boundary shown on the
official shoreland-wetland zoning maps and the actual field conditions at the time the maps were
adopted, the zoning administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the Department to
determine if the shoreland-wetland district boundary, as mapped, is in error. If the department staff
concur with the zoning administrator that a particular area was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the
zoning administrator shall have the authority to immediately grant or deny land use or building permit
in accordance with the regulations applicable to the correct zoning district. In order to correct wetland
mapping errors shown on the official shoreland-wetland zoning maps, the zoning administrator shall
be responsible for initiating a shoreland-wetland map amendment within a reasonable period.
(4) Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of Chapter 30 and 31 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, and the provisions of other local, state, and federal laws, if applicable:
(a) Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a building permit, provided that no wetland
alteration occurs:
(1) Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling, and boating;
(2) The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries, tree fruits,
and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops;
(3) The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning, and harvesting of timber;
(4) The pasturing of livestock;
(5) The cultivation of agricultural crops; and
3
(6) The construction and maintenance of duck blinds.
(b) Uses which do not require the issuance of a building permit and which may involve wetland alterations
only to the extent specifically provided below:
(1) The practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water level stabilization measures
which are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse
impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected;
(2) The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland alterations necessary for the purpose
of growing and harvesting cranberries;
(3) The maintenance and repair of existing drainage ditches, where permissible under Section
30.20, Wisconsin Statutes, or of other existing drainage systems (such as tiling) to restore
preexisting levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling necessary to dispose
of dredged spoil, provided that the filling is permissible under Chapter 30, Wisconsin
Statutes, and that dredged spoil is placed on existing spoil banks where possible;
(4) The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of livestock, including limited
excavation and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance;
(5) The construction and maintenance of piers, docks and walkways, observation decks, and trail
bridges built on pilings, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such
construction or maintenance;
(6) The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of draining lands outside the
shoreland-wetland zoning district provided that such installation or maintenance is done in a
manner designed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the
shoreland-wetland listed in Section 28.06(1)(c) of this ordinance; and
(7) The maintenance, repair, replacement, and reconstruction of existing highways and bridges,
including limited excavating and filling necessary for such maintenance, repair, replacement,
or reconstruction.
(c) Uses which are allowed upon the issuance of a building/conditional use) permit and which may
include wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below:
(1) The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for the continuity of the
municipal street system, the provision of essential utility and emergency services or to
provide access to uses permitted under Section 28.03(4) of this ordinance, provided that:
(a) The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
(b) The road is designed and constructed to minimize the adverse impact upon the
natural functions of the wetland listed in Section 28.06(1)(c) of this ordinance;
(c) The road is designed and constructed with the minimum cross-sectional area
practical to serve the intended uses;
(d) Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate area of the roadbed
only; and
(e) Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction or maintenance of the
road.
(2) The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings provided that:
(a) The building is used solely in conjunction with the use permitted in the shorelandwetland
district or for the raising of waterfowl, minnows, or other wetland or aquatic
animals;
(b) The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
(c) The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area; and
(d) Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide structural support for the
building is allowed.
(3) The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation areas;
outdoor education areas; historic, natural, and scientific areas; game refuges and closed
areas; fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects; game bird and animal farms; wildlife
preserves; and public boat launching ramps, provided that:
(a) Any private development allowed under this paragraph shall be used exclusively for
the permitted purpose;
(b) Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of public boat
launching ramps, swimming beaches, or the construction of park shelters or similar
structures is allowed;
(c) The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the uses permitted under
this paragraph are allowed only where such construction and maintenance meets the
criteria in Section 28.03(4)(c)(1) of this ordinance; and
(d) Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat
4
improvement projects, game bird and animal farms, wildlife preserves shall be for
the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland values.
(4) The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone transmission lines and water,
gas, and sewer distribution lines, and related facilities, provided that:
(a) The transmission and distribution lines and related facilities cannot, as a practical
matter, be located outside the wetland;
(b) Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such construction or maintenance is
allowed; and
(c) Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize the
adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in Section 28.06(1)(c)
of this ordinance.
(5) The construction and maintenance of railroad lines, provided that:
(a) The railroad lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
(b) Only limited wetland alteration necessary for such construction or maintenance is
allowed; and
(c) Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize the
adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetland as listed in Section
28.06(1)(c) of this ordinance.
(5) Prohibited Uses.
(a) Any uses not listed in Section 28.03(4) of this ordinance is prohibited, unless the wetland, or a portion
of the wetland, has been rezoned by amendment of this ordinance in accordance with Section 28.06
of this ordinance.
(b) The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or placement of a boathouse or
fixed houseboat below the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable waters are prohibited.
28.04 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES
(1) The existing lawful use of a structure, building, or property, or its accessory use, which is not in conformity with
the provisions of this ordinance may be continued subject to the following conditions.
(2) Notwithstanding Section 62.23(7)(h), Wisconsin Statutes, the repair, reconstruction, renovation, remodeling, or
expansion of a legal nonconforming structure in existence at the time of adoption or subsequent amendment
of this ordinance adopted under Section 62.231, Wisconsin Statutes, or of an environ-mental control facility in
existence on May 7, 1982 related to that structure, is permitted under Section 62.231(5), Wisconsin Statutes.
Section 62.23(7)(h), Wisconsin Statutes, applies to any environmental control facility that was not in existence
on May 7, 1982 but was in existence on the effective date of this ordinance or amendment.
(3) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months,
any future use of the building, structure, or property shall conform to the appropriate provisions of this
ordinance.
(4) Any legal nonconforming use of property which does not involve the use of a structure and which existed at
the time of the adoption of subsequent amendment to this ordinance adopted under Sections 62.231 or
61.351, Wisconsin Statutes, may be continued, although such use does not conform with the provisions of the
ordinance. However, such nonconforming use may not be extended.
(5) The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses which are located below the ordinary high-water
mark of any navigable waters shall comply with the requirements of Section 30.121, Wisconsin Statutes.
(6) Uses which are nuisances under common law shall not be permitted to continue as nonconforming uses.
28.05 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
(1) Zoning Administrator. The zoning administrator shall have the following duties and powers:
(a) Advise applicants as to the provisions of this ordinance and assist them in preparing permit
applications and appeal forms.
(b) Issue permits and certificates of compliance and inspect properties for compliance with this ordinance.
(c) Keep records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved, and other official actions.
(d) Have access to any structure or premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. for the
purpose of performing these duties.
(e) Submit copies of decisions on variances, conditional use permits, appeals for a map or text
interpretation, and map or text amendments within 10 days after they are granted or denied, to the
appropriate district office of the department.
(f) Investigate and report violations of this ordinance to the appropriate city planning agency and the
district attorney, corporation counsel, or municipal attorney.
(2) Building Permits.
(a) When required. Unless another section of this ordinance specifically exempts certain types of
5
development from this requirement, a building permit shall be obtained from the code enforcement
office before any new development, as defined in Section 28.08(2)(d), of this ordinance, or any
change in the use of an existing building or structure is initiated.
(b) Application. An application for a building permit shall be made to the code enforcement office upon
forms furnished by the City of Wisconsin Rapids, and shall include, for the purpose of proper
enforcement of these regulations, the following information:
(1) General information:
(a) Name, address, and telephone number of applicant, property owner, and contractor,
where applicable.
(b) Legal description of the property and a general description, of the proposed use or
development.
(c) Whether or not a private water or sewage system is to be installed.
(2) Site development plan. The site development plan shall be drawn to scale and submitted as a
part of the permit application form and shall contain the following information:
(a) Dimensions and area of the lot
(b) Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and center line
of all abutting streets or highways
(c) Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply
systems
(d) Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting navigable waterways
(e) Location and landward limit on all wetlands
(f) Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and vegetative cover
(g) Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property as determined from
floodplain zoning maps used to delineate floodplain areas
(h) Location of existing or future access roads
(i) Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland alteration
(c) Expiration. All permits issued, but not acted upon, under the authority of this ordinance shall expire six
months from the date of issue.
(3) Certificates of Compliance.
(a) Except where no building permit or conditional use permit is required, no land shall be occupied or
used, and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt, or replaced
shall be occupied, until a certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning administrator subject to the
following provisions:
(1) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof, and the
proposed use thereof, conform to the provisions of this ordinance.
(2) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a
building/conditional use permit.
(3) The certificate of compliance shall be issued within 10 days after the completion of the work
specified in the building/conditional use permit, providing the building or premises or
proposed use thereof conforms with all the provisions of this ordinance.
(b) The zoning administrator may issue a temporary certificate of compliance for a building, premises, or
part thereof, pursuant to rules and regulations established therefore, by the city council.
(c) Upon written request from the owner, the zoning administrator shall issue a certificate of compliance
for any building or premises existing at the time of the adoption, certifying after inspection, the extent
and type of use made of the building or premises and whether or not such use conforms to the
provisions of this ordinance.
(4) Fees. The city council may, by resolution, adopt fees for the following:
(a) Building permits
(b) Certificates of compliance
(c) Public hearings
(d) Legal notice publications
(e) Conditional use permits
(5) Recording. When a building permit or conditional use permit is approved, an appropriate record shall be made
by the zoning administrator of the land use and structures permitted.
(6) Revocation. Where the conditions of a building permit or conditional use permit are violated, the permit shall
be revoked by the zoning board of appeals.
(7) Board of Appeals. The city mayor shall appoint a zoning board of appeals under Section 62.23(7)(e),
Wisconsin Statutes, consisting of five members, subject to confirmation by the common council. The board of
appeals shall adopt rules for the conduct of the business of the board of appeals as required by Section
62.23(7)(e).3, Wisconsin Statutes.
6
(a) Powers and duties. The zoning board of appeals shall:
(1) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision,
or determination made by administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this
ordinance.
(2) Hear and decide applications for variances.
(3) May authorize upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms of the ordinance
as shall not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship. In the issuance of a
variance, the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done. No
variance from the terms of this ordinance shall be granted which is contrary to the public
interest. A variance may be granted where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement
of the provisions of this o ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship. The granting of a
variance shall not have the effect of granting or extending any use of property which is
prohibited in that zoning district by this ordinance.
(b) Appeals to the Zoning Board. Appeals to zoning board of appeals may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the community affected by any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning administrator or other administrative official.
Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board by filing
with the official from whom the appeal is taken, and with the board of appeals, a notice of appeal
specifying the reasons therefor. The zoning administrator or other official from whom the appeal is
taken shall transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record on which the appeal action was
taken.
(c) Public hearings:
(1) Before making a decision on an appeal, the zoning board of appeals shall, within a
reasonable period of time, hold a public hearing. The board shall give public notice of the
hearing by publishing a class II notice, under Chapter 985, Wisconsin Statutes, specifying the
date, time, and place of the hearing and the matters to come before the board. At the public
hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney and present testimony.
(2) A copy of such notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the appropriate district
office of the department, at least 10 days prior to all public hearings on issues involving
shoreland-wetland zoning.
(d) Decisions.
(1) The final disposition of an appeal or application for a variance to the zoning board of appeals
shall be in the form of a written decision, made within a reasonable time after the public
hearing, signed by the board chairperson. Such decision shall state the specific facts which
are the basis of the board's determination and shall either affirm, reverse, or modify the
order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the
appeal for lack of jurisdiction or persecution, or grant the application for a variance.
(2) A copy of such decision shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the appropriate district
office of the department within 10 days after the decision is issued.
28.06 AMENDING SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING REGULATIONS
(1) The city council may from time to time, alter, supplement or change the district boundaries and the regulations
contained in this ordinance in accordance with the requirements of Section 62.23(7)(d).2, Wisconsin Statutes,
and the following:
(a) A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted to the appropriate district office
of the department within five days of the submission of the proposed amendment to the city planning
agency;
(b) All proposed text and map amendments to the shoreland-wetland zoning regulations shall be referred
to the city planning agency, and a public hearing shall be held as required by Section 62.23(7)(d).2,
Wisconsin Statutes. The appropriate district office of the department shall be provided with written
notice of the public hearing at least 10 days prior to such hearing.
(c) In order to insure that the shoreland protection objectives in Section 144.26, Wisconsin Statutes, will
be accomplished by the amendment, the city council may not rezone a wetland in a shorelandwetland
zoning district, or any portion thereof, where the proposed rezoning may result in a significant
adverse impact upon any of the following:
(1) Storm and flood water storage capacity;
(2) Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of groundwater to a wetland, the
recharge of groundwater from a wetland to another area or the flow of groundwater through a
wetland;
7
(3) Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals, or organic compounds that would
otherwise drain into navigable waters;
(4) Shoreline protection against soil erosion;
(5) Fish spawning, breeding, nursery, or feeding grounds;
(6) Wildlife habitat; or
(7) Areas of special recreational, scenic, or scientific interest, including scarce wetland types and
habitat of endangered species.
(d) Where the district office of the department determines that a proposed rezoning may have a
significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in Section 28.06(1)(c) of this ordinance, the
department shall so notify the city of its determination either prior to or during the public hearing held
on the proposed amendment.
(e) The appropriate district office of the department shall be provided with:
(1) A copy of the recommendations and report, if any, of the city planning agency on the
proposed text or map amendment, within 10 days after the submission of those
recommendations to the city council; and
(2) Written notice of the city council's action on the proposed text or map amendment within 10
days after the action is taken.
(f) If the department notifies the city planning agency in writing that a proposed amendment may have a
significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in Section 28.06(1)(c) of this ordinance, that
proposed amendment, if approved by the city council, may not become effective until more than 30
days have elapsed since written notice of the city council approval was mailed to the department, as
required by Section 28.06(1)(e) of this ordinance. If within the 30-day period, the department notifies
the city council that the department intends to adopt a superseding shoreland-wetland zoning
ordinance for the city under Section 62.231(6)/61.351(6), Wisconsin Statutes, the proposed
amendment may not become effective until the ordinance adoption procedure under Section
62.231(6)/61.351(6), Wisconsin Statutes, is completed or otherwise terminated.
28.07 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Any development, building or structure, or accessory building or structure constructed, altered, added to, modified,
rebuilt or replaced, or any use or accessory use established after the effective date of this ordinance in violation of the
provisions of this ordinance, by any person, firm, association, corporation (including building contractors or their
agents) shall be deemed a violation. The zoning administrator shall refer violations to the city planning agency and the
district attorney, corporation counsel, or municipal attorney who shall prosecute such violations. Any person, firm,
association, or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be
subject to a forfeiture of not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 per offense, together with the taxable costs of such
action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this ordinance is a public
nuisance and the creation thereof may be enjoined and the maintenance thereof may be abated by action at suit of the
city, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to Section 87.30(2), Wisconsin Statutes.
28.08 DEFINITIONS
(1) For the purpose of administering and enforcing this ordinance, the terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
(a) Words used in the present tense include the future
(b) Words in the singular number include the plural number
(c) Words in the plural number include the singular number
(d) The word "shall" is mandatory, not permissive
(e) All distances, unless otherwise specified, shall be measured horizontally.
(2) The following terms used in this ordinance mean:
(a) Accessory Structure or Use means a detached subordinate structure or a use which is clearly
incidental to, and customarily found in connection with, the principle structure or use to which it is
related and which is located on the same lot as that of the principle structure or use.
(b) Boathouse, as defined in Section 30.121(1), Wisconsin Statutes, means a permanent structure used
for the storage of watercraft and associated materials and includes all structures which are totally
enclosed, have roofs or walls or any combination of structural parts.
(c) Department means the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(d) Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not
limited to, the construction of buildings, structures, or accessory structures; the construction of
additions or substantial alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the placement of
buildings or structures; ditching, lagooning, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations; and the deposition or extraction of earthen materials.
8
(e) Drainage System means one or more artificial ditches, tile drains, or similar devices which collect
surface runoff or groundwater and convey it to a point of discharge.
(f) Environment Control Facility means any facility, temporary or permanent, which is reasonably
expected to abate, reduce, or aid in the prevention, measurement, control, or monitoring of noise, air,
or water pollutants; solid waste and thermal pollution; radiation; or other pollutants, including facilities
installed principally to supplement or to replace existing property or equipment not meeting or
allegedly not meeting acceptable pollution control standards or which are to be supplemented or
replaced by other pollution control facilities.
(g) Fixed Houseboat, as defined in Section 30.121(1), Wisconsin Statutes, means a structure not actually
used for navigation which extends beyond the ordinary high-water mark of a navigable waterway and
is retained in place either by cables to the shoreline or by anchors or spudpoles attached to the bed of
the waterway.
(h) Navigable Waters means Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within Wisconsin,
and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages, and other waters within the territorial limits of this State,
including the Wisconsin portion of boundary waters, which are navigable under the laws of this state.
Under Section 144.26(2)(d), Wisconsin Statutes, not withstanding any other provision of law or
administrative rule promulgated thereunder, shoreland ordinances required under Section
61.351/62.231, Wisconsin Statutes, and Chapter NR 117, Wisconsin Administrative Code, do not
apply to lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches if:
(1) Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river;
(2) Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not navigable streams
before ditching; and
(3) Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use.
(i) Ordinary High Water Mark means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action
of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction, or
prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized
characteristic.
(j) Planning Agency means the city's planning commission created under Section 62.23(1), Wisconsin
Statutes, a board of public land commissioners, or a committee of the municipality's governing body
which acts on matters pertaining to planning and zoning.
(k) Regional Flood means a flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have
generally occurred in Wisconsin and which may be expected to occur to be exceeded on a particular
stream because of like physical characteristics, once in every 100 years.
(l) Shorelands means lands within the following distances from the ordinary high-water mark of
navigable waters: 1,000 feet from a lake, pond or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream or to
the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
(m) Shoreland-Wetland District means the zoning district, created in this shoreland-wetland zoning
ordinance, comprised of shorelands that are designated as wetlands on the wetlands inventory maps
which have been adopted and made a part of this ordinance, as described in Section 28.02 of this
ordinance.
(n) Special Exception or Conditional Use means a use which is permitted by this ordinance provided that
certain conditions specified in the ordinance are met and that a permit is granted by the board of
appeals, or where appropriate, the planning agency designed by the city council.
(o) Unnecessary Hardship means that circumstance where special conditions, which were not
self-created, affect a particular property and make strict conformity with the restrictions governing
area, setbacks, frontage, height, or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable In light of the
purpose of this ordinance.
(p) Variance means an authorization granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals to construct, alter, or use a
building or structure in a manner that deviates from the dimensional standards of this ordinance.
(q) Wetlands mean those areas where water is at, near, or above the land surface long enough to
support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which have soils indicative of wet conditions.
1
Chapter 29 Annexation
29.01 Statutes Adopted
29.02 Zoning
29.01 STATUTES ADOPTED
The statutory provisions set forth in Section 66.0217, 66.0219, 66.0221, and 66.0223 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and
any amendments thereto, relating to the annexation of territory, are hereby adopted.
29.02 ZONING.
All territory annexed to the City of Wisconsin Rapids shall automatically become a part of the R-2 residential district
until definite boundaries and zoning districts are recommended by the Planning Commission and adopted by the
Common Council; provided, however, that the Common Council shall adopt definite boundaries and district regulations
within 90 days from the date of the annexation. The Planning Commission may recommend definite zoning districts
and boundaries to the common council prior to or at the time the council acts on a proposed annexation, and may
adopt definite boundaries at the time of annexation provided the public notice procedure is followed. (MC#989)
1
Chapter 31 Historic Preservation
31.01 Purpose and Intent
31.02 Definitions
31.03 Historic Structure, Historic Site, and Historic Designation Criteria
31.04 Powers and Duties
31.05 Procedure
31.06 Interim Control
31.07 Penalties for Violations
31.08 Separability
30.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is hereby declared a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of improvements
or sites of special character or special architectural, archeological or historic interest or value is in the public interest.
The purpose of this section is to:
(1) Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement, and preservation of such improvements, sites and
districts which represent or reflect elements of the city's cultural, social, economic, political and architectural
history.
(2) Safeguard the city's historic, prehistoric and cultural heritage, as embodied and reflected in such historic
structures, sites and districts.
(3) Stabilize and improve property values, and enhance the visual and aesthetic character of the city.
(4) Protect and enhance the city's attractions to residents, tourists and visitors, and serve as a support and
stimulus to business and industry.
31.02 DEFINITIONS
The definitions shall be as follows:
(1) Certificate of Appropriateness means the certificate issued by the Common Council approving alteration,
rehabilitation, construction, reconstruction or demolition of a historic structure, historic site or any improvement
in a historic district.
(2) Historic district is an area designated by the Common Council that only contains historic improvements or
sites.
(3) Historic site means any parcel of land of historic significance due to a substantial value in tracing the history or
prehistory of man, or upon which a historic event has occurred, and which has been designated as a historic
site under this section, or an improvement parcel, or part thereof, on which is situated a historic structure and
any abutting improvement parcel, or part thereof, used as and constituting part of the premises on which the
historic structure is situated.
(4) Historic structure means any improvement which has a special character or special historic interest or value
as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the city, state or nation and which has been
designated as a historic structure pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(5) Improvement means any building, structure, place, work of art or other object constituting a physical
betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment, including streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, lighting
fixtures, signs and the like.
31.03 HISTORIC STRUCTURE, HISTORIC SITE AND HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATION CRITERIA
(1) For purposes of this ordinance, a historic structure, historic site, or historic district designation may be placed
on any site, natural or improved, including any building, improvement or structure located thereon, or any area
of particular historic, architectural, archeological or cultural significance to the city such as historic structures,
sites, or districts which:
(a) Exemplify or reflect the broad cultural, political, economic or social history of the nation, state or
community; or
(b) Are identified with historic personages or with important events in national, state or local history, or
(c) Embody the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or specimen inherently valuable for
a study of a period, style, method of construction, or of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or
(d) Are representative of the notable work of a master builder, designer or architect who influenced his
age; or
2
(e) Have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important to prehistory or history.
31.04 POWERS AND DUTIES
(1) Designation. The Common Council shall have the power, subject to Section V, to designate historic structures
and historic sites, upon the petitioning of the property owner(s), and to recommend designation of historic
districts within the city limits. Such designations shall be made based on Section III. Once designated, such
historic structures, sites and districts shall be subject to all the provisions of this ordinance.
(2) Regulation of Construction, Reconstruction, Alteration and Demolition
(a) No owner or person in charge of a historic structure, historic site or structure within a historic district
shall reconstruct, alter or demolish all or any part of the exterior of such property or construct any
improvement upon such designated property or properties or cause or permit any such work to be
performed upon such property or demolish such property unless a Certificate of Appropriateness has
been granted by the Common Council. Also, unless such certificate has been granted by the common
council, the building inspector shall not issue a permit for any such work.
(b) Upon filing of any application for a Certificate of Appropriateness with the Planning Commission and
the Common Council shall approve the application unless:
(1) In the case of a designated historic structure or historic site, the proposed work would
detrimentally change, destroy or adversely affect any exterior feature of the improvement or
site upon which said work is to be done;
(2) In the case of the construction of a new improvement upon a historic site, or within a historic
district, the exterior of such improvement would adversely affect or not harmonize with the
external appearance of other neighboring improvements on such site or within the district;
(3) In the case of any property located in a historic district, the proposed construction,
reconstruction, exterior alteration or demolition does not conform to the purpose and intent of
this section and to the objectives and design criteria of the historic preservation plan for said
district;
(4) The building or structure is of such architectural or historical significance that its demolition
would be detrimental to the public interest and contrary to the general welfare of the people of
the city and state;
(5) In the case of a request for the demolition of a deteriorated building or structure, any
economic hardship or difficulty claimed by the owner is self-created or is the result of any
failure to maintain the property in good repair.
(c) If the Common Council determines that the application for a Certificate of Appropriateness and the
proposed changes are consistent with the character and features of the property or district, it shall
issue the Certificate of Appropriateness.
(d) The issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall not relieve the applicant from obtaining other
permits and approvals required by the city. A building permit or other municipal permit shall be invalid
if it is obtained without the presentation of the Certificate of Appropriateness required for the proposed
work.
(e) Ordinary maintenance and repairs may be undertaken without a Certificate of Appropriateness
provided that the work involves repairs to existing features of a historic structure or site or the
replacement of elements of a structure with pieces identical in appearance and provided that the work
does not change the exterior appearance of the structure or site and does not require the issuance of
a building permit.
(f) Compliance with Certificates of Appropriateness shall be started within 12 months after the issuance
of the certificate, and the work shall conform to the provisions of the certificate. The city may inspect
the work during and after construction in order to assure compliance. Failure to comply with a
Certificate of Appropriateness or failure to obtain a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be a violation
of this section. In addition to other penalties and remedies, the city shall issue a stop work order, and
all work shall cease on the designated property. No additional work shall be undertaken as long as
such stop work order shall continue in effect.
(3) Recognition of Historic Structures, Sites and Districts. At such time as a historic structure, site or district has
been properly designated, the Common Council, in cooperation with the property owner, may cause to be
prepared and erected on such property at city expense, a suitable plaque declaring that such property is a
historic structure, site or district.
31.05 PROCEDURES
(1) Designation of Historic Structures and Historic Sites
(a) The Common Council may, after notice and public hearing, designate historic structures and historic
sites, or rescind such designation or recommendation, after application of the criteria in Section IV
3
above. At least 10 days prior to such hearing, the city clerk shall notify the owners of record, as listed
in the office of the city assessor, who are owners of property in whole or in part situated within 200
feet of the boundaries of the property affected. Notice of such hearing shall also be published as a
Class 1 Notice, under the Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) The common council shall then conduct such public hearing and, in addition to the notified persons,
may hear expert witnesses and shall have the power to subpoena such witnesses and records as it
deems necessary. The committee may conduct an independent investigation into the proposed
designation or rescission. Within 10 days after the close of the public hearing, the committee shall
make a recommendation to the Common Council which, within 10 days thereafter, may designate the
property as either a historic structure, or a historic site, or rescind the designation. After the
designation or rescission has been made, notification shall be sent to the property owner or owners.
Notification shall also be given to the building inspector and the city assessor. The city clerk shall
cause the designation or rescission to be recorded, at city expense, in the county register of deeds
office.
(2) Creation of Historic District
(a) For preservation purposes, the common council may select geographically defined areas within the
city to be designated as historic districts and shall prepare a historic preservation plan for each area.
A historic district may be designated for any geographic area of particular historic, architectural or
cultural significance to the city, after application of the criteria in Section III above. Each historic
preservation plan prepared for or by the city shall include a cultural and architectural analysis
supporting the historic significance of the area, the specific guidelines for development, and a
statement of preservation objectives.
(b) Review and Adoption Procedure
(1) The common council shall hold a public hearing when considering the plan for a historic
district. Notice of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall be sent by the city
clerk to the alderperson of the aldermanic district or districts in which the historic district is
located, and the owners of record, as listed in the office of the city assessor, who are owners
of the property within the proposed historic district or are situated in whole or in part within
200 feet of the boundaries of the proposed historic district. Said notice is to be sent at least
10 days prior to the date of the public hearing. Following the public hearing, the common
council shall vote to recommend, reject or withhold action on the plan. (MC#920)
(2) The Planning Commission shall review the historic district plan and make a recommendation
to the Common Council. The Planning Commission shall make its recommendation on the
historic district plan within 30 days.
(3) The common council, upon receipt of the recommendations from the Planning Commission
shall hold another a public hearing, notice to be given as noted in subparagraph (a) above
and shall, following the public hearing, either designate or reject the historic district.
Designation of the historic district shall constitute adoption of the plan prepared for that
district and direct the implementation of said plan. (MC#920)
31.06 INTERIM CONTROL
No building permit shall be issued by the building inspector for alteration, construction, demolition, or removal of a
nominated historic structure, historic site, or any property or structure within a nominated historic district from the date
when a nomination form is first presented at the city clerk's office until the final disposition of the nomination by the
Common Council unless such alteration, removal or demolition is authorized by formal resolution of the Common
Council as necessary for public health, welfare or safety. In no event shall the delays be for more than 180 days.
31.07 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS
Any person or persons violating any provision of this section shall be fined $50.00 for each separate violation. Each
and every day during which a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. Notice of violations shall
be issued by the building inspector.
31.08 SEPARABILITY
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder
of this chapter and the application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
Chapter 32 Construction Site Erosion (MC#1173)
32.01 Authority
32.02 Findings of Fact
32.03 Purpose
32.04 Applicability and Jurisdiction
32.05 Definitions
32.06 Technical Standards
32.07 Performance Standards for Construction Sites under an Acre
32.08 Performance Standards for Construction Sites of One Acres or More
32.09 Permitting Requirements, Procedures, and Fees
32.10 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, Statement, and Amendments
32.11 Fee Schedule
32.12 Inspection
32.13 Enforcement
32.14 Appeals
32.15 Severability
32.16 Effective Date
32.01 AUTHORITY
(1) This ordinance is adopted under the authority granted by Section 62.234, Wisconsin Statutes. This
ordinance supersedes all provisions of an ordinance previously enacted under Section 62.23, Wisconsin
Statutes, that relate to construction site erosion control. Except as otherwise specified in Section 62.234,
Wisconsin Statutes, Section 62.23, Wisconsin Statutes, applies to this ordinance and to any amendments
to this ordinance.
(2) The provisions of this ordinance are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of the same
governing body.
(3) The common council hereby designates the city engineer to administer and enforce the provisions of this
ordinance. Whenever city engineer is used in this ordinance it shall mean city engineer or his/her
designee.
(4) The requirements of this ordinance do not pre-empt more stringent erosion and sediment control
requirements that may be imposed by any of the following:
(a) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules, permits or approvals including
those authorized under ss. 281.16 and 283.33, Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) Targeted non-agricultural performance standards promulgated in rules by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources under Section NR 151.004, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
32.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
The common council finds that runoff from land disturbing construction activity carries a significant
amount of sediment and other pollutants to the waters of the state in the city of Wisconsin Rapids.
32.03 PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; prevent and
control water pollution; prevent and control soil erosion; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control
building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote
sound economic growth, by minimizing the amount of sediment and other pollutants carried by runoff or
discharged from land disturbing construction activity to waters of the state in the city of Wisconsin Rapids.
32.04 APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION.
(1) Applicability.
(a) This ordinance applies to the following land disturbing construction activities except as provided
under 32.04(1)(b):
(1) Construction sites for which the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources received a
notice of intent in accordance with subchapter III of chapter NR 216 on or after January 1,
2011.
(2) Construction sites for which a bid has been advertised or construction contract signed for
which no bid was advertised, on or after January 1, 2011.
(b) This ordinance does not apply to the following:
(1) Transportation facilities, except transportation facility construction projects that are part of
a larger common plan of development such as local roads within a residential or industrial
development.
(2) A construction project that is exempted by federal statutes or regulations from the
requirement to have a national pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued
under chapter 40, Code of Federal Regulations, part 122, for land disturbing construction
activity.
(3) Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices.
(4) Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities.
(5) Routine maintenance for project sites under 5 acres of land disturbance if performed to
maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility.
(c) Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in paragraph (a), this ordinance applies to
construction sites of any size that, in the opinion of the city engineer, are likely to result in runoff
that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water, that
causes undue channel erosion, that increases water pollution by scouring or the transportation of
particulate matter or that endangers property or public safety.
(2) Jurisdiction. This ordinance applies to land disturbing construction activity on construction sites located
within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the city of Wisconsin Rapids.
(3) Exclusions. This ordinance is not applicable to activities conducted by a state agency, as defined under
Section 227.01(1), Wisconsin Statutes, but also including the office of district attorney, which is subject to
the state plan promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered into under Section 281.33(2),
Wisconsin Statutes.
32.05 DEFINITIONS.
(1) Administering authority means a governmental employee, or a regional planning commission empowered
under Section 62.234, Wisconsin Statutes, that is designated by the common council to administer this
ordinance.
(2) Agricultural facilities and practices has the meaning in Section 281.16(1), Wisconsin Statutes
(3) Average annual rainfall means a typical calendar year of precipitation as determined by the department
for users of models such as SLAMM, P8, or equivalent methodology. The average annual rainfall is
chosen from a department publication for the location closest to the municipality.
(4) Best management practice or BMP means structural or non-structural measures, practices, techniques or
devices employed to avoid or minimize soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state.
(5) Business day means a day the office of the city engineer is routinely and customarily open for business.
(6) Cease and desist order means a court-issued order to halt land disturbing construction activity that is
being conducted without the required permit.
(7) Construction site means an area upon which one or more land disturbing construction activities occur,
including areas that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale where multiple separate and
distinct land disturbing construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules
but under one plan. A long-range planning document that describes separate construction projects, such
as a 20-year transportation improvement plan, is not a common plan of development.
(8) Division of land means the creation from one parcel of five or more parcels or building sites of 1.5 or
fewer acres each in area where such creation occurs at one time or through the successive partition
within a 5 year period.
(9) Erosion means the process by which the land’s surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or
gravity.
(10) Erosion and sediment control plan means a comprehensive plan developed to address pollution caused
by erosion and sedimentation of soil particles or rock fragments during construction.
(11) Extraterritorial means the unincorporated area within 3 miles of the corporate limits of a first, second, or
third class city, or within 1.5 miles of a fourth class city or village.
(12) Final stabilization means that all land disturbing construction activities at the construction site have been
completed and that a uniform perennial vegetative cover has been established, with a density of at least
70 percent of the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or that
employ equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
(13) Governing body means town board of supervisors, county board of supervisors, city council, village board
of trustees or village council.
(14) Land disturbing construction activity means any man-made alteration of the land surface resulting in a
change in the topography or existing vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and
lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of the state. Land disturbing
construction activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling
and grading activities.
(15) MEP or maximum extent practicable means a level of implementing best management practices in order
to achieve a performance standard specified in this chapter which takes into account the best available
technology, cost effectiveness , geographic features, and other competing interests such as protection of
public safety and welfare, protection of endangered and threatened resources, and preservation of
historic properties. MEP allows flexibility in the way to meet the performance standards and may vary
based on the performance standard and site conditions.
(16) Performance standard means a narrative or measurable number specifying the minimum acceptable
outcome for a facility or practice.
(17) Permit means a written authorization made by the city engineer to the applicant to conduct land disturbing
construction activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the state.
(18) Pollutant has the meaning given in Section 283.01(13), Wisconsin Statutes.
(19) Pollution has the meaning given in Section 281.01(10), Wisconsin Statutes.
(20) Responsible party means any entity holding fee title to the property or performing services to meet the
performance standards of this ordinance through a contract or other agreement.
(21) Runoff means storm water or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or similar water that moves on
the land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
(22) Sediment means settleable solid material that is transported by runoff, suspended within runoff or
deposited by runoff away from its original location.
(23) Separate storm sewer means a conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage
systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets
all of the following criteria:
(a) Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff.
(b) Is not part of a combined sewer system.
(c) Is not part of a publicly owned wastewater treatment works that provides secondary or more
stringent treatment.
(d) Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
(24) Site means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land disturbing
construction activity is proposed in the permit application.
(25) Stop work order means an order issued by the city engineer which requires that all construction activity
on the site be stopped.
(26) Technical standard means a document that specifies design, predicted performance and operation and
maintenance specifications for a material, device or method.
(27) Waters of the state has the meaning given in Section 283.01(20), Wisconsin Statutes.
32.06 TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
(1) Design Criteria, Standards and Specifications. All BMPs required to comply with this ordinance shall meet
the design criteria, standards and specifications based on any of the following:
(a) Design guidance and technical standards identified or developed by the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources under subchapter V of chapter NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code.
(b) For this ordinance, soil loss is calculated using the appropriate rainfall or runoff factor, also
referred to as the R factor, or an equivalent design storm using a type II distribution, with
consideration given to the geographic location of the site and the period of disturbance.
(2) Other Standards. Other technical standards not identified or developed in 32.06(1) may be used provided
that the methods have been approved by the city engineer.
32.07 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION SITES UNDER AN ACRE.
(1) Responsible Party. The landowner of the construction site or other person contracted or obligated by
other agreement with the landowner to implement and maintain construction site BMPs is the responsible
party and shall comply with this section.
(2) Erosion and Sediment Control Practices. Erosion and Sediment Control Practices. Erosion and sediment
control practices at each site where land disturbing construction activity is to occur shall be used to
prevent or reduce all of the following:
(a) The deposition of soil from being tracked onto streets by vehicles.
(b) The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into on-site storm water inlets.
(c) The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into adjacent waters of the state.
(d) The discharge of sediment from drainage ways that flow off the site.
(e) The discharge of sediment by dewatering activities.
(f) The discharge of sediment eroding from soil stockpiles existing for more than 7 days.
(g) The discharge of sediment from erosive flows at outlets and in downstream channels.
(h) The transport by runoff into waters of the state of chemicals, cement, and other building
compounds and materials on the construction site during the construction period. However,
projects that require the placement of these materials in waters of the state, such as constructing
bridge footings or BMP installations, are not prohibited by this subdivision.
(3) Location. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be located prior to runoff entering waters of the
state.
(4) Implementation. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be implemented as follows:
(a) Erosion and sediment control practices shall be constructed or installed before land disturbing
construction activities begin.
(b) Erosion and sediment control practices shall be maintained until final stabilization.
(c) Final stabilization activity shall commence when land disturbing activities cease and final grade
has been reached on any portion of the site.
(d) Temporary stabilization activity shall commence when land disturbing activities have temporarily
ceased and will not resume for a period exceeding 14 calendar days.
(e) BMPs that are no longer necessary for erosion and sediment control shall be removed by the
responsible party.
32.08 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION SITES OF ONE ACRE OR MORE
(1) Responsible Party. The responsible party shall implement an erosion and sediment control plan,
developed in accordance with 32.10 that incorporates the requirements of this section.
(2) Plan. A written plan shall be developed in accordance with 32.10 and implemented for each construction
site.
(3) Erosion and Sediment Control Practices. The plan required under 32.08(2) shall include the following:
(a) Erosion and Sediment Control Practices. Erosion and sediment control practices at each site
where land disturbing construction activity is to occur shall be used to prevent or reduce all of the
following:
(1) The deposition of soil from being tracked onto streets by vehicles.
(2) The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into on-site storm water inlets.
(3) The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into adjacent waters of the state.
(4) The discharge of sediment from drainage ways that flow off the site.
(5) The discharge of sediment by dewatering activities.
(6) The discharge of sediment eroding from soil stockpiles existing for more than 7 days.
(7) The discharge of sediment from erosive flows at outlets and in downstream channels.
(8) The transport by runoff into waters of the state of chemicals, cement, and other building
compounds and materials on the construction site during the construction period.
However, projects that require the placement of these materials in waters of the state,
such as constructing bridge footings or BMP installations, are not prohibited by this
subdivision.
(9) The transport by runoff into waters of the state of untreated wash water from vehicle and
wheel washing.
(b) Sediment Performance Standards. In addition to the erosion and sediment control practices
under paragraph (a), the following erosion and sediment control practices shall be employed:
(1) BMPs that, by design, discharge no more than 5 tons per acre per year, or to the
maximum extent practicable, of the sediment load carried in runoff from initial grading to
final stabilization.
(2) No person shall be required to employ more BMPs than are needed to meet a
performance standard in order to comply with maximum extent practicable. Erosion and
sediment control BMPs may be combined to meet the requirements of this paragraph.
Credit may be given toward meeting the sediment performance standard of this
paragraph for limiting the duration or area, or both, of land disturbing construction activity,
or for other appropriate mechanisms.
(3) Notwithstanding 32.08(3)(b)(1), if BMPs cannot be designed and implemented to meet
the sediment performance standard, the plan shall include a written, site-specific
explanation of why the sediment performance standard cannot be met and how the
sediment load will be reduced to the maximum extent practicable.
(c) Preventive Measures. The plan shall incorporate all of the following:
(1) Maintenance of existing vegetation, especially adjacent to surface waters, whenever
possible.
(2) Minimization of soil compaction and preservation of topsoil.
(3) Minimization of land disturbing construction activity on slopes of 20% or more.
(4) Development of spill prevention and response procedures.
(4) Location. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be located prior to runoff entering waters of the
state.
(5) Alternate Requirements. The city engineer may establish storm water management requirements more
stringent than those set forth in this section if the city engineer determines that an added level of
protection is needed for sensitive resources.
32.09 PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS, PROCEDURES, AND FEES.
(1) Permit Required. No responsible party may commence a land disturbing construction activity subject to
this ordinance without receiving prior approval of an erosion and sediment control plan for the site and a
permit from the city engineer.
(2) Permit Application and Fees. At least one responsible party desiring to undertake a land disturbing
construction activity subject to this ordinance shall submit an application for a permit and an erosion and
sediment control plan that meets the requirements of 32.09 and shall pay an application fee to the city
engineer. By submitting an application, the applicant is authorizing the city engineer to enter the site to
obtain information required for the review of the erosion and sediment control plan.
(3) Review and Approval of Permit Application. The city engineer shall review any permit application that is
submitted with an erosion and sediment control plan, and the required fee. The following approval
procedure shall be used:
(a) Within 30 business days of the receipt of a complete permit application, as required by 32.09(2),
the city engineer shall inform the applicant whether the application and plan are approved or
disapproved based on the requirements of this ordinance.
(b) If the permit application and plan are approved, the city engineer shall issue the permit.
(c) If the permit application or plan is disapproved, the city engineer shall state in writing the reasons
for disapproval.
(d) The city engineer may request additional information from the applicant. If additional information
is submitted, the city engineer shall have 30 business days from the date the additional
information is received to inform the applicant that the plan is either approved or disapproved.
(e) Failure by the city engineer to inform the permit applicant of a decision within 30 business days of
a required submittal shall be deemed to mean approval of the submittal and the applicant may
proceed as if a permit had been issued.
(4) Surety Bond. As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit, the city engineer may require the
applicant to deposit a surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit to guarantee a good faith execution of the
approved erosion control plan and any permit conditions.
(5) Permit Requirements. All permits shall require the responsible party to:
(a) Notify the city engineer within 48 hours of commencing any land disturbing construction activity.
(b) Notify the city engineer of completion of any BMPs within 14 days after their installation.
(c) Obtain permission in writing from the city engineer prior to any modification pursuant to 32.10(3)
of the erosion and sediment control plan.
(d) Install all BMPs as identified in the approved erosion and sediment control plan.
(e) Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage systems, BMPs and other facilities
identified in the erosion and sediment control plan.
(f) Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces and drainage ways resulting from
land disturbing construction activities and document repairs in a site erosion control log.
(g) Inspect the BMPs within 24 hours after each rain of 0.5 inches or more which results in runoff
during active construction periods, and at least once each week, make needed repairs and
document the findings of the inspections in a site erosion control log with the date of inspection,
the name of the person conducting the inspection, and a description of the present phase of the
construction at the site.
(h) Allow the city engineer to enter the site for the purpose of inspecting compliance with the erosion
and sediment control plan or for performing any work necessary to bring the site into compliance
with the control plan. Keep a copy of the erosion and sediment control plan at the construction
site.
(6) Permit Conditions. Permits issued under this section may include conditions established by city engineer
in addition to the requirements set forth in 32.09(5), where needed to assure compliance with the
performance standards in 32.07 or 32.08.
(7) Permit Duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid for a period of 180 days, or the length of
the building permit or other construction authorizations, whichever is longer, from the date of issuance.
The city engineer may extend the period one or more times for up to an additional 180 days. The city
engineer may require additional BMPs as a condition of the extension if they are necessary to meet the
requirements of this ordinance.
(8) Maintenance. The responsible party throughout the duration of the construction activities shall maintain all
BMPs necessary to meet the requirements of this ordinance until the site has undergone final
stabilization.
32.10 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN, STATEMENT, AND AMENDMENTS.
(1) Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
(a) An erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared and submitted to the city engineer.
(b) The erosion and sediment control plan shall be designed to meet the performance standards in
32.07, 32.08 and other requirements of this ordinance.
(c) The erosion and sediment control plan shall address pollution caused by soil erosion and
sedimentation during construction and up to final stabilization of the site. The erosion and
sediment control plan shall include, at a minimum, the following items:
(1) The name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting
firm retained by the applicant, together with the name of the applicant’s principal contact
at such firm. The application shall also include start and end dates for construction.
(2) Description of the site and the nature of the construction activity, including representation
of the limits of land disturbance on a United States Geological Service 7.5 minute series
topographic map.
(3) A sequence of construction of the development site, including stripping and clearing;
rough grading; construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and
landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the
estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of
temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of permanent
vegetation.
(4) Estimates of the total area of the site and the total area of the site that is expected to be
disturbed by construction activities.
(5) Calculations to show compliance with the required performance standards.
(6) Existing data describing the surface soil as well as subsoils.
(7) Depth to groundwater, as indicated by Natural Resources Conservation Service soil
information where available.
(8) Name of the immediate named receiving water from the United States Geological Service
7.5 minute series topographic maps.
(d) The erosion and sediment control plan shall include a site map. The site map shall include the
following items and shall be at a scale not greater than 100 feet per inch and at a contour interval
not to exceed five feet.
(1) Existing topography, vegetative cover, natural and engineered drainage systems, roads
and surface waters. Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches and other watercourses
on and immediately adjacent to the site shall be shown. Any identified 100-year flood
plains, flood fringes and floodways shall also be shown.
(2) Boundaries of the construction site.
(3) Drainage patterns and approximate slopes anticipated after major grading activities.
(4) Areas of soil disturbance.
(5) Location of major structural and non-structural controls identified in the plan.
(6) Location of areas where stabilization practices will be employed.
(7) Areas which will be vegetated following construction.
(8) Area and location of wetland acreage on the construction site and locations where storm
water is discharged to a surface water or wetland within one-quarter mile downstream of
the construction site.
(9) An alphanumeric or equivalent grid overlying the entire construction site map.
(e) Each erosion and sediment control plan shall include a description of appropriate controls and
measures that will be performed at the site to prevent pollutants from reaching waters of the
state. The plan shall clearly describe the appropriate control measures for each major activity and
the timing during the construction process that the measures will be implemented. The
description of erosion controls shall include, when appropriate, the following minimum
requirements:
(1) Description of interim and permanent stabilization practices, including a practice
implementation schedule. The erosion control plan shall ensure that existing vegetation is
preserved where attainable and that disturbed portions of the site are stabilized.
(2) Description of structural practices to divert flow away from exposed soils, store flows or
otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from the site. Unless otherwise
specifically approved in writing by the city engineer, structural measures shall be installed
on upland soils.
(3) Management of overland flow at all sites, unless otherwise controlled by outfall controls.
(4) Trapping of sediment in channelized flow.
(5) Staging construction to limit bare areas subject to erosion.
(6) Protection of downslope drainage inlets where they occur.
(7) Minimization of tracking at all vehicle and equipment entry and exit locations of the
construction site.
(8) Cleanup of off-site sediment deposits.
(9) Proper disposal of building and waste material.
(10) Stabilization of drainage ways.
(11) Control of soil erosion from dirt stockpiles.
(12) Installation of permanent stabilization practices as soon as possible after final grading.
(13) Minimization of dust to the maximum extent practicable.
(f) The erosion and sediment control plan shall require that velocity dissipation devices be placed at
discharge locations and along the length of any outfall channel, as necessary, to provide a nonerosive
flow from the structure to a water course so that the natural physical and biological
characteristics and functions are maintained and protected.
(2) Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Statement. For each construction site identified under 32.04(1)(c), an
erosion and sediment control plan statement shall be prepared. This statement shall be submitted to the
city engineer. The control plan statement shall briefly describe the site, including a site map. Further, it
shall also include the best management practices that will be used to meet the requirements of the
ordinance, including the site development schedule.
(3) Amendments. The applicant shall amend the plan if any of the following occur:
(a) There is a change in design, construction, operation or maintenance at the site which has the
reasonable potential for the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state and which has not
otherwise been addressed in the plan.
(b) The actions required by the plan fail to reduce the impacts of pollutants carried by construction
site runoff.
(c) The city engineer notifies the applicant of changes needed in the plan.
32.11 FEE SCHEDULE.
The fees referred to in other sections of this ordinance shall be established by the common council and
may from time to time be modified by resolution. A schedule of the fees shall be available for review at city hall.
32.12 INSPECTION.
If land disturbing construction activities are being carried out without a permit required by this ordinance,
the city engineer may enter the land pursuant to the provisions of Sections 66.0119(1), (2), and (3), Wisconsin
Statutes.
32.13 ENFORCEMENT.
(1) The city engineer may post a stop-work order if any of the following occurs:
(a) Any land disturbing construction activity regulated under this ordinance is being undertaken
without a permit.
(b) The erosion and sediment control plan is not being implemented in a good faith manner.
(c) The conditions of the permit are not being met.
(2) If the responsible party does not cease activity as required in a stop-work order posted under this section
or fails to comply with the erosion and sediment control plan or permit conditions, the city engineer may
revoke the permit.
(3) If the responsible party, where no permit has been issued, does not cease the activity after being notified
by the city engineer, or if a responsible party violates a stop-work order posted under 32.13(1), the city
engineer may request the city attorney to obtain a cease and desist order in any court with jurisdiction.
(4) The Zoning Board of Appeals may retract the stop-work order issued under 32.13(1) or the permit
revocation under 32.13(2).
(5) After posting a stop-work order under 32.13(1), the city engineer may issue a notice of intent to the
responsible party of its intent to perform work necessary to comply with this ordinance. The city engineer
may go on the land and commence the work after issuing the notice of intent. The costs of the work
performed under this subsection by the city engineer, plus interest at the rate of 1 percent per month shall
be billed to the responsible party. In the event a responsible party fails to pay the amount due, the clerk
shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect as a special assessment against the property
pursuant to Subchapter VII of Chapter 66, Wisconsin Statutes.
(6) Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than
$200 nor more than $1000 and the costs of prosecution for each violation. Each day a violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense.
(7) Compliance with the provisions of this ordinance may also be enforced by injunction in any court with
jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before
resorting to injunctional proceedings.
32.14 APPEALS.
(1) Zoning Board of Appeals. The zoning board of appeals created pursuant to Chapter 11 of the city of
Wisconsin Rapids ordinance pursuant to Section 62.23(7)(e), Wisconsin Statutes:
(a) Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or
determination made by the city engineer in administering this ordinance except for cease and
desist orders obtained under 32.12(3).
(b) Upon appeal, may authorize variances from the provisions of this ordinance which are not
contrary to the public interest and where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the
provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship; and
(c) Shall use the rules, procedures, duties and powers authorized by statute in hearing and deciding
appeals and authorizing variances.
(2) Who May Appeal. Appeals to the zoning board of appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by
any office, department, board, or bureau of the city of Wisconsin Rapids affected by any decision of the
city engineer. Appeals must be filed with the city engineer and zoning board of appeals within 30 days of
the decision.
32.15 SEVERABILITY.
If a court of competent jurisdiction judges any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance
unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of the ordinance shall remain in force and not be affected by such
judgment.
32.16 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This ordinance shall be in force and effect from and after its adoption and publication. The above and
foregoing ordinance was duly adopted by the common council of the city of Wisconsin Rapids on the 18th day of
February, 2014.
Chapter 33 Stormwater Management Utility
33.01 Findings and Declarations of Policy
33.02 Establishment
33.03 Authority
33.04 Interpretation
33.05 Severability of Ordinance Provisions
33.06 Definitions
33.07 Basis of Charge
33.08 Customer Classification
33.09 Charge Formulas
33.10 Charges
33.11 Credits and Adjustments
33.12 Budget-Excess Revenues
33.13 Billing
33.01 FINDINGS AND DECLARATIONS OF POLICY
The City of Wisconsin Rapids finds that the management of stormwater and other surface water discharges within and
beyond the City of Wisconsin Rapids is a matter that affects the health, safety and welfare of the city, its citizens and
businesses, and others in the surrounding area. Failure to effectively manage stormwater affects the sanitary sewer utility
operations of the city by, among other things, increasing infiltration to the sanitary sewer. In addition, surface water runoff
causes erosion of lands, damages to businesses and residences, sedimentation, and other environmental damage in the
City of Wisconsin Rapids and the surrounding area. In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, the City
of Wisconsin Rapids is exercising its authority to establish a Stormwater Utility for stormwater management services. The
city is acting under the authority of Wisconsin Statutes 62.04, 62.11, 61.16, 62.175, 62.18, 66.0101, 66.0621, 66.0627,
66.0809, 66.0811, and 66.0821.
33.02 ESTABLISHMENT
There is hereby established a stormwater utility in the City of Wisconsin Rapids. The operation of the stormwater utility
shall be under the supervision of the city engineer.
33.03 AUTHORITY
(1) The city, acting through the stormwater utility, may acquire, construct, lease, own, operate, maintain, extend,
expand, replace, clean, dredge, repair, conduct, manage and finance such facilities, operations and activities, as
are deemed by the city to be proper and reasonably necessary for a system of storm and surface water
management. These facilities may include, without limitation due to enumeration, surface and underground
drainage facilities, sewers, watercourses, retaining walls, ponds, streets, roads, ditches and such other facilities
as will support a stormwater management system.
(2) The common council hereby designates the city engineer to administer and enforce the provisions of this
ordinance.
33.04 INTERPRETATION
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be interpreted liberally to secure the ends
sought hereby and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted to the city by the Wisconsin
Statutes.
33.05 SEVERABILITY OF ORDINANCE PROVISIONS
If any section, provisions or portion of this ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
33.06 DEFINITIONS
The following terms, whenever they occur in this Ordinance, are defined as follows:
(1) Charge means the fee imposed under this chapter for the rendering of stormwater utility services by the city.
(2) City Engineer means the individual or the firm appointed or retained by the common council to routinely provide
engineering services for the city, or the individual’s or firm’s designee or representative.
(3) Developed Property. A property shall be considered to be developed if:
(a) A certificate of occupancy has been issued for a building or structure on the property or, if no certificate
of occupancy has been issued, upon substantial completion of construction or final inspection; or
(b) Construction of an improvement on the property is at least fifty percent (50%) completed and such
construction has ceased for a period of at least 3 months, whether consecutive or not.
(4) Equivalent Residential Unit or "ERU” means the basic unit by which the Stormwater Utility charge is calculated
under this section. It is the statistical average of the horizontal impervious area of residential living units within
the City of Wisconsin Rapids on the date of the establishment of the stormwater utility. The horizontal impervious
area includes, but is not limited to, all areas covered by structures, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways,
sidewalks, pavement, gravel, compacted clay, and loading docks.
(5) Impervious Area means a surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly
resistant to infiltration by rainwater. The term includes, without limitation due to enumeration, all areas covered
by structures, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, pavement, gravel, compacted
clay, and loading docks, all as measured on a horizontal plane.
(6) Living Unit means a room or group of rooms, including cooking accommodations, occupied by one family, and in
which not more than two persons, other than members of the family, are lodged or boarded for compensation at
any one time.
(7) Multifamily Residential means a residential property comprised of two or more attached living units, including but
not limited to duplexes, apartments, flats, and condominiums.
(8) Nonresidential Property means a lot or parcel of land, with improvements such as a building, structure, or other
impervious areas as defined in Section 33.06(5), grading or substantial landscaping, which is not exclusively
residential as defined herein, including, but not limited to, commercial, industrial, institutional, mixed-use, and
governmental property, and excluding publicly-owned right-of-way and publicly-owned or privately-owned rail
beds.
(9) Residential Property means a lot or parcel of land developed exclusively for residential purposes, regardless of
zoning classification, including but not limited to single-family homes, duplexes, condominiums, manufactured
homes, trailers and multifamily apartments.
(10) Single-Family Residential means a residential property comprised of one living unit, and/or multiple living unit(s)
that are not physically attached to other living unit(s). This includes but is not limited to single-family homes,
manufactured homes, trailers, and condominiums.
(11) Stormwater Utility means the utility established under this chapter for the purpose of managing stormwater and
imposing charges for the recovery of costs connected with such stormwater management.
(12) Undeveloped Property means property that is not developed by the addition of an improvement such as a
building, structure, other impervious area as defined in Section 33.06(5), grading or substantial landscaping
which increases stormwater runoff.
33.07 BASIS OF CHARGE
(1) By this ordinance, the common council is establishing the rate classification and basis for computation of
charges for stormwater services for each lot and parcel within the City of Wisconsin Rapids. The actual charges to
be imposed pursuant to these rate classifications, and any future changes in the charges, shall be made by
resolution. A schedule of current rates, following approval by the common council, shall be maintained and on file
in the office of the city engineer. All charges established pursuant to this chapter shall be fair and reasonable.
(2) The rate classifications used to distribute the costs of the Stormwater Program among utility customers shall be
based on the Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU). The charge assigned to each parcel shall be assessed based upon
the impervious area or living units as reasonably determined by the city, except for undeveloped properties, which
shall be assessed the charge for one ERU, and public right-of-way, which shall be exempt from the utility charge.
33.08 CUSTOMER CLASSIFICATION
(1) Customer Classes. For the purposes of imposing the stormwater charges, all lots and parcels within the city are
classified into the following five (5) customer classes.
(a) Residential, Single-Family & Mobile Home
(b) Residential, Multi-Family
(c) Nonresidential
(d) Undeveloped
(e) Right-of-way
(2) Parcel Classification. The city engineer shall assign a customer classification to each lot and parcel within the City
of Wisconsin Rapids.
(3) ERU. The ERU is established to be 2,620 square feet.
33.09 CHARGE FORMULAS
(1) (a) Residential, Single Family, and Double Wide Mobile Homes. The charges imposed for residential properties
comprised of living units that are unattached to other living unit(s) shall be the charge for one ERU times
the number of living units, i.e.
Residential parcel charge = ERU charge x number of living units (MC#1085)
(b) Residential, Single Wide Mobile Homes. The charges imposed for residential properties comprise of living
units that are unattached to other living unit(s) shall be the fee of 0.65 of one ERU per living unit existing
on the property, i.e.
Single wide mobile home charge = 0.65 X ERU fee X number of dwelling units (MC#1085)
(2) Residential, Multi-Family. The charges imposed for residential properties with two (2) or more attached living
units shall be the fee of 0.65 of one ERU per living unit existing on the property, i.e.
Multi-family parcel charge = 0.65 x ERU fee x number of dwelling units
(3) Non-Residential. The charges imposed for non-residential properties shall be the charge for one ERU times the
numerical factor obtained by dividing the total square footage of impervious area of the property by the square
footage of one ERU. The factor shall be rounded down to the nearest one-tenth (0.1), i.e.
Non-residential parcel charge = ERU charge x parcel impervious area ÷ 2,620 feet
(4) Undeveloped. The charges imposed for undeveloped parcels as defined herein shall be the fee of 0.65 of one
ERU.
Undeveloped parcel charge = 0.65 x ERU charge
(5) Right-of-Way. Public highway, road, and rail right-of-way shall be exempt from the stormwater utility charge.
(6) Minimum Charge. The minimum charges for any customer assessed a charge shall be equal to the charge for
0.65 of one ERU.
(7) Impervious Area Measurement. The city engineer shall be responsible for determining the impervious area of
nonresidential parcels based on the best available information, including, but not limited to, data supplied by the
city assessor, city building inspector, aerial photography, property owner, tenant, or developer. The city engineer
may require additional information as necessary to make the determination. The number of ERU's shall be
updated by the city engineer based on any additions to the impervious area as approved through the building
permit process.
33.10 CHARGES
The common council shall, by resolution, set or adjust the ERU charge to reflect the costs of the stormwater management
program. Stormwater charges will be kept on file with the city clerk and city engineer.
33.11 CREDITS AND ADJUSTMENTS
The common council shall adopt, by separate resolution, criteria recommended by the city engineer for providing
adjustments. The city engineer shall develop a manual that explains the criteria for granting adjustments and that
provides application materials. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to prove, using adjustments manual,
that a parcel is eligible.
(1) Credits.
(a) Eligibility. Customer may be eligible for a credit, in the form of a reduced ERU multiplier for properties
where all of the following conditions apply:
(1) The city’s cost of providing service or making service available to the property has been
lessened.
(2) The property conforms to all applicable ordinances and standards of the City of Wisconsin
Rapids in effect at the time of parcel development.
(3) The property has been assigned a nonresidential user classification by the city engineer.
(b) Maximum Credit. The maximum aggregate credit for any individual property is 50% of its ERU charge,
regardless of how many types of credits the property qualifies.
(c) Credit Types. The following credits may be available to customers for properties meet all of the eligibility
criteria of Section 33.11(1)(a).
(1) Zero Discharge Credit. Credits shall be considered for properties that discharge stormwater
directly into a water body not maintained in any way by the city, or directly into a water body
downstream of where it is maintained by the city, or is otherwise contained entirely upon the
property.
(2) Peak Discharge Control Credit. Credits shall be considered for customers who own and maintain
stormwater management facilities such as retention or detention basins that exceed state and
local peak discharge rate requirements applicable to the site.
(3) Water Quality Credit. Credits shall be considered for customers who own and maintain
stormwater management facilities that improve the quality of runoff from the property to a
degree that exceeds state and local water quality requirements applicable to the site.
(2) Adjustments. A customer may be eligible to have the number of ERU's assigned to their property adjusted under
the conditions described below:
(a) Undeveloped Property. Properties which have been assigned an undeveloped user classification may be
eligible to reduce the number of ERU's assigned to the property if either of the following conditions exist:
(1) The property owner can show that the cumulative impervious area on the parcel is less than half
of the impervious area of one ERU, in which case the number of ERU's assigned to the property
shall be reduced to zero.
(2) The property owner can show that the parcel assigned an undeveloped user classification is
adjacent to another owned residential parcel with an assessed ERU, and that any impervious
area or living units associated with the undeveloped property have been assessed to the
adjacent parcel. In this case the number of ERU's assigned to the property shall be reduced to
zero.
(b) Nonresidential Property. Nonresidential customers who believe the number of ERU's assigned to their
property to be incorrect may submit an adjustment request to the city engineer. The allocated ERU's may
be adjusted if the owner can provide information showing the square footage calculation as determined
in Section 33.09(8) is incorrect.
(3) Review Procedure.
(a) Within thirty (30) days of the submission of a request to the city engineer for an adjustment to the
number of ERU's allocated to the property, the city engineer shall issue a written recommendation as to
whether the request for adjustment should be granted, denied or granted in part. The written
recommendation shall also set forth the reason or reasons for such recommendation. The
recommendation shall be sent to the customer by certified mail, and shall be provided to the Public
Works Committee and the common council.
(b) Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the written recommendation from the city engineer, the Public Works
Committee shall review the recommendation. The customer shall be notified of the review by certified
mail. The customer shall be allowed to present evidence at a hearing to be scheduled by the Public
Works Committee. Upon review, the Public Works Committee shall determine whether the
recommendation should be approved, rejected, or modified. The final determination of the Public Works
Committee shall be in writing and set forth the reason or reasons for its decision. The Public Works
Committee shall inform the customer of its decision by certified mail. The decision of the Public Works
Committee shall be final.
(c) In reviewing a recommendation, the Public Works Committee shall apply the considerations set forth in
Wis. Stat. § 66.0821(4)(c).
(4) Effective Date. Any ERU adjustment granted shall thereafter be used to calculate the customer’s user charges.
The reduction shall only apply for the period of time subsequent to the filing of the request for adjustment. There
shall be no retroactive adjustment for user charges imposed prior to the filing of the request.
33.12 BUDGET-EXCESS REVENUES
The city shall separately account for the stormwater utility finances. The city engineer shall prepare an annual budget,
which is to include capital, borrowing and other costs related to the operation of the utility. The budget is subject to
approval by the common council. Any excess of revenues over expenditures in a year will be deposited in a stormwater
maintenance fund, which shall only be only be used to defer the costs of capital improvements, retire debt or other
stormwater management expenses approved by the city engineer.
33.13 BILLING
(1) Bills. Stormwater utility charges shall be billed monthly first to the occupied property owner or tenant with utility
accounts and secondary to the owner of each unoccupied property through the city’s Water Works and Lighting
utility. The property owner shall be ultimately responsible for payment of the Stormwater Utility charge.
(MC#1141)
(2) Late Payment. Failure to pay the charges within 20 days of the billing date will be subject to a late payment
charge of three (3) percent of the most recent past due charge. (MC#1134)
(3) Unpaid Charges. Unpaid charges shall be assessed as a lien against the property pursuant to Wisconsin
Statutes66.0821.
Chapter 34 Illicit Stormwater Discharge
34.01 General Provisions
34.02 Definitions
34.03 Applicability
34.04 Ultimate Responsibility
34.05 Discharge Prohibitions
34.06 Suspension of MS4 Access
34.07 Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges
34.08 Best Management Practices
34.09 Watercourse Protection
34.10 Access and Inspection of Properties and Facilities
34.11 Notification of Accidental Discharges and Spills
34.12 Violations, Appeals, and Enforcement
34.13 Penalties
34.14 Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance
34.15 Remedies not Exclusive
34.16 Severability
34.17 Effective Date
34.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(1) Authority. This chapter is adopted under the authority granted by Section 283.33, Wisconsin Statutes, and
required by NR 216.07(3)(a), Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(2) Legislative Findings. The Common Council of the City of Wisconsin Rapids finds that discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased
nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters. The impacts of these discharges adversely affect
public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other
used of lands and waters.
(3) Purpose And Intent. This ordinance establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the Wisconsin Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) permit process. The objectives of this ordinance are:
(a) To regulate the contribution of non stormwater pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system
(MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user;
(b) To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
(c) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary
to ensure compliance with this ordinance.
(4) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations, ordinances or
permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, wherever this chapter imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
(5) Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the
minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the
Wisconsin Statutes. Where any terms or requirements of this chapter may be inconsistent or conflicting, the more
restrictive requirement or interpretation shall control.
34.02 DEFINITIONS
(1) Accidental Discharge means a discharge prohibited by this ordinance that occurs by chance and without planning
or thought prior to occurrence.
(2) Best Management Practice (BMP) means a practice, technique, or measure that is an effective, practical means
of preventing or reducing the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or
stormwater conveyance systems. This can include a structural or operational practice, schedule of activities,
prohibition of practices, general good house keeping, pollution prevention and educational practices,
maintenance procedures, and other management practices systems. A BMP may also be a practice that controls
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
(3) Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent
amendments thereto.
(4) Construction Activity means any land alterations or disturbances that may result in soil erosion, sedimentation, or
change in runoff including but not limited to removal of ground cover, grading, excavating, and filling of land.
(5) City Engineer means the individual or the individual’s designee, or the firm, or a representative of the firm,
appointed or retained by the common council to routinely provide engineering services for the city, and
empowered by the common council to administer this ordinance.
(6) Hazardous Material means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because
of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment
when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
(7) Illicit Discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer
system, except as exempted in 34.05(b) of this ordinance.
(8) Illegal Connection means either of the following:
(a) Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit
discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any
non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm
drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously
allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
(b) Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the municipal separate storm sewer system
which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.
(9) Industrial Activity means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26
(b)(14).
(10) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or
conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs,
gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches,
swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which
is:
(a) Owned and maintained by the City of Wisconsin Rapids;
(b) Not a combined sewer; and
(c) Not part of a publicly owned treatment works.
(11) Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit means a permit
issued by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (WDNR) under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC
§ 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state, whether the permit is applicable on
an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
(12) Non-Stormwater Discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of
stormwater.
(13) Person means except to the extent exempted from this ordinance, any individual, partnership, firm, association,
joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility,
cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the State, any interstate body or any other legal entity.
(14) Pollutant means anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to:
paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents
(biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard
wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that
same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid
wastes; sewage, fecal coli form and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
(15) Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water’s physical, chemical or biological properties
by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color,
turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into
any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to
the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural,
recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life.
(16) Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including
adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
(17) Storm Drainage System means publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed,
including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels,
reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
(18) Stormwater means the flow of water that results from, and which occurs during and immediately following, a
rainfall, snow- or ice- melt event.
(19) Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan means a document which describes the best management practices and
activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site
and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems,
and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
(20) Stormwater Runoff means the waters derived from rains falling or snowmelt or ice melt occurring within a
drainage area, flowing over the surface of the ground and/or collected in channels, watercourses or conduits.
(21) Structural Stormwater Control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls
stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and
quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow.
(22) Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility.
(23) Waters of the State has the meaning given in Section 281.01(18), Wisconsin Statutes,
34.03 APPLICABILITY
This chapter applies to all substances entering the city MS4 generated on any developed or undeveloped lands unless
otherwise authorized or explicitly exempted by this ordinance or the WDNR.
34.04 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this ordinance are minimum standards; therefore this
ordinance does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
34.05 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS
(1) Prohibition of Illicit Discharges.
(a) Prohibition. No person shall throw, drain, discharge, cause to be discharged, or allow others under their
control to discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system or watercourse any materials other
than stormwater, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing pollutants.
(b) Exemptions. The following non-stormwater discharges are excluded from 34.05(1)(a) of this ordinance:
(1) waterline flushing or other potable water sources;
(2) landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
(3) diverted, natural riparian habitat and/or wetland flows;
(4) rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, and/or uncontaminated pumped
groundwater;
(5) foundation or footing drains (not including active ground water dewatering systems) and crawl
space pumps;
(6) air conditioning condensation;
(7) springs;
(8) non-commercial washing of vehicles;
(9) de-chlorinated (less than one PPM chlorine) swimming pool water;
(10) firefighting/training activities and other discharges specified in writing by the city engineer as
being necessary to protect public health and safety and
(11) other water sources determined by the city engineer in writing as not containing pollutants that
cause or contribute to waterway degradation, including but not limited to a violation of
applicable water quality standards and/or degradation of the biotic integrity of surface water
bodies and their floodplains.
(2) Prohibition of Illegal Connections.
(a) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain
system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in
the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices application or
prevailing at the time of connection.
(b) A person is in violation of this ordinance if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or
allows such a connection to continue.
(c) Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be
connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon
receipt of written notice of violation from the city engineer requiring that such locating be completed.
Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is
to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and
the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other
discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the
city engineer.
34.06 SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS
(1) Suspension due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations.
(a) The city engineer may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present
imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the
MS4 or waters of the state.
(b) If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized
enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the
MS4 or waters of the state, or to minimize danger to persons.
(2) Suspension Due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge
(a) Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this ordinance may have their MS4 access terminated
if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will
notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized
enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to
this Section, without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency.
34.07 INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity WPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all
provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city engineer
prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
34.08 BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
(1) The city engineer may adopt requirements identifying Best Management Practices for any activity, operation, or
facility that may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or
waters of the U.S.
(2) The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense,
reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm
drain system or watercourses through the use of structural and non- structural BMP's identified by the city
engineer under Section 34.08(1).
(3) Any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be
required to implement, at said person's expense, structural and non-structural BMP's, in additional to those
required by sub. (2), to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
(4) Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid WPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater
associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of
this section. These BMP's shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for
compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
34.09 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that
part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would
pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee
shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not
become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
34.10 ACCESS AND INSPECTION OF PROPERTIES AND FACILITIES
The city engineer shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times and as often as
necessary to determine compliance with this ordinance.
(1) If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before
entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to
representatives of the city engineer.
(2) The owner or operator shall allow the city engineer ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under
the conditions of an WPDES permit to discharge stormwater.
(3) The city engineer shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the
opinion of the city engineer to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges.
(4) The city engineer may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as
necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the city engineer. This sampling and monitoring equipment
shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own
expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected
and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city
engineer and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the city engineer access to a facility is a violation of this ordinance.
(7) If the city engineer has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged,
and the city engineer is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city engineer may seek issuance of a search
warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
34.11 NOTIFICATION OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES AND SPILLS
(1) Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation,
or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting
or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the city’s municipal separate storm
sewer system, waters of the state, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the
discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge.
(2) Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person within
no more than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or
by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city engineer within three business
days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or
industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record
of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three
years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill.
(3) In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate
agencies shall be immediately notified.
(4) Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this ordinance.
34.12 VIOLATIONS, APPEALS, AND ENFORCEMENT
(1) Notice of Violation. Whenever the city engineer finds that a violation of this ordinance has occurred, the city
engineer may order compliance by a written notice of violation to the responsible person.
(a) The notice of violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the alleged violator;
(2) The address, when available, or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the
violation is occurring, or has occurred;
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this ordinance and
a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to
whom the notice of violation is directed; and
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Public Works
Committee by filing a written notice of appeal with the Public Works Committee Chairperson
within five (5) days of the service of notice of violation.
(b) Such notice may require without limitation:
(1) The performance or monitoring, analyses, and/or reporting;
(2) The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections;
(3) That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and desist;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the
restoration of any affected property;
(5) Payment to cover administrative and abatement costs; and
(6) The implementation of pollution prevention practices.
(2) Appeal of Notice of Violation.
(a) Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the determination of the city engineer.
(b) The notice of appeal must be received within five (5) days from the Notice of Violation
(c) Hearing on the appeal before the Public Works Committee shall take place within 10 days from the
receipt of the notice of appeal.
(d) The decision of the Public Works Committee shall be final.
(3) Enforcement/Abatement Measures After Appeal.
(a) If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation, or
in the event of an appeal, within 5 days of the Public Works Committee upholding the decision of the city
engineer, then representatives of the city engineer shall enter upon the subject private property and are
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent, or person in possession of any premises to refuse to
allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set
forth above.
(4) Costs of Abatement of the Violation
(a) Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of
abatement including administrative costs.
(b) The property owner may file a written objection to the amount of the assessment within fifteen (15) days.
(c) If the amount due is not paid within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken,
within thirty (30) days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment
against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
(d) Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall become liable to the city by reason of such
violation.
34.13 PENALTIE
(1) Civil Penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of
violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the
local permitting authority shall deem appropriate, after the local permitting authority has taken one or more of
the actions described in 34.12, the local permitting authority may impose a penalty, not to exceed $1,000
(depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the
notice of violation.
(2) Criminal Penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this ordinance, the local permitting authority may
issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for
such violation.
34.14 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of
any of the provisions of this ordinance is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and
deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law.
34.15 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE
(1) The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable
Federal, State or local law and the city may seek cumulative remedies.
(2) The City of Wisconsin Rapids may recover in full attorney’s fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with
enforcement of this ordinance, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
34.16 SEVERABILITY
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance is judged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of the ordinance shall remain in force and not be affected by such judgment.
34.17 EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall be in force and effect from and after its adoption and publication.
Chapter 35 Post-construction Stormwater Management Zoning (MC#1174)
35.01 Authority
35.02 Findings of Fact
35.03 Purpose and Intent
35.04 Applicability and Jurisdiction
35.05 Definitions
35.06 Technical Standards
35.07 Performance Standards
35.08 Permitting Requirements, Procedures, and Fees
35.09 Stormwater Management Plan
35.10 Maintenance Agreement
35.11 Financial Guarantee
35.12 Fee Schedule
35.13 Enforcement
35.14 Appeals
35.15 Severability
35.16 Effective Date
35.01 AUTHORITY.
(1) This ordinance is adopted by the common council under the authority granted by Section 62.234, Wisconsin
Statutes. This ordinance supersedes all provisions of an ordinance previously enacted under Section 62.23,
Wisconsin Statutes., that relate to stormwater management regulations. Except as otherwise specified in
Section 62.234, Wisconsin Statutes, Section 62.23, Wisconsin Statutes., applies to this ordinance and to any
amendments to this ordinance.
(2) The provisions of this ordinance are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of the same
governing body.
(3) The common council hereby designates the city engineer to administer and enforce the provisions of this
ordinance. Whenever city engineer is used in this ordinance it shall mean city engineer or his/her designee.
(4) The requirements of this ordinance do not pre-empt more stringent stormwater management requirements
that may be imposed by any of the following:
(a) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules, permits or approvals including
those authorized under Sections 281.16 and 283.33, Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) Targeted non-agricultural performance standards promulgated in rules by the Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources under s. NR 151.004, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
35.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
The common council finds that uncontrolled, post-construction runoff has a significant impact upon water
resources and the health, safety and general welfare of the community and diminishes the public enjoyment and use
of natural resources. Specifically, uncontrolled post-construction runoff can:
(1) Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion, increasing streambed scour, diminishing
groundwater recharge, diminishing stream base flows and increasing stream temperature.
(2) Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life, recreational and water supply uses by
increasing pollutant loading of sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals, bacteria, pathogens and
other urban pollutants.
(3) Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by increasing pollutant loads.
(4) Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading.
(5) Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by overtaxing storm sewers, drainage ways, and
other minor drainage facilities.
(6) Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by increasing major flood peaks and volumes.
(7) Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence and levels of flooding.
35.03 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
(1) Purpose. The general purpose of this ordinance is to establish long-term, post-construction runoff
management requirements that will diminish the threats to public health, safety, welfare and the aquatic
environment. Specific purposes are to:
(a) Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions.
(b) Prevent and control the adverse effects of stormwater; prevent and control soil erosion; prevent and
control water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites,
placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound
economic growth.
(c) Control exceedance of the safe capacity of existing drainage facilities and receiving water bodies;
prevent undue channel erosion; control increases in the scouring and transportation of particulate
matter; and prevent conditions that endanger downstream property.
(2) Intent. It is the intent of the common council that this ordinance regulates post-construction stormwater
discharges to waters of the state. This ordinance may be applied on a site-by-site basis. The common council
recognizes, however, that the preferred method of achieving the stormwater performance standards set forth
in this ordinance is through the preparation and implementation of comprehensive, systems-level stormwater
management plans that cover hydrologic units, such as watersheds, on a municipal and regional scale. Such
plans may prescribe regional stormwater devices, practices or systems, any of which may be designed to
treat runoff from more than one site prior to discharge to waters of the state. Where such plans are in
conformance with the performance standards developed under s. 281.16, Wisconsin Statutes., for regional
stormwater management measures and have been approved by the common council, it is the intent of this
ordinance that the approved plan be used to identify post-construction management measures acceptable for
the community.
35.04 APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION.
(1) Applicability.
(a) Where not otherwise limited by law, this ordinance applies after final stabilization to a site of land
disturbing construction activity meeting any of the criteria in this paragraph, unless the site is
otherwise exempt under paragraph (b).
(1) A post construction site that had 1 or more acres of land disturbing construction activity.
(b) A site that meets any of the criteria in this paragraph is exempt from the requirements of this
ordinance.
(1) A post-construction site with less than 10% connected imperviousness based on complete
development of the post-construction site, provided the cumulative area of all parking lots and
rooftops is less than one acre.
(2) Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices. (Note: NR 151.121 excludes
not just nonpoint, but all agricultural discharges, as Section II of NR 151 covers agricultural
facilities.)
(3) Underground utility construction but not including the construction of any above ground
structures associated with utility construction.
(c) Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in paragraph (a), this ordinance applies to postconstruction
sites of any size that, in the opinion of the city engineer, is likely to result in runoff that
exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water, that causes
undue channel erosion, that increases water pollution by scouring or the transportation of particulate
matter or that endangers property or public safety.
(2) Jurisdiction. This ordinance applies to post construction sites within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the City
of Wisconsin Rapids.
(3) Exclusions. This ordinance is not applicable to activities conducted by a state agency, as defined under s.
227.01(1), Wisconsin Statutes., but also including the office of district attorney, which is subject to the state
plan promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered into under s. 281.33(2), Wisconsin Statutes.
35.05 DEFINITIONS.
(1) Administering authority means a governmental employee, or a regional planning commission empowered
under Section 62.234, Wisconsin Statutes., that is designated by the common council to administer this
ordinance.
(2) Agricultural facilities and practices has the meaning given in Section 281.16, Wisconsin Statutes.
(3) Average annual rainfall means a typical calendar year of precipitation as determined by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources for users of models such as SLAMM, P8, or equivalent methodology. The
average annual rainfall is chosen from a department publication for the location closest to the municipality.
(4) Best management practice or BMP means structural or non-structural measures, practices, techniques or
devices employed to avoid or minimize sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state.
(5) Business day means a day the office of the city engineer is routinely and customarily open for business.
(6) Cease and desist order means a court-issued order to halt land disturbing construction activity that is being
conducted without the required permit.
(7) Combined sewer system means a system for conveying both sanitary sewage and stormwater runoff.
(8) Connected imperviousness means an impervious surface connected to the waters of the state via a separate
storm sewer, an impervious flow path, or a minimally pervious flow path.
(9) Design storm means a hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a specific duration, temporal
distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency, and total depth of rainfall.
(10) Development means residential, commercial, industrial or institutional land uses and associated roads.
(11) Division of land means the creation from one parcel of five or more parcels or building sites of 1.5 or fewer
acres each in area where such creation occurs at one time or through the successive partition within a 5 year
period.
(12) Effective infiltration area means the area of the infiltration system that is used to infiltrate runoff and does not
include the area used for site access, berms or pretreatment.
(13) Erosion means the process by which the land’s surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or
gravity.
(14) Exceptional resource waters means waters listed in Section NR 102.11, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(15) Extraterritorial means the unincorporated area within 3 miles of the corporate limits of a first, second, or third
class city, or within 1.5 miles of a fourth class city or village.
(16) Final stabilization means that all land disturbing construction activities at the construction site have been
completed and that a uniform, perennial, vegetative cover has been established, with a density of at least
70% of the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or employment of
equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
(17) Financial guarantee means a performance bond, maintenance bond, surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit,
or similar guarantees submitted to the city engineer by the responsible party to assure that requirements of
the ordinance are carried out in compliance with the stormwater management plan.
(18) Governing body means town board of supervisors, county board of supervisors, city council, village board of
trustees or village council.
(19) Impervious surface means an area that releases as runoff all or a large portion of the precipitation that falls on
it, except for frozen soil. Rooftops, sidewalks, driveways, gravel or paved parking lots and streets are
examples of areas that typically are impervious.
(20) In-fill area means an undeveloped area of land located within existing development.
(21) Infiltration means the entry of precipitation or runoff into or through the soil.
(22) Infiltration system means a device or practice such as a basin, trench, rain garden or swale designed
specifically to encourage infiltration, but does not include natural infiltration in pervious surfaces such as
lawns, redirecting of rooftop downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration from practices, such as swales or
road side channels designed for conveyance and pollutant removal only.
(23) Karst feature means an area or surficial geologic feature subject to bedrock dissolution so that it is likely to
provide a conduit to groundwater, and may include caves, enlarged fractures, mine features, exposed
bedrock surfaces, sinkholes, springs, seeps, or swallets.
(24) Land disturbing construction activity means any man-made alteration of the land surface resulting in a change
in the topography or existing vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and lead to an
increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of the state. Land disturbing construction
activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading
activities.
(25) Maintenance agreement means a legal document that provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater
management practices.
(26) MEP or maximum extent practicable means a level of implementing best management practices in order to
achieve a performance standard specified in this chapter which takes into account the best available
technology, cost effectiveness, geographic features, and other competing interests such as protection of
public safety and welfare, protection of endangered and threatened resources, and preservation of historic
properties. MEP allows flexibility in the way to meet the performance standards and may vary based on the
performance standard and site conditions.
(27) New development means development resulting from the conversion of previously undeveloped land or
agricultural land uses.
(28) Off-site means located outside the property boundary described in the permit application.
(29) On-site means located within the property boundary described in the permit application.
(30) Ordinary high-water mark has the meaning given in Section NR 115.03(6), Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(31) Outstanding resource waters means waters listed in Section NR 102.10, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(32) Percent fines mean the percentage of a given sample of soil, which passes through a # 200 sieve.
(33) Performance standard means a narrative or measurable number specifying the minimum acceptable outcome
for a facility or practice.
(34) Permit means a written authorization made by the city engineer to the applicant to conduct land disturbing
construction activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the state.
(35) Permit administration fee means a sum of money paid to the city engineer by the permit applicant for the
purpose of recouping the expenses incurred by the authority in administering the permit.
(36) Pervious surface means an area that releases as runoff a small portion of the precipitation that falls on it.
Lawns, gardens, parks, forests or other similar vegetated areas are examples of surfaces that typically are
pervious.
(37) Pollutant has the meaning given in Section 283.01(13), Wisconsin Statutes.
(38) Pollution has the meaning given in Section 281.01(10), Wisconsin Statutes.
(39) Post-construction site means a construction site following the completion of land disturbing construction
activity and final site stabilization.
(40) Pre-development condition means the extent and distribution of land cover types present before the initiation
of land disturbing construction activity, assuming that all land uses prior to development activity are managed
in an environmentally sound manner.
(41) Preventive action limit has the meaning given in Section NR 140.05(17), Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(42) Redevelopment means areas where development is replacing older development.
(43) Responsible party means any entity holding fee title to the property or other person contracted or obligated by
other agreement to implement and maintain post-construction stormwater BMPs.
(44) Runoff means stormwater or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or similar water that moves on the
land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
(45) Separate storm sewer means a conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage
systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all
of the following criteria:
(a) Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff.
(b) Is not part of a combined sewer system.
(c) Is not part of a publicly owned wastewater treatment works that provides secondary or more stringent
treatment.
(d) Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
(46) Site means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land disturbing
construction activity occurred.
(47) Stop work order means an order issued by the city engineer which requires that all construction activity on the
site be stopped.
(48) Stormwater management plan means a comprehensive plan designed to reduce the discharge of pollutants
from stormwater after the site has under gone final stabilization following completion of the construction
activity.
(49) Stormwater management system plan is a comprehensive plan designed to reduce the discharge of runoff
and pollutants from hydrologic units on a regional or municipal scale.
(50) Technical standard means a document that specifies design, predicted performance and operation and
maintenance specifications for a material, device or method.
(51) Top of the channel means an edge, or point on the landscape, landward from the ordinary high-water mark of
a surface water of the state, where the slope of the land begins to be less than 12% continually for at least 50
feet. If the slope of the land is 12% or less continually for the initial 50 feet, landward from the ordinary highwater
mark, the top of the channel is the ordinary high-water mark.
(52) TR-55 means the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service
(previously Soil Conservation Service), Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Second Edition, Technical
Release 55, June 1986.
(53) Type II distribution means a rainfall type curve as established in the “United States Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service, Technical Paper 149, published 1973”. The Type II curve is applicable to all of
Wisconsin and represents the most intense storm pattern.
(54) Waters of the state has the meaning given in Section 283.01(20), Wisconsin Statutes.
35.06 TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
The following methods shall be used in designing the water quality, peak flow shaving and infiltration
components of stormwater practices needed to meet the water quality standards of this ordinance:
(1) Technical standards identified, developed or disseminated by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources under subchapter V of chapter NR 151, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(2) Where technical standards have not been identified or developed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources, other technical standards may be used provided that the methods have been approved by the city
engineer.
(3) In this ordinance, the following year and location has been selected as an average annual rainfall: Green Bay,
1969 (March 29 – November 25).
35.07 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
(1) Responsible Party. The landowner of the post-construction site or other person contracted or obligated by
other agreement with the landowner to implement and maintain post-construction stormwater BMPs is the
responsible party and shall comply with this ordinance.
(2) Plan. A written stormwater management plan in accordance with 35.09 shall be developed and implemented
for each post-construction site.
(3) Requirements. The plan required under 35.07(2) shall include the following:
(a) Total Suspended Solids. BMPs shall be designed, installed and maintained to control total suspended
solids carried in runoff from the post-construction site as follows:
(1) BMPs shall be designed in accordance with Table 1, or to the maximum extent practicable as
provided in 35.07(3). The design shall be based on an average annual rainfall, as compared
to no runoff management controls.
Table 1. TSS Reduction Standards
Development Type TSS Reduction
New Development 80 percent
In-fill development 80 percent
Redevelopment 40 percent of load from parking areas and
roads
(2) Maximum Extent Practicable. If the design cannot meet a total suspended solids reduction
performance standard of Table 1, the stormwater management plan shall include a written,
site-specific explanation of why the total suspended solids reduction performance standard
cannot be met and why the total suspended solids load will be reduced only to the maximum
extent practicable. No person shall be required to exceed the applicable total suspended
solids reduction performance standard to meet the requirements of maximum extent
practicable.
(3) Off-site Drainage. When designing BMPs, runoff draining to the BMP from off-site shall be
taken into account in determining the treatment efficiency of the practice. Any impact on the
efficiency shall be compensated for by increasing the size of the BMP accordingly.
(b) Peak Discharge.
(1) Requirement. Except as provided in 35.07(3)(b)(2), BMPs, by design, shall be employed to
maintain or reduce the 1, 2, 5, 10, 25, 50, 100-year, 24-hour post-construction peak runoff
discharge rates to the 1, 2, 5, 10, 25, 50, 100-year, 24-hour pre-development peak runoff
discharge rates respectively, or to the maximum extent practicable as determined by the city
engineer. The runoff curve numbers in Table 2 shall be used to represent the actual predevelopment
conditions.
Table 2. Maximum Pre-Development Runoff Curve Numbers
Pre-development condition Hydrologic Soil Group
A B C D
Woodland 30 55 70 77
Grassland 39 61 71 78
Cropland 55 69 78 83
(2) Other requirements. The following post-development peak discharge flow rate requirements
apply for the specific year storm event stated only if 35.07(3)(b)(1) is less restrictive. Peak
runoff discharge flow rate requirements associated with storm events not listed below shall
still follow 35.07(3)(b)(1).
(a) Existing storm conveyance systems with restricted post-development peak discharge
flow rates:
? 8th Street South (Ruby Avenue to the south corporate limits) storm sewer
? 1 cubic feet per second per acre, cfs/ac, for a 25 year, 24 hour storm
event
? Rapids East Commerce Center Storm System
? 0.02 cfs/ac for a 2 year, 24 hour storm event
? 0.08 cfs/ac for a 5 year, 24 hour storm event
? 0.20 cfs/ac for a 25 year, 24 hour storm event [2005 MSA
Professional Services RECC Stormwater Management Plan]
? Woodlands Business Park – Saratoga Street Storm System
? 1.5 cfs/ac for 2 hour duration, 25 year recurrence [1996 HNTB
Saratoga St Drainage Basin Study]
? One Mile Creek
? 0.37 cfs/ac for 100 year flood [2003 MSA Professional Services
Walgreens Flood Study]
? Quinnell’s Creek
? Peak discharge shall be in accordance with 1997 STH 54 State
Municipal Agreement 1526-03-78,80
? STH 54 (Kingston Road to 26th Street North) storm sewer
? Peak discharge shall be in accordance with 1997 STH 54 State
Municipal Agreement 1526-03-78,80
(3) Additional requirements may be enforced in the former areas, as well as Two Mile Creek,
Romanski Ditch, and West Side Industrial Park storm system to reduce flooding and erosion
potential as determined necessary by the city engineer.
(4) 35.07(3)(b)(1) and (2) of the ordinance does not apply to any of the following:
(a) A post-construction site where the discharge is directly into a lake over 5,000 acres
or a stream or river segment draining more than 500 square miles.
(b) A redevelopment post-construction site.
(c) An in-fill development area less than 5 acres.
(c) Infiltration.
(1) BMPs shall be designed, installed, and maintained to infiltrate runoff in accordance with the
following or to the maximum extent practicable:
(a) Low imperviousness. For development up to 40 percent connected imperviousness,
such as parks, cemeteries, and low density residential development, infiltrate
sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume shall be at
least 90 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an average
annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this
requirement, no more than one percent of the post-construction site is required as an
effective infiltration area.
(b) Moderate imperviousness. For development with more than 40 percent and up to 80
percent connected imperviousness, such as medium and high density residential,
multi-family development, industrial and institutional development, and office parks,
infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume shall
be at least 75 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an
average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to
meet this requirement, no more than 1 percent of the post-construction site is
required as an effective infiltration area.
(c) High imperviousness. For development with more than 80 percent connected
imperviousness, such as commercial strip malls, shopping centers, and commercial
downtowns, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration
volume shall be at least 60 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based
on an average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration
systems to meet this requirement, no more than 2 percent of the post-construction
site is required as an effective infiltration area.
(2) Pre-development. Pre-development condition shall be the same as specified in Table 2 of the
Peak Discharge section of this ordinance.
(3) Source areas.
(a) Prohibitions. Runoff from the following areas may not be infiltrated and may not
qualify as contributing to meeting the requirements of this section unless
demonstrated to meet the conditions of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
groundwater standards in NR 151.124(6):
(1) Areas associated with a tier 1 industrial facility identified in Section NR
216.21(2)(a), including storage, loading and parking. Rooftops may be
infiltrated with the concurrence of the regulatory authority.
(2) Storage and loading areas of a tier 2 industrial facility identified in Section NR
215.21(2)(b).
(3) Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Rooftops of fueling and vehicle
maintenance areas may be infiltrated with the concurrence of the regulatory
authority.
(b) Exemptions. Runoff from the following areas may be credited toward meeting the
requirement when infiltrated, but the decision to infiltrate runoff from these source
areas is optional:
(1) Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for commercial
development.
(2) Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for industrial
development not subject to the prohibitions under paragraph a. of this
ordinance.
(3) In-fill development areas less than 5 acres
(4) Roads on commercial, industrial and institutional land uses, and arterial
residential roads.
(4) Location of Practices.
(a) Prohibitions. Infiltration practices may not be located in the following areas:
(1) Areas within 1000 feet upgradient or within 100 feet downgradient of direct
conduits to groundwater.
(2) Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as specified in
Section NR 811.16(4) or within the separation distances listed in Section NR
812.08 for any private well or non-community well for runoff infiltrated from
commercial, including multi-family residential, industrial and institutional land
uses or regional devices for 0ne- and two-family residential development.
(3) Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in Section NR 720.03(2),
are present in the soil through which infiltration will occur.
(b) Separation distances.
(1) Infiltration practices shall be located so that the characteristics of the soil and
the separation distance between the bottom of the infiltration system and the
elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock are in
accordance with Table 3:
Table 3. Separation Distances and Soil Characteristics
Source Area Separation Distance Soil Characteristics
Industrial, Commercial,
Institutional Parking Lots
and Roads
5 feet or more Filtering Layer
Residential Arterial Roads 5 feet or more Filtering Layer
Roofs Draining to
Subsurface Infiltration
Practices
1 foot or more Native or Engineered
Soil with Particles
Finer than Coarse
Sand
Roofs Draining to Surface
Infiltration Practices
Not Applicable
All Other Impervious
Source Areas
3 feet or more Filtering Layer
(2) Notwithstanding 35.07(3)(c)(4)(b), applicable requirements for injection wells
classified under Chapter NR 815 shall be followed.
(c) Infiltration rate exemptions. Infiltration practices located in the following areas may be
credited toward meeting the requirements under the following conditions, but the
decision to infiltrate under these conditions is optional:
(1) Where the infiltration rate of the soil measured at the proposed bottom of the
infiltration system is less than 0.6 inches per hour using a scientifically
credible field test method.
(2) Where the least permeable soil horizon to 5 feet below the proposed bottom
of the infiltration system using the U.S. Department of Agriculture method of
soils analysis is one of the following: sandy clay loam, clay loam, silty clay
loam, sandy clay, silty clay, or clay.
(5) Alternate Use. Where alternate uses of runoff are employed, such as for toilet flushing,
laundry, or irrigation or storage on green roofs where an equivalent portion of the runoff is
captured permanently by rooftop vegetation, such alternate use shall be given equal credit
toward the infiltration volume required by this section.
(6) Groundwater Standards.
(a) Infiltration systems designed in accordance with this section shall, to the extent
technically and economically feasible, minimize the level of pollutants infiltrating to
groundwater and shall maintain compliance with the preventive action limit at a point
of standards application in accordance with Chapter NR 140. However, if site specific
information indicates that compliance with a preventive action limit is not achievable,
the infiltration BMP may not be installed or shall be modified to prevent infiltration to
the maximum extent practicable.
(b) Notwithstanding 35.07(3)(c)(6)(a), the discharge from BMPs shall remain below the
enforcement standard at the point of standards application.
(7) Pretreatment. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for parking lot runoff
and for runoff from new road construction in commercial, industrial and institutional areas that
will enter an infiltration system. The pretreatment shall be designed to protect the infiltration
system from clogging prior to scheduled maintenance and to protect groundwater quality in
accordance with 35.07(3)(c)(6). Pretreatment options may include, but are not limited to, oil
and grease separation, sedimentation, biofiltration, filtration, swales or filter strips.
(8) Maximum Extent Practicable. Where the conditions of 35.07(3)(c)(3) and (4) limit or restrict
the use of infiltration practices, the performance standard of Section NR 151.124 shall be met
to the maximum extent practicable.
(d) Protective Areas.
(1) Definition. In this section, “protective area” means an area of land that commences at the top
of the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary of wetlands, and
that is the greatest of the following widths, as measured horizontally from the top of the
channel or delineated wetland boundary to the closest impervious surface. However, in this
section, “protective area’ does not include any area of land adjacent to any stream enclosed
within a pipe or culvert, so that runoff cannot enter the enclosure at this location.
(a) For outstanding resource waters and exceptional resource waters, 75 feet.
(b) For perennial and intermittent streams identified on a U.S. Geological Survey 7.5-
minute series topographic map, or a county soil survey map, whichever is more
current, 50 feet.
(c) For lakes, 50 feet.
(d) For wetlands not subject to 35.07(3)(d)(1)(e) and (f), 50 feet.
(e) For highly susceptible wetlands, 75 feet. Highly susceptible wetlands include the
following types: calcareous fens, sedge meadows, open and coniferous bogs, low
prairies, coniferous swamps, lowland hardwood swamps, and ephemeral ponds.
(f) For less susceptible wetlands, 10 percent of the average wetland width, but no less
than 10 feet nor more than 30 feet. Less susceptible wetlands include: degraded
wetland dominated by invasive species such as reed canary grass; cultivated hydric
soils; and any gravel pits, or dredged material or fill material disposal sites that take
on the attributes of a wetland.
(g) In 35.07(3)(d)(1)(d) to (f), determinations of the extent of the protective area adjacent
to wetlands shall be made on the basis of the sensitivity and runoff susceptibility of
the wetland in accordance with the standards and criteria in Section NR 103.03.
(h) Wetland boundary delineation shall be made in accordance with current Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources procedures. This paragraph does not apply to
wetlands that have been completely filled in compliance with all applicable state and
federal regulations. The protective area for wetlands that have been partially filled in
compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations shall be measured from
the wetland boundary delineation after a fill has been placed. Where there is a legally
authorized wetland fill, the protective area standard need not be met in that location.
(i) For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas greater than 130 acres, 10 feet.
(j) Notwithstanding 35.07(3)(d)(1)(a) to (i), the greatest protective area width shall apply
where rivers, streams, lakes and wetlands are contiguous.
(2) Applicability. This section applies to post-construction sites located within a protective area,
except those areas exempted pursuant to 35.07(3)(d)(4).
(3) Requirements. The following requirements shall be met:
(a) Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective area entirely or to the
maximum extent practicable. If there is no practical alternative to locating an
impervious surface in the protective area, the stormwater management plan shall
contain a written, site-specific explanation.
(b) Where land disturbing construction activity occurs within a protective area, adequate
sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover of 70 percent or greater shall be established
and maintained where no impervious surface is present. The adequate sod or selfsustaining
vegetative cover shall be sufficient to provide for bank stability,
maintenance of fish habitat, and filtering of pollutants from upslope overland flow
areas under sheet flow conditions. Non-vegetative materials, such as rock riprap,
may be employed on the bank as necessary to prevent erosion such as on steep
slopes or where high velocity flows occur.
(c) Best management practice such as filter strips, swales, or wet detention ponds, that
are designed to control pollutants from non-point sources, may be located in the
protective area.
(4) Exemptions. This section does not apply to any of the following:
(a) In-fill development areas less than 5 acres.
(b) Structures that cross or access surface water such as boat landings, bridges, and
culverts.
(c) Structures constructed in accordance with Section 59.692(1v), Wisconsin Statutes.
(d) Areas of post-construction sites from which the runoff does not enter the surface
water, including wetlands, without first being treated by a BMP to meet the local
ordinance requirements for total suspended solids and peak flow reduction, except to
the extent that vegetative ground cover is necessary to maintain bank stability.
(e) Fueling and Vehicle Maintenance Areas. Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas
shall have BMPs designed, installed, and maintained to reduce petroleum within
runoff, so that the runoff that enters waters of the state contains no visible petroleum
sheen, or to the maximum extent practicable.
(f) Swale Treatment for Transportation Facilities.
(1) Requirement. Except as provided in 35.07(3)(f)(2), transportation facilities
that use swales for runoff conveyance and pollutant removal are exempt from
the requirements of local ordinance requirements for peak flow control, total
suspended solids control, and infiltration, if the swales are designed to do all
of the following or to the maximum extent practicable:
(a) Swales shall be vegetated. However, where appropriate, nonvegetative
measures may be employed to prevent erosion or provide
for runoff treatment, such as rock riprap stabilization or check dams.
(b) Swales shall comply with the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources technical standard 1005 “Vegetated Infiltration Swales”,
dated May 2007, or a superseding document.
(2) Other requirements.
(a) Notwithstanding 35.07(3)(f)(1), the city engineer may, consistent with
water quality standards, require that other requirements, in addition
to swale treatment, be met on a transportation facility with an
average daily traffic rate greater than 2,500 and where the initial
surface water of the state that the runoff directly enters is any of the
following:
(1) An outstanding resource water.
(2) An exceptional resource water.
(3) Waters listed in section 303(d) of the Federal Clean Water
Act that are identified as impaired in whole or in part, due to
non-point source impacts.
(4) Water where targeted performance standards are developed
pursuant to Section NR 151.004.
(b) The transportation facility authority shall contact the city engineer to
determine if additional BMPs beyond a water quality swale are
needed under this subsection.
(4) General Considerations for On-site and Off-site Stormwater Management Measures. The following
considerations shall be observed in managing runoff:
(a) Natural topography and land cover features such as natural swales, natural depressions, native soil
infiltrating capacity, and natural groundwater recharge areas shall be preserved and used, to the
extent possible, to meet the requirements of this section.
(b) Emergency overland flow for all stormwater facilities shall be provided to prevent exceeding the safe
capacity of downstream drainage facilities and prevent endangerment of downstream property or
public safety.
(5) Location and Regional Treatment Option.
(a) The BMPs may be located on-site or off-site as part of a regional stormwater device, practice or
system.
(b) Post-construction runoff within a non-navigable surface water that flows into a BMP, such as a wet
detention pond, is not required to meet the performance standards of this ordinance. Postconstruction
BMPs may be located in non-navigable surface waters.
(c) Except as allowed under 35.07(5)(d), post-construction runoff from new development shall meet the
post-construction performance standards prior to entering a navigable surface water.
(d) Post-construction runoff from any development within a navigable surface water that flows into a BMP
is not required to meet the performance standards of this ordinance if:
(1) The BMP was constructed prior to the effective date of this ordinance and the BMP either
received a permit issued under Chapter 30, Wisconsin Statutes, or the BMP did not require a
Chapter 30, Wisconsin Statutes., permit; and
(2) The BMP is designed to provide runoff treatment from future upland development.
(e) Runoff from existing development, redevelopment and in-fill areas shall meet the post-construction
performance standards in accordance with this paragraph.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, BMPs shall be located to treat runoff prior to discharge to
navigable surface waters.
(2) Post-construction BMPs for such runoff may be located in a navigable surface water if
allowable under all other applicable federal, state and local regulations such as Chapter NR
103, Wisconsin Administrative Code, and Chapter 30, Wisconsin Statutes.
(f) The discharge of runoff from a BMP, such as a wet detention pond, or after a series of such BMPs is
subject to this chapter.
(g) The city engineer may approve off-site management measures provided that all of the following
conditions are met:
(1) The city engineer determines that the post-construction runoff is covered by a stormwater
management system plan that is approved by the City of Wisconsin Rapids and that contains
management requirements consistent with the purpose and intent of this ordinance.
(2) The off-site facility meets all of the following conditions:
(a) The facility is in place.
(b) The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control
equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices meeting
the performance standards of this ordinance.
(c) The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its long-term operation and
maintenance.
(h) Where a regional treatment option exists such that the city engineer exempts the applicant from all or
part of the minimum on-site stormwater management requirements, the applicant shall be required to
pay a fee in an amount determined in negotiation with the city engineer. In determining the fee for
post-construction runoff, the city engineer shall consider an equitable distribution of the cost for land,
engineering design, construction, and maintenance of the regional treatment option.
(6) Alternate Requirements. The city engineer may establish stormwater management requirements more
stringent than those set forth in this section if the city engineer determines that an added level of protection is
needed to protect sensitive resources.
(7) Maintenance of Effort. For redevelopment sites where the redevelopment will be replacing older development
that was subject to post-construction performance standards of NR 151 in effect on or after October 1, 2004,
the responsible party shall maintain the existing level of control for TSS, infiltration and peak flow reduction, or
meet the redevelopment standards of Sections NR 151.122 to 151.125, whichever is more stringent.
35.08 PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS, PROCEDURES, AND FEES.
(1) Permit Required. No responsible party may undertake a land disturbing construction activity without receiving
a post-construction runoff permit from the city engineer prior to commencing the proposed activity.
(2) Permit Application and Fees. Unless specifically excluded by this ordinance, any responsible party desiring a
permit shall submit to the city engineer a permit application made on a form provided by the city engineer for
that purpose.
(a) Unless otherwise excepted by this ordinance, a permit application must be accompanied by a
stormwater management plan, a maintenance agreement and a non-refundable permit administration
fee.
(b) The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the requirements of 35.07 and 35.09,
the maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet the requirements of 35.10, the financial
guarantee shall meet the requirements of 35.11, and fees shall be those established by the common
council as set forth in 35.12.
(3) Review and Approval of Permit Application. The city engineer shall review any permit application that is
submitted with a stormwater management plan, maintenance agreement, and the required fee. The following
approval procedure shall be used:
(a) Within 30 business days of the receipt of a complete permit application, including all items as required
by 35.08(2), the city engineer shall inform the applicant whether the application, plan and
maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved based on the requirements of this ordinance.
(b) If the stormwater permit application, plan and maintenance agreement are approved, or if an agreed
upon payment of fees in lieu of stormwater management practices is made, the city engineer shall
issue the permit.
(c) If the stormwater permit application, plan or maintenance agreement is disapproved, the city engineer
shall detail in writing the reasons for disapproval.
(d) The city engineer may request additional information from the applicant. If additional information is
submitted, the city engineer shall have 30 business days from the date the additional information is
received to inform the applicant that the plan and maintenance agreement are either approved or
disapproved.
(e) Failure by the city engineer to inform the permit applicant of a decision within 30 business days of a
required submittal shall be deemed to mean approval of the submittal and the applicant may proceed
as if a permit had been issued.
(4) Permit Requirements. All permits issued under this ordinance shall be subject to the following conditions, and
holders of permits issued under this ordinance shall be deemed to have accepted these conditions. The city
engineer may suspend or revoke a permit for violation of a permit condition, following written notification of
the responsible party. An action by the city engineer to suspend or revoke this permit may be appealed in
accordance with 35.14.
(a) Compliance with this permit does not relieve the responsible party of the responsibility to comply with
other applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations.
(b) The responsible party shall design and install all structural and non-structural stormwater
management measures in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan and this
permit.
(c) The responsible party shall notify the city engineer at least 5 business days before commencing any
work in conjunction with the stormwater management plan, and within 5 business days upon
completion of the stormwater management practices. If required as a special condition under
35.08(5), the responsible party shall make additional notification according to a schedule set forth by
the city engineer so that practice installations can be inspected during construction.
(d) Practice installations required as part of this ordinance shall be certified "as built" by a licensed
professional engineer. Completed stormwater management practices must pass a final inspection by
the city engineer to determine if they are in accordance with the approved stormwater management
plan and ordinance. The city engineer shall notify the responsible party in writing of any changes
required in such practices to bring them into compliance with the conditions of this permit.
(e) The responsible party shall notify the city engineer of any significant modifications it intends to make
to an approved stormwater management plan. The city engineer may require that the proposed
modifications be submitted to it for approval prior to incorporation into the stormwater management
plan and execution by the responsible party.
(f) The responsible party shall maintain all stormwater management practices in accordance with the
stormwater management plan until the practices either become the responsibility of the common
council, or are transferred to subsequent private owners as specified in the approved maintenance
agreement.
(g) The responsible party authorizes the city engineer to perform any work or operations necessary to
bring stormwater management measures into conformance with the approved stormwater
management plan, and consents to a special assessment or charge against the property as
authorized under Subchapter VII of Chapter. 66, Wisconsin Statutes., or to charging such costs
against the financial guarantee posted under 35.11.
(h) If so directed by the city engineer, the responsible party shall repair at the responsible party's own
expense all damage to adjoining municipal facilities and drainage ways caused by runoff, where such
damage is caused by activities that are not in compliance with the approved stormwater management
plan.
(i) The responsible party shall permit property access to the city engineer or its designee for the purpose
of inspecting the property for compliance with the approved stormwater management plan and this
permit.
(j) Where site development or redevelopment involves changes in direction, increases in peak rate
and/or total volume of runoff from a site, the city engineer may require the responsible party to make
appropriate legal arrangements with affected property owners concerning the prevention of
endangerment to property or public safety.
(k) The responsible party is subject to the enforcement actions and penalties detailed in 35.13, if the
responsible party fails to comply with the terms of this permit.
(5) Permit Conditions. Permits issued under this subsection may include conditions established by the city
engineer in addition to the requirements needed to meet the performance standards in 35.07 or a financial
guarantee as provided for in 35.11.
(6) Permit Duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date
the city engineer notifies the responsible party that all stormwater management practices have passed the
final inspection required under 35.08(4)(d).
35.09 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
(1) Plan Requirements. The stormwater management plan required under 35.08(2) shall contain at a minimum
the following information:
(a) Name, address, and telephone number for the following or their designees: landowner; developer;
project engineer for practice design and certification; person(s) responsible for installation of
stormwater management practices; and person(s) responsible for maintenance of stormwater
management practices prior to the transfer, if any, of maintenance responsibility to another party.
(b) A proper legal description of the property proposed to be developed, referenced to the U.S. Public
Land Survey system or to block and lot numbers within a recorded land subdivision plat.
(c) Pre-development site conditions, including:
(1) One or more site maps at a scale of not less than 1 inch equals 100 feet. The site maps shall
show the following: site location and legal property description; predominant soil types and
hydrologic soil groups; existing cover type and condition; topographic contours of the site at a
scale not to exceed 5 feet; topography and drainage network including enough of the
contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site; watercourses
that may affect or be affected by runoff from the site; flow path and direction for all
stormwater conveyance sections; watershed boundaries used in hydrology determinations to
show compliance with performance standards; lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches,
and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site; limits of the 100 year
floodplain; location of wells and wellhead protection areas covering the project area and
delineated pursuant to Section NR 811.16, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(2) Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to show compliance with
performance standards. All major assumptions used in developing input parameters shall be
clearly stated. The geographic areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly crossreferenced
to the required map(s).
(d) Post-development site conditions, including:
(1) Explanation of the provisions to preserve and use natural topography and land cover features
to minimize changes in peak flow runoff rates and volumes to surface waters and wetlands.
(2) Explanation of any restrictions on stormwater management measures in the development
area imposed by wellhead protection plans and ordinances.
(3) One or more site maps at a scale of not less than 1 inch equals 100 feet showing the
following: post-construction pervious areas including vegetative cover type and condition;
impervious surfaces including all buildings, structures, and pavement; post-construction
topographic contours of the site at a scale not to exceed 5 feet; post-construction drainage
network including enough of the contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through,
and from the site; locations and dimensions of drainage easements; locations of maintenance
easements specified in the maintenance agreement; flow path and direction for all
stormwater conveyance sections; location and type of all stormwater management
conveyance and treatment practices, including the on-site and off-site tributary drainage area;
location and type of conveyance system that will carry runoff from the drainage and treatment
practices to the nearest adequate outlet such as a curbed street, storm drain, or natural
drainage way; watershed boundaries used in hydrology and pollutant loading calculations
and any changes to lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on
and immediately adjacent to the site.
(4) Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to show compliance with
performance standards. The computations shall be made for each discharge point in the
development, and the geographic areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly
cross-referenced to the required map(s).
(5) Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required for the placement and design of
stormwater management measures. Detailed drawings including cross-sections and profiles
of all permanent stormwater conveyance and treatment practices.
(e) A description and installation schedule for the stormwater management practices needed to meet the
performance standards in 35.07.
(f) A maintenance plan developed for the life of each stormwater management practice including the
required maintenance activities and maintenance activity schedule.
(g) Cost estimates for the construction, operation, and maintenance of each stormwater management
practice.
(h) Other information requested in writing by the city engineer to determine compliance of the proposed
stormwater management measures with the provisions of this ordinance.
(i) All site investigations, plans, designs, computations, and drawings shall be certified by a licensed
professional engineer to be prepared in accordance with accepted engineering practice and
requirements of this ordinance.
(2) Alternate Requirements. The city engineer may prescribe alternative submittal requirements for applicants
seeking an exemption to on-site stormwater management performance standards under 35.07(5).
35.10 MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT.
(1) Maintenance Agreement Required. The maintenance agreement required under 35.07(2) for stormwater
management practices shall be an agreement between the city engineer on behalf of the City and the
responsible party to provide for maintenance of stormwater practices beyond the duration period of this
permit. The maintenance agreement shall be filed with the Wood County Register of Deeds as a property
deed restriction so that it is binding upon all subsequent owners of the land served by the stormwater
management practices.
(2) Agreement Provisions.. The maintenance agreement shall contain the following information and provisions
and be consistent with the maintenance plan required by 35.09(1)(f):
(a) Identification of the stormwater facilities and designation of the drainage area served by the facilities.
(b) A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the stormwater management system consistent
with the stormwater management plan required under 35.07(2).
(c) Identification of the responsible party(s), organization or city, county, town or village responsible for
long term maintenance of the stormwater management practices identified in the stormwater
management plan required under 35.07(2).
(d) Requirement that the responsible party(s), organization, or city, county, town or village shall maintain
stormwater management practices in accordance with the schedule included in 35.10(2)(b).
(e) Authorization for the city engineer to access the property to conduct inspections of stormwater
management practices as necessary to ascertain that the practices are being maintained and
operated in accordance with the agreement.
(f) A requirement of the city engineer to maintain public records of the results of the site inspections, to
inform the responsible party responsible for maintenance of the inspection results, and to specifically
indicate any corrective actions required to bring the stormwater management practice into proper
working condition.
(g) Agreement that the party designated under 35.10(2)(c), as responsible for long term maintenance of
the stormwater management practices, shall be notified by the city engineer of maintenance problems
which require correction. The specified corrective actions shall be undertaken within a reasonable
time frame as set by the city engineer.
(h) Authorization of the city engineer to perform the corrected actions identified in the inspection report if
the responsible party designated under 35.10(2)(c) does not make the required corrections in the
specified time period. The city engineer shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect the
money as a special charge against the property pursuant to Subchapter VII of Chapter 66, Wisconsin
Statutes.
35.11 FINANCIAL GUARANTEE.
(1) Establishment of the Guarantee. The city engineer may require the submittal of a financial guarantee, the
form and type of which shall be acceptable to the city engineer. The financial guarantee shall be in an amount
determined by the city engineer to be the estimated cost of construction and the estimated cost of
maintenance of the stormwater management practices during the period which the designated party in the
maintenance agreement has maintenance responsibility. The financial guarantee shall give the city engineer
the authorization to use the funds to complete the stormwater management practices if the responsible party
defaults or does not properly implement the approved stormwater management plan, upon written notice to
the responsible party by the city engineer that the requirements of this ordinance have not been met.
(2) Conditions for Release. Conditions for the release of the financial guarantee are as follows:
(a) The city engineer shall release the portion of the financial guarantee established under this section,
less any costs incurred by the city engineer to complete installation of practices, upon submission of
"as built plans" by a licensed professional engineer. The city engineer may make provisions for a
partial pro-rata release of the financial guarantee based on the completion of various development
stages.
(b) The city engineer shall release the portion of the financial guarantee established under this section to
assure maintenance of stormwater practices, less any costs incurred by the city engineer, at such
time that the responsibility for practice maintenance is passed on to another entity via an approved
maintenance agreement.
35.12 FEE SCHEDULE.
The fees referred to in other sections of this ordinance shall be established by the common council and may
from time to time be modified by resolution. A schedule of the fees shall be available for review in the city engineer’s
office.
35.13 ENFORCEMENT.
(1) Any land disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff initiated after the effective date of this
ordinance by any person, firm, association, or corporation subject to the ordinance provisions shall be
deemed a violation unless conducted in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.
(2) The city engineer shall notify the responsible party by certified mail of any non-complying land disturbing
construction activity or post-construction runoff. The notice shall describe the nature of the violation, remedial
actions needed, a schedule for remedial action, and additional enforcement action which may be taken.
(3) Upon receipt of written notification from the city engineer under 35.13(2), the responsible party shall correct
work that does not comply with the stormwater management plan or other provisions of this permit. The
responsible party shall make corrections as necessary to meet the specifications and schedule set forth by
the city engineer in the notice.
(4) If the violations to a permit issued pursuant to this ordinance are likely to result in damage to properties,
public facilities, or waters of the state, the city engineer may enter the land and take emergency actions
necessary to prevent such damage. The costs incurred by the city engineer plus interest and legal costs shall
be billed to the responsible party.
(5) The city engineer is authorized to post a stop work order on all land disturbing construction activity that is in
violation of this ordinance, or to request the city attorney to obtain a cease and desist order in any court with
jurisdiction.
(6) The city engineer may revoke a permit issued under this ordinance for non-compliance with ordinance
provisions.
(7) Any permit revocation, stop work order, or cease and desist order shall remain in effect unless retracted by
the city engineer or by a court with jurisdiction.
(8) The city engineer is authorized to refer any violation of this ordinance, or of a stop work order or cease and
desist order issued pursuant to this ordinance, to the city attorney for the commencement of further legal
proceedings in any court with jurisdiction.
(9) Any person, firm, association, or corporation who does not comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall
be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $200 dollars or more than $1000 dollars per offense, together with
the costs of prosecution. Each day that the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(10) Compliance with the provisions of this ordinance may also be enforced by injunction in any court with
jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting to
in junctional proceedings.
(11) When the city engineer determines that the holder of a permit issued pursuant to this ordinance has failed to
follow practices set forth in the stormwater management plan, or has failed to comply with schedules set forth
in said stormwater management plan, the city engineer may enter upon the land and perform the work or
other operations necessary to bring the condition of said lands into conformance with requirements of the
approved plan. The city engineer shall keep a detailed accounting of the costs and expenses of performing
this work. These costs and expenses shall be deducted from any financial security posted pursuant to 35.11
of this ordinance. Where such a security has not been established, or where such a security is insufficient to
cover these costs, the costs and expenses shall be entered on the tax roll as a special assessment against
the property and collected with any other taxes levied thereon for the year in which the work is completed.
35.14 APPEALS.
(1) Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals, created pursuant to section 11 of the City of
Wisconsin Rapids ordinances pursuant to Section 62.23(7)(e), Wisconsin Statutes, shall hear and decide
appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the city
engineer in administering this ordinance. The board shall also use the rules, procedures, duties, and powers
authorized by statute in hearing and deciding appeals. Upon appeal, the board may authorize variances from
the provisions of this ordinance that are not contrary to the public interest, and where owing to special
conditions a literal enforcement of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship.
(2) Who May Appeal. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by an
officer, department, board, or bureau of the City of Wisconsin Rapids affected by any decision of the city
engineer. Appeals must be filed with the city engineer and the zoning board of appeals within 30 days of the
decision.
35.15 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance is judged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the ordinance shall remain in force and not be affected by such judgment.
35.16 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This ordinance shall be in force and effect from and after its adoption and publication. The above and
foregoing ordinance was duly adopted by the common council of the City of Wisconsin Rapids on the 18th day of
February, 2014.
Chapter 36 International Property Maintenance Code (MC#1094)
36.01 Document on File
36.02 Sections Revised
36.01 DOCUMENT ON FILE
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Department Planning and Economic Development of City
of Wisconsin Rapids, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 edition, as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of
Wisconsin Rapids, in the State of Wisconsin, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical
things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing
structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the
Department Planning and Economic Development of the City of Wisconsin Rapids are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in Section 2 of this ordinance. The International property Maintenance Code, 2009 edition, can be accessed
at: http://www.ecodes.biz/.
36.02 SECTIONS REVISED
The following sections of International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 edition are hereby revised:
(1) All sections that refer to the “International Building Code” shall be revised to say the “City of Wisconsin Rapids
Building Code and the codes and provisions adopted therein”.
(2) All sections that refer to the “International Existing Building Code,” shall be revised to say the “City of
Wisconsin Rapids Building Code and the codes and provisions adopted therein”.
(3) All sections that refer to the “International Plumbing Code,” shall be revised to say the “City of Wisconsin
Rapids Plumbing Code and the codes and provisions adopted therein”.
(4) All sections that refer to the “International Zoning Code,” shall be revised to say the “City of Wisconsin Rapids
Zoning Code and the codes and provisions adopted therein”.
(5) All sections that refer to the “International Fire Code,” shall be revised to say the “City of Wisconsin Rapids Fire
Code and the codes and provisions adopted therein”.
(6) All sections that refer to the “Board of Appeals,” shall be revised to say the “Board of Zoning Appeals”.
(7) The following sections of the document entitled “International Property Maintenance Code” are amended as
follows:
(a) Chapter 1 – Administration
(1) Part 1 – Scope and Application
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Wisconsin Rapids
Section 102.3 Replace with: Application of other codes. Repairs, additions, or alterations to
a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
provisions of all codes adopted by the City.
Section 102.7 Removed.
(2) Part 2 – Administration and Enforcement
Section 103 Replace with: Department of Planning and Economic Development.
Section 103.1 Replace with: General. The Department of Planning and Economic
Development shall serve as the department overseeing this code and the
chief building inspector shall be known as the code official.
Section 103.2 Replace with: Appointment. The code official shall be the chief building
inspector.
Section 103.3 Replace with: Employees. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of
the City, the code official shall have the authority to designate employees.
Such employees shall have the powers as delegated by the code official.
Section 103.5 Replace with: The fees for activities and services performed by the
department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as
indicated in the most recently Common Council adopted fee schedule.
Section 104.3 Replace with: The code official is authorized to enter the structure or
premises at reasonable times to inspect subject to constitutional restriction
on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not obtained,
the code official is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by law.
Section 106.3 Replace with: Prosecution of violation. Failure to comply with a notice of
violation served in accordance with Section 107 may result in criminal or
civil penalty.
Section 106.4 Replace with: Violation penalties. It shall be unlawful to do any act prohibited
hereby and it shall be unlawful to fail to do or perform and act required
hereby. Any person, firm, corporation, or agent or employee thereof who
violates any of the provisions of this article shall be fined an amount not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) provided, however, in the event a defendant has once previously
been convicted under this code, the defendant shall be fined an amount not
less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and shall be fined an amount not
less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for a third conviction and for each
conviction thereafter. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this section shall limit the remedies
available to the City in seeking to enforce the provisions of this code.
Section 107.2 Add: 7. In a notice provided under Section 107.1, the code official may
inform the person responsible that committing another violation, of the
same or similar nature, of any provisions of this code on or before the first
anniversary of the date of the notice, that the City, without further notice,
may proceed with the prosecution of said violation.
Section 107.7 Add: Service charge. Any person who shall fail or neglect to comply with any
lawful order of the code official or his/her designee issued pursuant to the
provisions of this code may be assessed a service charge for compliance
inspections in excess of one. Service charges that are not paid within 30
days shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against said lot or
parcel of land pursuant to the provisions of Section 66.0627 of the
Wisconsin Statutes for collection and settlement under Chapter 74 of the
Wisconsin Statutes. Service charges are independent of other penalties, and
the payment of such service charges shall not relieve any person from
complying with the requirements of this code or any other code adopted by
the city, or from any additional penalties proscribed herein. (MC#1103)
Section 108.1.1 Replace with: Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to
be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the
occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect
or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains
unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally
unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or
complete collapse is likely.
Section 108.2.1 Replace with: Authority to disconnect service utilities. The code official shall
have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building,
structure or system regulated by this code or any code adopted by the City,
in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to
life or property or when such utility connection has been made without
approval. The code official shall notify the serving utility and, whenever
possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system
of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior
to disconnection the owner or occupant of the building structure or service
system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter.
Section 110.2 Replace with: Adoption of Codes and Regulations. Section 66.0413 (Razing
buildings) of the Wisconsin State Statutes, and any amendments thereto, is
hereby adopted and made part of this code. The razing of buildings shall be
done in accordance with Section 66.0413 (Razing buildings) of the
Wisconsin State Statutes.
Section 110.3 Remove
Section 110.4 Remove
Section 111 The City of Wisconsin Rapids Board of Zoning Appeals shall serve as the
Board of Appeals and shall be governed under the rules and regulations of
State Statues and the City of Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code.
Section 111.1 Replace with: Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a
decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall
have the right to appeal to the board of zoning appeals, provided that a
written application for appeal is filed within 10 days after the day the
decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal may come
from any person affected by any notice, order, decision, or ruling of the code
official, issued in connection with the enforcement of this code.
Section 111.1.1 Add. Contents of application. The application shall include at minimum the
name, address, and telephone number of the petitioner, and a brief
statement of the grounds for appeal.
Section 111.1.2 Add. Appeal fee. A non-refundable fee in the amount determined from timeto-
time by the Common Council shall accompany any application for appeal.
Section 111.2 Replace with: Membership of board. The City of Wisconsin Rapids Board of
Zoning Appeals shall serve as the Board of Appeals and shall be governed
under the rules and regulations of State Statues and the City of Wisconsin
Municipal Code.
Section 111.2.1 Replace with: Alternate members. The City of Wisconsin Rapids Board of
Zoning Appeals shall serve as the Board of Appeals and shall be governed
under the rules and regulations of State Statues and the City of Wisconsin
Municipal Code.
Section 111.2.2 Replace with: Chairperson. The City of Wisconsin Rapids Board of Zoning
Appeals shall serve as the Board of Appeals and shall be governed under the
rules and regulations of State Statues and the City of Wisconsin Municipal
Code.
Section 111.2.3 Replace with: Disqualification of member. The City of Wisconsin Rapids
Board of Zoning Appeals shall serve as the Board of Appeals and shall be
governed under the rules and regulations of State Statues and the City of
Wisconsin Municipal Code.
Section 111.2.4 Replace with: Secretary. The City of Wisconsin Rapids Board of Zoning
Appeals shall serve as the Board of Appeals and shall be governed under the
rules and regulations of State Statues and the City of Wisconsin Municipal
Code.
Section 111.4 Replace with: Open hearing. The City of Wisconsin Rapids Board of Zoning
Appeals shall serve as the Board of Appeals and shall be governed under the
rules and regulations of State Statues and the City of Wisconsin Municipal
Code.
Section 111.4.1 Replace with: Procedure. The City of Wisconsin Rapids Board of Zoning
Appeals shall serve as the Board of Appeals and shall be governed under the
rules and regulations of State Statues and the City of Wisconsin Municipal
Code.
Section 111.5 Replace with: Postponed hearing. The City of Wisconsin Rapids Board of
Zoning Appeals shall serve as the Board of Appeals and shall be governed
under the rules and regulations of State Statues and the City of Wisconsin
Municipal Code.
Section 111.6 Replace with: Board decision. The City of Wisconsin Rapids Board of Zoning
Appeals shall serve as the Board of Appeals and shall be governed under the
rules and regulations of State Statues and the City of Wisconsin Municipal
Code.
Section 111.6.1 Replace with: Records and copies. The City of Wisconsin Rapids Board of
Zoning Appeals shall serve as the Board of Appeals and shall be governed
under the rules and regulations of State Statues and the City of Wisconsin
Municipal Code.
Section 111.6.2 Replace with: Administration. The City of Wisconsin Rapids Board of Zoning
Appeals shall serve as the Board of Appeals and shall be governed under the
rules and regulations of State Statues and the City of Wisconsin Municipal
Code.
Section 111.7 Replace with: Court review. The City of Wisconsin Rapids Board of Zoning
Appeals shall serve as the Board of Appeals and shall be governed under the
rules and regulations of State Statues and the City of Wisconsin Municipal
Code.
Section 112.4 Insert: one hundred ($100.00) and five hundred ($500.00)
Section 113 Add: Order to Vacate
Section 113.1. Add. Authority. Where a notice of violation and order to comply has been
issued as herein provided and upon re-inspection at the end of the time
specified for compliance it is found that the violation or violations have not
been corrected, or at any time when required in accordance with the
emergency procedure, the code official may order the entire building or
structure, or the parts thereof affected by the continued violations, to be
vacated in accordance with the following procedures:
Section 113.1.1 Add. The vacation shall be within a reasonable time as determined by the
code official, but shall not to exceed 60 days;
Section 113.1.2 Add. Vacated buildings shall have all outer doors, windows, or other
openings securely boarded to prevent entry as outlined in section 108.2.
Section 113.1.3 Add. The building shall be posted with a placard under the provisions as
outlined in section 108.4.
Section 113.2 Add. Such buildings shall not be used for human habitation until all
violations have been corrected and a written determination obtained from
the code official that the building or structure complies with the provisions of
this code.
(b) Chapter 2 – Definitions
Section 201.3 Replace with: Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this
code and are defined in the Chapters Comm. 16, 20-25, 50-70, 81-85 Wis. Admin.
Code, or in the respected chapters of the City of Wisconsin Rapids Municipal Code
such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
Section 202 BASEMENT. Replace with: BASEMENT. That portion of a building below the first
floor or groundfloor with its entire floor below grade.
Section 202 Add. CITY. The City of Wisconsin Rapids.
Section 202 Add. GUEST. An individual who shares a dwelling unit in a non-permanent status for
not more than thirty (30) days.
Section 202 Add. LOT. Shall also include for purposes of this code, in addition to the land within
its boundaries, all land adjacent to and extending beyond the property line to the
curbline of adjacent streets, and where no curb exists, to the existing street
surface. The word lot shall also include all land lying between the property line of
any lot and the center of adjacent alleys.
Section 202 OCCUPANT. Replace with: OCCUPANT. Any individual having possession of a
premises or any individual over one (1) year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or
eating in or having possession of a dwelling unit or a rooming unit; except that in
dwelling units, a guest shall not be considered an occupant.
Section 202 STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. Remove.
(c) Chapter 3 – General Requirements
Section 302.4 Replace with: Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free
from weeds or plant growth in excess of seven (7) inches. All noxious weeds shall
be prohibited.
Section 302.4.1 Add. Adoption of Codes and Regulations. Section 66.0517 (Weed commissioner)
and Section 66.0407 (Noxious Weeds) and any amendments thereto, are hereby
adopted and made part of this code.
Section 302.4.2 Add. Definitions.
Section 302.4.2.1 Add. Destroy. The complete killing of weeds or the killing of weed plants above the
surface of the ground by the use of chemicals, cutting, tillage, cropping system,
pasturing livestock, or any or all of these in effective combination, at a time and in
a manner as will effectually prevent the weed plants from maturing to the bloom or
flower stage.
Section 302.4.2.2 Add. Noxious Weeds. Canada Thistle, Leafy Spurges and Field Bindwell (Creeping
Jenny); Beggar-Ticks; Burdocks; Chickweeds; Cockleburs; Fan Weed or Pennycress;
Fleabanes; Giant Ragweed; Lamb's Quarters; Stinging Nettles; Redroot Pigweed;
Poison Ivy; Poison Oak and Poison Sumac; Common Ragweed; Sandburs;
Shepherd's Purse; Annual Spurges; Bull Thistle; Witchgrass; and Quackgrass.
(MC#459)
Section 302.4.2.3 Add. Weeds. All grasses, annual plants, and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs
provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
Natural plantings of native wild plants and accepted cultivars of wild plants are a
recognized type of landscaping. These areas must be tended, cultivated in a
manner consistent with natural plantings, and confined to a definite area.
Untended lawns in excess of the height restriction in section 302.4 shall be
considered a violation of this ordinance.
Section 302.4.3 Add. Duty to Destroy. Every person shall destroy all noxious weeds on all lands
within the City of Wisconsin Rapids, which they shall own, occupy, or control,
including any terraces and/or ditches abutting said property. The weed
commissioner shall destroy all noxious weeds on all public lands within the City of
Wisconsin Rapids except as hereinabove prescribed.
Section 302.4.4 Add. Publication. The mayor shall annually on or before May 15 publish a class 2
notice, under Chapter 985, that every person is required by law to destroy all
noxious weeds, as defined in this section, on lands in the municipality which the
person owns, occupies or controls.
Section 302.4.5 Add. Entry. The weed commissioner may enter upon any lands within the City of
Wisconsin Rapids upon which any of the weeds mentioned in the section are
growing, and cut or otherwise destroy them, without being liable to an action for
trespass or any other action for damages resulting from such entry and
destruction, if reasonable care is exercised in the performance of the duty hereby
imposed. The weed commissioner may also authorize the mowing of any untended
lawns. (MC#459)
Section 302.4.6 Add. Charges for Destroying Noxious Weeds or Mowing Lawn. Should the property
owner fail to destroy noxious weeds or mow lawn within five (5) days written notice,
which will only be sent once per year, the weed commissioner shall order crews to
do this work, and the actual costs of the same, including administrative, labor,
overhead, bookkeeping, mileage, and incidentals, shall be charged to the property
owner and shall be added to the property’s tax bill as a special tax. (MC#1027)
Section 303.1 Replace with: Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs shall be maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition, and in good repair.
Section 303.2 Replace with: Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing
water more than 18 inches (457 mm) in depth shall be completely surrounded by a
fence or barrier at least 48 inches (1219 mm) in height above the finished ground
level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Gates and doors in
such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the self-latching device
is less than 54 inches (1372 mm) above the bottom of the gate, the release
mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate. Self-closing and selflatching
gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch
when released from an open position of 6 inches (152 mm) from the gatepost. No
existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that
reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier. For above ground pools, the side wall
can be used as part of the barrier as long as the walls are 48 inches (1219 mm)
above the ground and the access ladder and/or steps are removed or secured to
prevent entry.
Section 303.2 Exception. Add: The only approved exception to the enclosure requirements for
swimming pools is an approved cover.
Section 304.3 Replace with: Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address
numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or
road fronting the property, and shall not be obstructed by any structural element,
plant, tree, shrub, or similar obstruction. These numbers shall contrast with their
background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters.
Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) high and a maximum of 10
inches (254 mm) high, with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm). The
address number must be located within four (4) feet of the principle entrance door
abutting the street. If the principal entrance to a structure is not on the assigned
address street then the address number must be posted at more than one
entrance or location on that building, or on a mailbox or signpost located at or near
the front property line. If the building is set back forty (40) feet or more from the
front property line, the property owner must place and maintain the required
numbers on a mailbox or a signpost located at or near the front property line.
Mobile home numbers will be placed in a uniform area on each unit within the
mobile home park. The number shall be placed on or as close as possible to the
entrance door and shall be visible from the public right-of-way readily abutting the
property. Commercial buildings situated in a manner that may create confusion for
emergency personnel responding to the rear side of such building shall also post
their business address on their back doors. This section shall apply to commercial
buildings including, but not limited to, multiple tenant strip malls, buildings
serviced with alleyways such as downtown areas and single buildings with multiple
tenants with individual rear doors for each tenant. This section shall not apply to
stand alone commercial buildings occupied by a single tenant.
Section 304.14 Insert: At all times
Section 307.1 Replace with: Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than three
risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open portion of a
stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface more than 24
inches above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be
less than 30 inches high or more than 38 inches high measured vertically above
the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking
surfaces. Guards shall not be less than 36 inches high above the floor of the
landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface. Exception: Existing
handrail and guardrails in good repair may remain per the code in effect at the
time of installation.”
Section 308.2.2 Replace with: Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation
shall not be discarded, abandoned, or stored on the premises.
(d) Chapter 4 – Light, Ventilation, and Occupancy Limitations
Section 404.4.1 Add. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space for the
first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of floor space for
every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated on the basis of
total habitable room area. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square
feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than
one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant
12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor space for each
occupant under 12 years of age.
Section 404.8 Add. Basement Dwelling Units. No basement space shall be used as dwelling or
rooming unit unless:
Section 404.8.1 Add. The floor and walls are impervious to leakage or underground and surface
run-off water.
Section 404.8.2 Add. The dwelling unit meets the lighting standards as outlined in this code.
Section 404.8.3 Add. The dwelling unit meets the ventilation standards as outlined in this code.
Section 404.8.4 Add. The dwelling unit meets the occupancy limitations as outlined in this code.
Section 404.8.5 Add. It is separated from the heating equipment, incinerators, or other equally
hazardous equipment by a standard one-hour fire partition.
Section 404.8.6 Add. Access can be gained to the unit without going through a furnace room.
Section 404.8.7 Add. Two (2) independent means of egress are provided from every basement
containing more than one (1) dwelling unit or one (1) rooming unit.
(e) Chapter 5 – Plumbing Facilities and fixture Requirement
Section 505.1 Modified. The final sentence of subsection 505.1 is modified to provide as follows:
“All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be
supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with
provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(f) Chapter 6 – Mechanical and Electrical Requirements
Section 602.3 Modified. To provide that it is effective between September 1 and May 31 and so
as to replace the reference to Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code with
Comm. 22.07(2), Wisconsin Administrative Code.
Section 602.4 Insert: September 1 to May 31
Section 603.2 is modified to eliminate the exception.
Section 605.4 Add. Additional Requirements for Multiple-Family Dwellings. In all multiple
dwellings, all sub panels and switching for full-time lighting shall be located in
areas not accessible to the public.
Section 605.5 Add. NFPA 70. NFPA 70 shall be incorporated and made part of this code.
(g) Chapter 7 – Fire Safety Requirements
Section 701.3 Add. Wisconsin Rapids Fire Code. Chapter 18 of the Wisconsin Rapids Municipal
Code (Fire Code) is hereby adopted and made part of this chapter.
Section 702.5 Add. Exit Ways. Where there are two (2) or more dwelling units located on the
second story of the dwelling, or where there are more than two (2) stories in a
dwelling, every floor above the first shall have a minimum of two (2) approved
means of egress, two of which shall be accessible to all occupants of the floor,
without passing through another dwelling unit. A second story may be served by a
single interior stairway if such stairway is enclosed by one-hour fire resistive
materials, and all doors opening into the stairway shall be self-closing class "B" fire
doors or solid wood doors not less than 1-3/4 inches thick at any one point. This
exception shall not apply in cases where the second story exceeds 1,000 square
feet of habitable floor area.
(h) Chapter 8 – Referenced Standards
None
Chapter 37 Comprehensive Plan (MC#1095)
37.01
Pursuant to Section 60.22(3) of the Wisconsin Statutes, the City of Wisconsin Rapids is authorized to
prepare and adopt a comprehensive plan as defined in Section 66.1001(1)(a) and 66.1001(2) of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
37.02
The Common Council of the City of Wisconsin Rapids, Wisconsin, has adopted written procedures
designed to foster public participation in every stage of the preparation of a comprehensive plan as required
by section 66.1001(4)(a) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
37.03
The Planning Commission of the City of Wisconsin Rapids, by a majority vote of the entire
commission recorded in its official minutes, has adopted a resolution recommending to the Common Council
the adoption of the document entitled "Comprehensive Plan of the City of Wisconsin Rapids," containing all
of the elements specified in section 66.1001(2) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
37.04
The City has held at least one public hearing on this ordinance, in compliance with the requirements
of section 66.1001(4)(d) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
37.05
The Common Council of the City of Wisconsin Rapids, Wisconsin, does, by enactment of this
ordinance, formally adopt the document entitled, "Comprehensive Plan of the City of Wisconsin Rapids,"
pursuant to section 66.1001(4)(c) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
37.06
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage by a majority vote of the members-elect of the
Common Council and publication/posting as required by law.
Chapter 38 (MC #1241) Shoreland Zoning
38.01 Shorelands.
38.02 Definitions.
38.03 Applicability.
38.04 Reserved.
38.05 Reserved.
38.06 Reserved.
38.07 Reserved.
38.08 Reserved.
38.09 Reserved.
38.10 Reserved.
38.11 Vegetation.
38.12 Earth Movement.
38.13 Setbacks.
38.14 Appeals.
38.01 Shorelands.
(1) In addition to any other applicable use, site, or sanitary restrictions and regulations, the following
regulations shall apply to all shorelands, as defined in Section 38.02.
38.02 Definitions.
(1) “Principal building" means the main building or structure on a single lot or parcel of land and includes
any attached garage or attached porch.
(2) "Shorelands" means the area within the following distances from the ordinary high-water mark of
navigable waters, as defined under Wisconsin Statutes. 281.31(2)(d):
(a) One thousand feet from a lake, pond or flowage. If the navigable water is a glacial pothole
lake, this distance shall be measured from the high-water mark of the lake.
(b) Three hundred feet from a river or stream or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever
distance is greater.
(3) "Shoreland setback area" means an area in a shoreland that is within a certain distance of the
ordinary high-water mark in which the construction or placement of buildings or structures has been
limited or prohibited under an ordinance enacted under this section.
(4) “Vegetative buffer zone” means land that extends from the ordinary high-water mark to 35 feet inland.
38.03 Applicability.
(1) A shoreland that was annexed by the City after May 7, 1982, and was subject to the Wood County
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance prior to annexation, shall be subject to the requirements of this Chapter.
(2) Shoreland regulations do not apply to lands adjacent to an artificially constructed drainage ditch,
pond, or storm water retention basin if the drainage ditch, pond, or retention basin is not hydrologically
connected to a natural navigable water body.
38.11 Vegetation.
(1) Any person who owns shoreland property that contains vegetation shall maintain that vegetation in a
vegetative buffer zone along the entire shoreline of the property and extending 35 feet inland from the
ordinary high-water mark of the navigable water, except as provided in 38.11(3).
(2) If the vegetation in a vegetative buffer zone contains invasive species or dead or diseased vegetation,
the owner of the shoreland property may remove such vegetation, except that if the owner removes all
of the vegetation as described herein within the vegetative buffer zone, the owner shall reestablish
vegetation within the vegetative buffer zone.
(3) A person who is required to maintain or establish a vegetative buffer zone under this section shall be
allowed to remove all of the vegetation in a part of that zone in order to establish a viewing or access
corridor that is no greater than 30 feet wide for every 100 feet of shoreline frontage and that extends
no more than 35 feet inland from the ordinary high-water mark.
38.12 Earth Movement.
(1) Earth Movements, such as construction, altering or enlargement of waterways, removal of stream or
lake bed materials, channel clearing, dredging, lagooning, grading, topsoil removal, filling, road
cutting, ditching, and soil and water conservation structures may require City approval in conformance
with other chapters of the Municipal Code in addition to any permit required from the state agency
having jurisdiction under Sections 30.11, 30.12, 30.19, 30.195, and 30.20 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
38.13 Setbacks.
(1) Shoreland Setback. Areas within shorelands as defined by this Chapter shall be subject to the
following:
(2) Within the shoreland area, no principal building, except navigational aids, piers and boat launching
facilities, shall be closer than 50 feet to the ordinary highwater mark of a navigable body of water
unless a smaller setback is approved by the Planning Commission.
(a) A shoreland setback area of at least 50 feet from the ordinary high-water mark, except as
provided in 38.13(2)(b).
(b) Construction or placement of a principal building within the shoreland setback area
established under (2) shall be allowed if all of the following apply:
(1) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel of land that is
immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel of land containing a principal
building.
(2) The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance equal to the average
setback of the principal building on the adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary
high-water mark, whichever distance is greater.
(3) For purposes of this section structures shall include fences, ice fishing shanties, accessory structures
other than boathouses, minor structures, and retaining walls not approved by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources (DNR).
(4) For purposes of this section, principal building means the main building or structure on a single lot or
parcel of land and includes any attached garage or attached porch.
38.14 Appeals.
(1) The zoning board of appeals created pursuant to Chapter 11 of the City of Wisconsin Rapids ordinance
pursuant to Section 62.23(7)(e), Wisconsin Statutes:
(a) Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or
determination made by the zoning administrator in administering this ordinance.
(b) Upon appeal, may authorize variances from the provisions of this ordinance which are not
contrary to the public interest and where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of
the provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship; and
(c) Shall use the rules, procedures, duties and powers authorized by statute in hearing and
deciding appeals and authorizing variances.
(2) Appeals to the zoning board of appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by any office,
department, board, or bureau of the City of Wisconsin Rapids affected by any decision of the zoning
administrator. Appeals must be filed with the zoning administrator and zoning board of appeals within
30 days of the decision.
1
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Section 46-1. Applicability.
All signs erected or maintained after March 1, 2013; except official, traffic, street signs,
and those signs which are displayed inside of a business or residence; shall conform to
the provisions of this chapter and any other ordinance or regulations of the City of
Wisconsin Rapids not in conflict.
Section 46-2. Purposes of Sign Regulations.
The purposes of these regulations are:
(a) To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the city;
(b) To maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the city's ability to
attract sources of economic development and growth;
(c) To improve pedestrian and traffic safety;
(d) To minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private
property;
(e) To restrict off-premises signage to reduce visual clutter thereby helping to
prevent unsafe traffic conditions; and
(f) To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these restrictions.
Section 46-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
Abandoned sign means a sign, and all of its components, which no longer correctly
directs or exhorts any person, advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product or
activity conducted, or product available on the premises where the sign is displayed.
Alteration of sign means changes to the exterior appearance of any part of the frame,
supporting structure, or lighting of a sign; including material, size, height, or location of a
sign. Alteration does not include the normal maintenance of a sign or changing the face
of a sign under the same business.
Animated sign means a sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action
or create a special effect or scene. A changeable message sign shall not be considered
an animated sign.
Area of copy means the entire area within a single, continuous perimeter generally
composed of squares or rectangles which enclose the extreme limits of the advertising
message, announcement, or decoration of a wall sign.
Area of sign means the area of the largest single face of the sign within a perimeter
which forms the outside shape including any frame that forms an integral part of the
2
display, but excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which the signs may be
placed. If the sign consists of more than one section or module, all areas will be totaled.
Any irregular shaped sign area shall be computed using the actual sign-face surface. In
the case of wall signs the area of copy will be used.
Athletic field sign means a sign located within an athletic field owned by a school or
other government entity. Advertising associated with these signs is to be incidental to the
sign and not a primary function thereof.
Banner means any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is mounted to a
building or other permanent structure by its edges. National flags, state or municipal
flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners.
Billboard. See off-premises sign.
Building face means that portion of a building, which is parallel or nearly parallel to an
abutting roadway.
Business identification sign means any sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, offered, or manufactured upon
the premises where the sign is located.
Canopy sign means any sign that is part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other
fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover (including a marquee) over a door, entrance,
window, or outdoor service area. The area of a canopy sign is calculated by the area of
copy.
Changeable message sign means a sign such as an electronic or a controlled time and
temperature sign, message center or reader board, whether electronic, electric, or
manual, where different copy changes.
Civic banner means any sign of lightweight fabric, or similar material mounted by edges
to a pole or building. Civic banners generally display information relative to events
sponsored by the City or other nonprofit civic organizations. Civic banners displayed on
City-owned property are not bound by the restrictions imposed on banners installed on
private property.
Construction sign means a sign erected on a lot where construction is taking place and
contains information regarding the construction, management, leasing, or future tenants
of the building as well as the development of a new subdivision.
Copy means the advertising message, announcement or decoration on a sign surface.
Directional sign means any sign which serves to designate the location or direction of
any place or area up to six (6) square feet in area.
Electric sign means any sign containing electrical wiring, which is attached or intended to
be attached to an electrical energy source.
Flag means any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or
symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity.
3
Flashing sign means any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light source, or
which includes the illusion of flashing, light by means of animation, or an externally
mounted intermittent light source, not including changeable message signs.
Frontage means the length of the property line of any one premise parallel to and along
each public right-of-way it borders. Said public right-of-way may be known as a frontage
road.
Gross area means the area of a wall sign determined by using the outside perimeter
dimensions of the sign. If the sign consists of more than one module or section, the
areas of the modules will be totaled. If the modules are formed in the shape of letter or
symbols, the rules for area of copy apply.
Ground sign means a permanent sign supported by structures or supports placed on, or
anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure.
The area of ground signs is calculated on one face only.
Height of sign means the vertical distance measured from the grade at the street rightof-
way line where the sign is located to the highest point of such sign.
Inflatable device means an object that is inflated with air or gas utilized to attract
attention to a use or business activity being conducted.
Illuminated sign means a sign in which a source of light, either internal or external, is
used to make the message legible.
Incidental sign means a sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to
the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no parking", "entrance", "loading only",
"telephone", and other similar directives. No sign with a commercial message legible
from a position off the lot on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental.
Integrated shopping center means a building under single ownership or under unified
control which contains four (4) or more businesses.
Monument sign means a sign mounted on a base or platform. The base shall be
constructed out of a solid material such as stone, brick or poured concrete and it
dimensions shall be proportionate to those of the sign. The bottom of the sign shall be
located within six (6) inches of the base.
Movable sign means any sign not permanently attached to the ground or a building in
excess of ten (10) square feet in area.
Mural. See wall sign.
Name plate sign means a sign indicating the name and/or address of the building, tenant
of the unit or manager of the property that is located upon a premise where the sign is
displayed.
Nonconforming sign means a sign that does not meet current code regulations but was
permitted under a previous ordinance or regulation.
Off-premises sign means a sign, including billboard, which advertises goods, products,
facilities, or services not necessarily located on the premises, or directs persons to a
4
different location from where the sign is located. Athletic field signs shall not be
considered off-premises signs.
Pennant means any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not
containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string.
Permanent sign means a sign that is self-supporting and sufficiently attached to a
building or its own ground foundation.
Point of sale sign means a sign which calls attention to specific products and services
available on the property where the sign is located. Such signs are specifically intended
to be utilized by patrons of the establishment and are not intended for view by a
passerby on the public street or access road.
Political sign means a temporary sign used in connection with a local, state or national
election or referendum, or to represent a political or philosophical position.
Portable sign means any sign of ten (10) square feet or less in area that is not
permanently attached to the ground or building.
Projecting sign means a sign, other than a wall sign, which is attached to and projects
more than 18 inches from a structure or building face. The area of a projecting sign is
calculated on one face only.
Real estate sign means a temporary on-site sign that advertises the sale or lease of a
property.
Roof sign means a sign erected upon, against or above a roof.
Sandwich board/sidewalk sign means an unlit freestanding, internally weighted portable
sign frequently but not exclusively having the cross-sectional shape of an A.
Sign means any identification, description, illustration, or devise illuminated or nonilluminated
which is visible from any public place or is located on private property and
exposed to the public and which directs attention to a product, service, place, activity,
person, institution, business, or solicitation, including any permanently installed or
situated merchandise; or any emblem, painting, banner, pennant, placard, or temporary
sign designed to advertise, identify or convey information with the exception of window
displays and flags. For the purpose of removal, signs shall also include all sign
structures.
Sign contractor means any person, partnership, or corporation engaged in whole or in
part in the erection or maintenance of signs, excluding the business which the sign
advertises.
Sign structure means any structure or material, which supports, has supported, or is
capable of supporting or helping maintain a sign in a stationary position, including
decorative covers.
Special event sign means a collection of signs intended to be displayed for a specific
event and for a restricted timeframe. Examples of events include grand openings, store
closings and sidewalk sales.
5
Temporary sign means a sign advertising display intended to be displayed for a limited
period of time. If a sign display area is permanent but the message displayed is subject
to periodic changes, that sign shall not be considered as temporary.
Vehicle sign means a sign mounted, painted or otherwise placed on a trailer, truck,
automobile or other vehicle which are parked on a public right-of-way, or private property
so as to be visible from the right-of-way where the apparent purpose is to advertise a
product or to direct people to a business or activity. However, this does not include signs
affixed to vehicles and trailers, such as lettering on motor vehicles, where the sign is
incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer.
Vision clearance area/triangle means an area, formed by any two existing or proposed
intersecting street or alley right-of-way lines and a line joining points on such lines
located a minimum of 15 feet from their intersection, where no obstructions, including
signs, shall be permitted between the height of 2.5 feet and 10 feet above the grade of
the adjacent right-of-way.
Wall sign means a permanent sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building
with the face parallel to the plane of the building wall. A wall sign shall not project more
than 18 inches from the surface of the wall.
Window sign means a sign designed to communicate information about an activity,
business, commodity, event, sale, or service that is placed inside a window and is visible
from the exterior of the premises.
Yard sale sign means a sign that is used to advertise yard, garage, rummage, estate or
other similar sales.
(Sections 46-4 to 46-10 Reserved)
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION
Section 46-11 Enforcing Officer.
The Department of Planning and Economic Development shall enforce this chapter and
shall perform the following duties:
(a) Issue permits and conduct inspections of property to determine compliance with
the terms of this chapter;
(b) Establish and enforce necessary or desirable regulations in writing, clarifying or
explaining any provision of this chapter;
(c) Receive and file any application for exceptions or appeals; and
(d) Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including but not limited
to the following: all permits, plans, exceptions and appeals.
Section 46-12 Permits Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, erect, construct, relocate, enlarge, change
copy, or structurally modify any sign in the City, or cause the same to be done without
first obtaining a sign permit for each sign as required by this chapter. Permits shall not
6
be required by a change of copy on a sign under the same business, nor for repainting,
cleaning, and other normal maintenance or repair of the sign or sign structure.
Section 46-13 Permit Application and Plans.
The application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by a plan or design of the sign
showing the following information:
(a) The location and nominal dimensions of the proposed sign;
(b) The kinds of material to be used in the construction and/or erection of the sign;
(c) Construction specifications, if required, showing that the structure and design
meet the requirements of this chapter for wind pressure load;
(d) The location, size and types of other signs on the premises if such signs exist;
and
(e) The area of the building face if the sign is to be attached to it.
Section 46-14 Permit Fees.
Permit fees, as established by the Common Council, shall be paid at the time the sign
permit application is submitted.
Section 46-15 Inspection Required.
The applicant shall, upon completion of the installation, relocation, or alteration of a sign,
notify the Department of Planning and Economic Development, which will inspect to
ensure that the sign complies with the regulations of this chapter.
Section 46-16 Permit Issuance or Denial.
A sign permit shall be issued when the application is properly made, all fees have been
paid, and the proposed sign is found to be in compliance with all appropriate laws and
regulations of the City. If the sign permit is denied, written notice of the denial shall be
given to the applicant, together with a brief written statement of the reasons for the
denial.
Section 46-17 Administrative Appeal.
The holder of a denied permit who feels their permit was incorrectly denied shall be
entitled to an administrative appeal before the Board of Zoning Appeals.
Section 46-18 Exceptions.
Any exceptions to this chapter shall be considered by the City Planning Commission. An
exception shall only permit up to a 25 percent increase of an applicable bulk regulation
or to allow the face-change of a non-conforming sign structure.
(Section 49.19 Reserved)
ARTICLE III. NONCONFORMING SIGNS
7
Section 46.20 Continuation of Use.
Signs existing as of the effective date of these ordinances, and were previously
permitted, which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter, shall be nonconforming
signs and be subject to the following provisions:
(a) Signs shall not be allowed to expand in number, area, height or illumination; and
(b) Normal maintenance and repair of a nonconforming sign is permitted. Normal
maintenance and repair does not include the alteration of a sign and is limited to
painting and/or replacement of non-supporting members such as the facing
material or cross bracing.
Section 46.21 Loss of Status.
The following situations shall result in the loss of non-conforming status for signs:
(a) Placement of new signs. New signs, not to exceed the maximum allowable
aggregate sign area, may be erected only upon the complete removal of all
nonconforming signs of the same category existing on the property at the time of
adoption of this ordinance;
(b) Alteration of signs. Alterations of a nonconforming sign, including those which
make the sign less in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, are
prohibited;
(c) Change of location. Relocation of a nonconforming sign is prohibited, except in
the case of a sign which is nonconforming only in relation to a setback and the
new location is compliant with the required setbacks;
(d) Damage to sign. In the event the nonconforming sign is damaged to such an
extent that the cost to repair or reconstruct the sign exceeds fifty percent (50%)
of the value of the sign; and
(e) Failure to maintain. Failure to comply with the maintenance, repair, construction
standards, or abandoned sign regulations of this chapter.
Section 46.22 Removal.
All signs found not to be in compliance with the provisions of this article shall be
removed within 30 days of receiving written notice of noncompliance and removal from
the enforcing officer. Upon failure to comply with this notice, the City may cause removal
to be executed, the expenses of which will be a special charge placed upon the tax roll
of the property on which the abandoned sign is located.
(Sections 46.23-46.29 Reserved)
ARTICLE IV. DANGEROUS, UNMAINTAINED AND ABANDONED SIGNS
Section 46.30 Intent.
8
In order to ensure public welfare and safety, and to promote community aesthetics, any
dangerous, unmaintained, and abandoned signs shall be ordered removed from the
property upon which they are located.
Section 46.31 Maintenance and Repair.
Regulations for the maintenance and repair of signs are as follows:
(a) Every sign, including but not limited to those signs for which a permit is required,
shall be a maintained in a safe, presentable, and good structural condition at all
times, including replacement of defective parts, painting, cleaning and other acts
for the maintenance of said sign; and
(b) The Department of Planning and Economic Development shall require
compliance with all standards of this chapter. If the sign is not modified to comply
with safety standards outlined in this chapter, the Department of Planning and
Economic Development shall require its removal.
Section 46.32 Abandoned Signs.
Regulations for abandoned signs are as follows:
(a) All signs or sign messages shall be removed within 60 days by the owner or
lessee of the premises, when, for an on-premises sign, the business it advertises
is no longer conducted; and for an off-premises sign, when lease payment and
rental income are no longer provided.
Section 46.33 Removal.
If the owner or lessee fails to remove a sign, the Department of Planning and Economic
Development shall give the owner 30 days written notice to remove said sign. Upon
failure to comply with this notice, the City may cause removal to be executed, the
expenses of which will be a special charge placed upon the tax roll of the property on
which the sign is located.
(Sections 46.34-46.39 Reserved.)
ARTICLE V. PROHIBITED SIGNS
Section 46.40 Intent.
Some specific signs and classes of sign, provide little value in identifying a specific
business, promoting advertising for a business or communication for a business, and
may only harm community aesthetics and/or the public welfare.
Section 46.41. Prohibited Signs.
The following signs shall be prohibited within the City:
(a) Flashing signs, including those giving off intermittent or rotating beams;
(b) Animated signs, except as provided in Section 46.73;
9
(c) Signs that resemble any official marker erected by a government agency or
display such words as "stop", "danger", etc.;
(d) Signs painted directly on the surface of a wall and signs attached to trees or
painted on rocks;
(e) Pennants and other fluttering, undulating, swinging, rotating, or otherwise moving
signs, and other similar decorations, except as provided in Section 46.63 (f);
(f) Vehicle signs, except as provided in Section 46.73;
(g) Signs that obstruct any window, door, fire escape, stairway, or opening intended
to provide light, air, ingress or egress for any building or structure;
(h) Inflatable devices, except as provided in Section 46.63 (f);
(i) Off-premises signs;
(j) Signs located within the public right-of-way, easements, or other City property,
unless otherwise specifically approved by the City Council or as provided in
Section 46.63 (g);
(k) Portable signs; except as provided in Section 46.51 or 46.63;
(l) Movable signs; except as provided in Section 46.51 or 46.63;
(m) Roof signs; and
(n) Abandoned signs.
(Sections 46.42-46.49 Reserved.)
ARTICLE VI. SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT
Section 46.50 Intent.
Some signs are temporary in nature, others are intended to communicate and direct,
and not used to identify a business or for advertising. Still others are so small that they
are not obtrusive and will not affect the public welfare. Such signs will not require a sign
permit; however, those used on a temporary basis shall adhere to a specific time limit for
their use.
Section 46.51. Signs with Time Limits.
The following signs, although not needing a permit, have the following restrictions:
(a) Political signs. Signs may not be erected earlier than the beginning of an election
campaign period as defined in Wisconsin Statues § 12.04. In the event the sign
is not tied to an election the sign shall not be in place for longer than 90 days.
Political signs shall not exceed 11 square feet in residential districts and 32
square feet in non-residential districts. To ensure traffic and pedestrian safety no
sign may be located on city property, nor less than 12 feet from the existing curb
or edge of the street surfacing.
10
(b) Real estate signs. Signs in residential districts are limited to one (1) sign that
shall not exceed eight (8) square feet and shall not be illuminated. In nonresidential
districts real estate signs are limited to one (1) sign that shall not
exceed 32 square feet and shall not be illuminated. Lots in any district with more
than one (1) frontage are permitted one (1) additional sign of the same
dimensions. All signs shall be removed within 30 days after sale, rental or lease
of the property.
(c) Construction signs. Signs shall be limited to one (1) un-illuminated sign
identifying an engineer, architect, contractor, company, or product engaged in or
used in the construction of a new building or development. Said sign shall not
exceed 100 square feet per face and not more than 15 feet in height. Lots with
more than one (1) frontage are permitted one (1) additional sign of the same
dimensions. Said sign shall be removed when the development is completed or
upon the granting of an occupancy permit for the building. Renovation signs shall
be limited to one (1) un-illuminated sign identifying the contractor or company
engaged in renovation of an existing building. Said renovation sign shall not
exceed eight (8) square feet per face and shall be removed when the renovation
work is complete. In no case shall a renovation sign be in place for more than 90
days.
(d) Yard sale signs. Signs shall not interfere with traffic; be located on City property;
be attached to public property; be displayed for a period exceeding 72 hours; nor
exceed nine (9) square feet in area.
(e) Banners. Signs shall be limited to three (3) at any one time and only permitted
within commercial or industrial districts. Banners shall not exceed 24 square feet,
be attached to a permanent structure and not be displayed higher than 16 feet
above grade. With City staff approval one (1) larger banner, not to exceed 72
square feet, may be permitted in place of three (3) individual banners. Banners
shall advertise goods or services found on-site with the exception of one (1)
banner that may advertise a civic, philanthropic, educational or religious drive or
event. Banners shall be maintained in a whole, clean, and undamaged condition
so as not to be a public nuisance.
(f) Point of sale signs. Signs shall be located within ten (10) feet of the building
entrance, or outside ordering area. Point of sale signs shall not exceed eight (8)
square feet in area and shall not be located higher than eight (8) feet. Point of
sale signs shall not be located closer than 40 feet to a public street and shall not
be easily seen from a public street or access road. Point of sale signs shall be
maintained in a whole, clean, and undamaged condition.
Section 46.52 Signs without a Time Limit.
(a) Directional signs. Signs shall be located entirely on the property to which they
pertain and not exceed six (6) square feet in height.
(b) Flags. Signs shall not contain a commercial message.
(c) Incidental signs. Signs shall be located entirely on the property to which they
pertain and not contain a commercial message visible off of the property.
11
(d) Window signs. Signs shall not exceed 50% of the total window area in which they
are located and shall not be placed on door windows or other windows needed to
be clear for pedestrian safety.
(Sections 46.53-46.59. Reserved.)
ARTICLE VII. GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR SIGNS REQUIRING PERMITS
Section 46.60 Generally.
All signs shall meet the general standards contained in this article regarding
construction, installation and design.
Section 46.61 Specifications.
(a) No sign shall project across a property line or right-of-way line except where
expressly permitted by this ordinance.
(b) Where a sign is illuminated, the source of light shall not shine into any part of a
residence or into any residential district so as to cause a nuisance. Illumination
for signs located within residential districts, in order to minimize potential
nuisances with surrounding residential uses and with the exception of signs for
hospitals, shall be limited to the hours of 6 a.m. to 10 p.m.
(c) All signs, except those attached flat against the wall of a building, shall be
constructed to withstand wind loads in accordance to the most recent version of
ASCE-7. Signs over 12 feet in height shall provide calculations signed and
sealed by a licensed engineer showing compliance with ASCE-7.
Section 46.62 Installation Standards.
(a) All signs shall be installed and maintained in a workmanlike manner using
equipment which is adequate and safe for the task. A sign permit may be denied
if the sign contractor does not have or does not arrange for use of adequate
equipment.
(b) Electric sign contractors and their employees are hereon authorized to perform
the following specific tasks:
(1) Install exterior electric signs, ballasts, or high voltage transformers to
sockets or outline lighting tubes, and connect said signs to primary
branch circuit, if said circuit already exists outside of the building.
(2) Install interior electric signs, but not connect said signs to the primary
circuit branch.
(3) Maintain and replace any electric component within the sign, on its
surface, or between the sign and building for exterior signs only.
Section 46.63 Design Requirements.
(a) No sign or sign structure shall be located within the vision clearance area.
12
(b) All projecting and canopy signs shall maintain a minimum vertical distance
between the bottom of the sign and the ground level of eight (8) feet.
(c) The gross area of permanent window signs shall not exceed 50 percent of the
gross window area of any given building face.
(d) No sign shall be located where, by reason of its position, size, shape or color, it
may obstruct, impair, obscure or interfere with the view of or be confused with
any traffic control sign, signal or device, or where it may interfere within, mislead
or confuse traffic.
(e) Projecting signs shall not exceed ten (10) square feet and shall not extend more
than five (5) feet from the building to which they are attached.
(f) Special event signs shall only be permitted within the B-2, General Commercial
District and must comply with the following conditions:
(1) An annual permit is required which shall include a listing of all intended
signs and dates the signs will be in place.
(2) Special event signs are restricted to four (4) events per business per
calendar year.
(3) Special event signs shall not be in place for more than 15 days per event.
(4) Banners, inflatable devices, and pennants are allowed as part of a special
event.
(g) Sandwich board signs shall only be permitted within the B-1, Central Commercial
District and must comply with the following conditions:
(1) Sandwich board signs shall only be located a minimum of one (1) foot
from the face of the street curb but no more than four (4) feet or the sign
must be located within three (3) feet of the building face.
(2) Sandwich board signs shall leave a minimum of five (5) feet of clear
sidewalk space for pedestrian movement.
(3) Sandwich board signs shall be freestanding and at sidewalk grade level.
(4) Sandwich board signs shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in area and
shall not exceed a width of three (3) feet or height of four (4) feet.
(5) Sandwich board signs shall not have other attention getting devices, such
as balloons and ribbons, attached to them.
(6) Sandwich board signs are limited to one (1) per business.
(7) Sandwich board signs shall be stored inside the business overnight
and/or when the business is closed.
13
(8) A certificate of general liability insurance naming the City of Wisconsin
Rapids as an additional insured in the form of general commercial liability
insurance in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence/general
aggregate, shall be provided with the application for any permit to locate a
sandwich board sign within the right-of-way.
(Sections 46.64-46.69 Reserved.)
ARTICLE VIII. SIGN REQUIREMENTS BY ZONING DISTRICT
Section 46.70 Intent.
Zoning districts by definition encourage and allow different uses and types of
development. Therefore, the requirements for permitted signs in the districts also differ
as related to types of signs, their height, area of coverage and setbacks.
Section 46.71 Signs in R-1, R-2, and R-3 Residential Districts.
Residential districts normally do not require the use of signs; however, certain higher
density uses and non-residential uses create special situations that require limited
signage. No signs shall be erected except the following:
(a) Permitted signs. Signs requiring no permits, wall signs, and ground signs.
(b) Area restrictions. Wall signs for single-family lots and lots containing four (4)
dwelling units or less (including home occupations) are limited to two (2) square
feet in area. Wall signs for more than four (4) dwelling units or other nonresidential
uses are limited to 12 square feet in area. One (1) ground sign, not to
exceed 30 square feet in area, is permitted for lots containing more than four (4)
dwelling units or other non-residential uses; one (1) additional ground sign is
permitted on lots with more than one (1) frontage or more than 300 feet of
frontage. Such ground sign shall be solely for the purpose of displaying the name
of the use and its activities or services.
(c) Height restrictions. No ground sign shall exceed 12 feet in height.
(d) Setbacks. All ground signs shall be setback a minimum of 5 feet from any
property line.
Section 46.72 Signs in B-1 Central Business District.
This district encourages compact development consisting of buildings that contain both
single and multi-tenant uses. Businesses located in this district tend to rely less on
passing traffic than other commercial districts. No signs shall be erected except the
following:
(a) Permitted signs. Signs requiring no permits, wall signs, projecting and canopy
signs, ground signs, and sandwich board signs.
(b) Area restrictions. The total area of all signs (excluding ground signs) on a lot
shall not exceed the sum of two (2) square feet of signage per lineal foot of the
building façade(s) facing the right-of-way. Buildings setback more than 20 feet
from the front property line, may erect one (1) ground sign whose area shall not
14
exceed the sum of one-half (.5) of a square foot of signage per lineal foot of the
longest street frontage. In no case shall a ground sign exceed 100 square feet in
area.
(c) Height restrictions. No ground sign shall exceed 12 feet in height.
(d) Setbacks. All ground signs shall be setback a minimum of 5 feet from any
property line. The issuance of any sign permit for a sign that is suspended or
projects above a public right-of-way shall require conditional use approval and
the sign owner shall maintain liability insurance for the sign.
Section 46.73 Signs in B-2 General Business District.
This district encourages auto-related businesses and features properties with both single
tenants as well as multiple tenants. Businesses in this district tend to rely heavily on
passing traffic. No signs shall be erected except the following:
(a) Permitted signs. Signs requiring no permits, wall signs, projecting and canopy
signs, ground signs, special event signs, animated signs by conditional use, and
vehicle signs.
(b) Area restrictions. The total area of all signs on a property shall not exceed the
sum of three (3) square feet of signage per lineal foot of lot frontage. In the case
of corner lots, the greatest width of lot shall be the lot frontage for the purposes of
this section.
Wall signs. Total area of wall signs (including projecting and canopy signs) shall
not exceed 15% of the building face on which they are attached. In the case of a
multi-tenant building the wall face shall be the area leased by an individual
tenant.
Ground signs. Total area of ground signs (including vehicle signs) shall not
exceed the sum of one-half (.5) of a square foot per lineal foot of lot frontage or
one (1) square foot per lineal foot of the longest building face, whichever is
greater. In no case shall a ground sign exceed 200 square feet in area. One (1)
ground sign is permitted per lot; properties with more than one frontage are
permitted one (1) additional ground sign. A vehicle sign counts against the total
area permitted, but not the number permitted for a lot.
Miscellaneous signs. Temporary signs shall not be counted against the area
restrictions for wall signs or ground signs, but shall not result in the total square
footage exceeding that permitted for the lot.
(c) Height restrictions. No ground sign shall project higher than 35 feet or six feet
above the height of the building, whichever is less.
(d) Setbacks. No ground sign (including banners, special events signs, and vehicle
signs) shall be closer to the side or rear lot line (not inclusive of a corner side lot
line) than the total height of the sign. In no case shall any portion of a ground
sign be closer than five (5) feet to any lot line.
Section 46.74 Signs in B-3 Exclusive Office District, B-4 Central Area Mixed Use District, B-5 General
Mixed Use District, and B-6 Specialized Commercial District.
15
These districts all are designed to maintain a higher quality of design with more
restrictive sign regulations. Businesses and uses within these districts tend to rely less
on passing traffic. No signs shall be erected except the following:
(a) Permitted signs. Signs requiring no permits (excluding banners), wall signs, and
monument signs.
(b) Area restrictions. Maximum sign area per business shall not exceed 80 square
feet. Single tenant monument signs shall not exceed 40 square feet. Multi-tenant
monument signs shall not exceed 60 square feet. Only one (1) monument sign
per lot shall be permitted.
(c) Height restrictions. Single tenant monument signs shall not exceed ten (10) feet
in height. Multi-tenant monument signs shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in
height.
(d) Setbacks. No monument sign shall be closer to the side or rear lot line (not
inclusive of a corner side lot line) than the total height of the sign. In no case shall
any portion of a monument sign be closer than five (5) feet to any lot line.
Section 46.75 Signs in M-1 Enclosed Industrial District, M-2 Open Storage Industrial District, M-3
Industrial Park District, and M-4 Heavy Industrial-Future District.
These districts are designed for manufacturing uses that do not rely on traffic for
business. No signs shall be erected except the following:
(a) Permitted signs. Signs requiring no permits, wall signs, ground signs, and
projecting and canopy signs.
(b) Area restrictions. Maximum area of all signs on a lot shall not exceed three (3)
square feet per lineal foot of frontage. In the case of corner lots, the greatest
width of lot shall be the lot frontage for the purposes of this section. No individual
sign shall exceed 300 square feet of area. One (1) ground sign is permitted per
lot; properties with more than one frontage are permitted one (1) additional
ground sign.
(c) Height restrictions. No ground sign shall project higher than 35 feet or six feet
above the height of the building whichever is less.
(d) No ground sign shall be closer to the side or rear lot line (not inclusive of a corner
side lot line) than the total height of the sign. In no case shall any portion of a
ground sign be closer than five (5) feet to any lot line.
Section 46.76 Signs in A-1 Agricultural District.
This district is designed for uses which rely on signs mainly for identification and not for
pulling in traffic and business. No signs shall be erected except the following:
(a) Permitted signs. Signs requiring no permits, wall signs, and ground signs.
(b) Area restrictions. Wall signs are limited to one sign not to exceed 12 square feet
in area. One (1) ground sign, not to exceed 30 square feet in area, is permitted
16
for lots containing non-residential uses. Such ground sign shall be solely for the
purpose of displaying the name of the use and its activities or services.
(c) Height restrictions. Ground signs shall not exceed 12 feet in height.
(d) Setbacks. No ground signs shall be closer to the side or rear lot line (not
inclusive of a corner side lot line) than the total height of the sign. In no case shall
any portion of a ground sign be closer than five (5) feet to any lot line.
Section 46.77 Signs in C-1 Conservancy District.
This district is designed for open space uses with limited commercial activity. No signs
shall be erected except the following:
(a) Permitted signs. Signs providing directions or information about natural, historic,
scientific features are permitted upon approval of the Park and Recreation
Commission.
(b) Area restrictions. No sign shall exceed ten (10) square feet in area, unless
otherwise approved by the Park and Recreation Commission.
(c) Height restrictions. No sign shall exceed ten (10) feet in height, unless otherwise
approved by the Park and Recreation Commission.
(d) Setbacks. No ground sign shall be closer to the side or rear lot line (not inclusive
of a corner side lot line) than the total height of the sign. In no case shall any
portion of a ground sign be closer than five (5) feet to any lot line.
1
Chapter 340 Traffic (Updated through MC #1175)
340.001 State Traffic Laws Adopted
340.002 Official Traffic Map and Control Devices; Prohibited Signs, Signals, and Markers
340.003 Speed Limits
340.004 Through Streets and Controlled Intersections
340.005 One-way Streets, Safety Zones, Safety Islands, Mid-block Crosswalks, Turns, and
Lanes
340.006 Pedestrians, Bicycles, etc., Prohibited on Freeways, Streets, and Expressways
340.007 No Passing Zones
340.008 Truck Routes
340.009 School Bus Warning Lights
340.010 Motor Vehicles or Pedestrian Way, Boulevards, and Overpasses
340.011 Obstruction of Railroad Crossing
340.012 Snowmobile Regulations
340.013 Penalties
340.014 Citations
340.015 Reference to Wisconsin Statutes
340.016 Storage Fees for Seized Vehicles
340.017 Immobilization of Vehicles
340.018 Compression Brake Regulations
340.020 Use of Hand-held Mobile Telephones and Mobile Electronic Devices While Driving
340.001 STATE TRAFFIC LAWS ADOPTED (MC#530)
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this code, the statutory provisions in Chapters 340 to 348 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic, exclusive of any
provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed and exclusive of any regulations for which the statutory
penalty is a fine or term of imprisonment, are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this code as if
fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by
reference is required or prohibited by this code. Any future amendments, revisions, or modifications of the
statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this code in order to secure, to the extent legally
practicable, uniform statewide regulations of traffic on the highways, street, and alley of the State of Wisconsin.
340.002 OFFICIAL TRAFFIC MAP AND CONTROL DEVICES; PROHIBITED SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND MARKERS
(1) Office of City Traffic Engineer is Hereby Established. The position will be under the supervision of the
city engineer. It shall be the general duty of the city traffic engineer to recommend to the proper
common council committee, the ordinance for the installation of traffic control devices, including
streets signs and markings; to conduct engineering analysis of traffic accidents and to revise remedial
measures; to conduct engineering investigation of traffic conditions; to plan the operation of traffic on
the streets and highways of this city and to cooperate with the other city officials in the development of
a way and means to improve traffic conditions; and to carry out the additional powers and duties
imposed by ordinance of this city.
(2) Duty of City Traffic Engineer to Erect and Install Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Whenever traffic
regulations created by this code, including a State of Wisconsin traffic regulation adopted by reference
in Section 340.001, requires the erection of traffic control devices for enforcement, the city traffic
engineer shall procure, erect, and maintain uniform traffic control devices conforming to the Uniform
Traffic Control Device Manual promulgated by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, giving
notice of such traffic regulation to the users of the streets and highway on which such regulations
apply. Whenever state law grants discretion to local authorities in erecting or placement of a uniform
traffic control device, devices shall be erected in such locations and in such a manner as, in the
2
judgment of the city traffic engineer, will carry out the purposes of this code and give adequate
warning to users of the streets and highways of the city.
(3) Code Numbers to be Affixed to Official Traffic Control Devices. The city traffic engineer shall cause to
be placed on each official traffic control sign, guide board, mile post, signals or markers, erected under
Section 340.002(b) a code number assigned by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, and
shall also place, or direct the placing of, code numbers on all existing official traffic control devices as
required by the laws of the State of Wisconsin.
(4) Official Traffic Map.
(a) Official traffic map established. There is hereby established an official traffic map for the City
of Wisconsin Rapids upon which shall be indicated no parking areas, restricted parking areas,
stop signs, arterial intersections, yield signs, special speed limits, one-way highways, school
crossings, and all other restrictions or limitations contained in this code, as from time to time
amended or modified by the common council when the laws of the State of Wisconsin require
the erection or use of official traffic control devices to enforce such restrictions or limitations.
(b) Violations prohibited. When official traffic control devices giving notice of the restrictions,
prohibition, and limitations shown on the official traffic map are erected and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of this section, a violation of this restriction, prohibition, or
limitation shown on the official traffic map shall be a violation of the provisions of this code.
(c) Map to be maintained. A copy of the official traffic map shall be maintained and displayed in
the office of the director of public works, police department, and circuit court. (MC#813)
(d) Additions to map. The common council may, from time to time, make additions to or deletions
from the official traffic map and the city traffic engineer shall keep such official traffic map
current.
(5) Prohibited Signs and Markers on Highways. No person other than an officer authorized by this code to
erect and maintain official traffic control devices, or his or her designee, shall place within the limits of
any street or highway maintained by the city any sign, signal, marker, mark, or monument placed or
maintained in violation of this section shall be subject to removal as provided in Section 340.002(6).
(6) Removal of Unofficial Signs, Markers, Signals, and Traffic Control Devices. The city traffic engineer may
remove any sign, signals, marking, or other device which is placed, maintained, or displayed in
violation of this code or state law. Any charge imposed against premises for removal of a prohibited or
illegal sign, signal, marking, or device shall be reported by the city traffic engineer to the common
council for review and certification at its next regular meeting following the imposition of the charge.
Any charge not paid on or before the next succeeding November 15 shall be placed upon the tax roll
for collection as other special municipal taxes.
340.003 SPEED LIMITS
The common council hereby determines that the speed limits on all city streets shall be 25 miles per hour and
all city alleys shall be 15 miles per hours, except such speed limits as follows:
(1) The speed limit shall be 10 miles per hour on:
(a) all park and recreation roads
(b) the north/south alley bounded by 1st Avenue South, 2nd Avenue South, and West Riverview
Expressway
(2) The speed limit shall be 15 miles per hour on:
(a) 1st Street North, from one block south of Drake Street to one block north of Franklin Street,
when the swimming pool is in operation
(b) 3rd Avenue South, West Grand Avenue to Chase Street (MC#436)
(c) Dewey Street, from 3rd Street South to Hill Street (MC#993)
(3) The speed limit shall be 20 miles per hour on:
(4) The speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour on:
(a) 8th Street South, from East Grand Avenue to East Riverview Expressway
(b) Sampson Street, from Pepper Avenue to Two Mile Avenue
(c) West Grand Avenue, from Riverview Expressway to 17th Avenue (MC#1080)
(d) 1st Street South, from East Riverview Expressway to Two Mile Avenue (MC#854)
(5) The speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour on:
3
(a) 2nd Avenue South, from West Riverview Expressway to Gaynor Avenue (MC#1079)
(b) 4th Avenue North, from Bonow Avenue to Brown Street
(c) 5th Avenue North, from 1200 feet north of relocated STH 34 to the north city limits (MC#609)
(d) 8th Street South, from East Riverview Expressway to the south city limits
(e) 17th Avenue North, from Green Bay Street to Rosecrans Street
(f) 25th Avenue North, from the Green Bay and Western Railroad tracks to Engel Road
(g) 32nd Street South (in the city) ,660’ South of Washington Street to Kingston Road (MC#1218).
(h) 32nd Street South (in the city), from 300’ North of Chestnut Street to 660’ North of Peach
Street (MC#1218).
(i) Bonow Avenue, from 6th Avenue South to Wilson Street
(j) Commerce Drive, between 40th Street and 48th Street (MC#1044)
(k) Griffith Avenue, from the east city limits to the west city limits
(l) Jefferson Street, from 17th Avenue to 25th Avenue (MC#390)
(m) Peach Street, from S.T.H. 54 (East Riverview Expressway) to 32nd Street South (MC#852)
(n) Pepper Avenue, from 1st Street South west to the city limits
(o) Reddin Road, from 450 feet south of Rose Street to the north city limits
(p) Spring Street, from 3rd Street North to 1500 feet west of STH 54
(q) West Grand Avenue, from 17th Avenue to 25th Avenue
(6) The speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour on:
(a) 2nd Avenue South, from Gaynor Avenue to the south city limits
(b) Baker Drive, from Irving Street extended to the north city limits
(c) Riverview Expressway, from West Grand Avenue to the east city limits (MC#761)
(d) West Grand Avenue, from 25th Avenue to the west city limits
(7) The speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour on:
(a) 17th Avenue North, from Rosecrans Street to Bonow Avenue
(b) 48th Street, within the city limits (MC#1044)
(c) Bonow Avenue, from Wilson Street to the north city limits
(d) West Riverview Expressway, from West Grand Avenue to the north city limits
(8) The speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour on:
(9) Speed Limits Increased.
(a) School Zones. Speed limits are increased to 20 miles per hour upon the following designated
streets, or portion thereof, when passing the school house or at those times when children are
going to or from school or playing within the sidewalk area at or about school:
(1) Streets beginning with the letter "A":
(a) Alton Street, from 200 feet west of 17th Avenue South to 200 feet east of
13th Avenue South
(2) Streets beginning with the letter "B":
(3) Streets beginning with the letter "C":
(c) Chestnut Street, from 200 feet west of Hill Street to 300 feet west of Lincoln
Street (MC#1167)
(d) Chestnut Street, from 140 feet west of 12th Street South to 140 feet east of
13th Street South (MC#1163) (MC#1165)
(f) Clyde Avenue, from Lincoln Street to 140’ east of Lincoln Street (MC#1163)
(4) Streets beginning with the letter "D":
(a) Dewey Street, from140 feet west of 12th Street South to 13th Street South
(MC#1163)
(5) Streets beginning with the letter "E":
(b) 8th Street North, from Avon Street to 200 feet north of East Grand Avenue
(d) 11th Street North, from 100 feet south of Saratoga Street to 200 feet south
of Oak Street
(f) East G Street, from 100 140 feet west of 12th Street South to 12th Street
South (MC#1163)
4
(g) East G Street, from 13th Street South to 100 140 feet east of 13th Street
South (MC#1163)
(h) Engler Drive, from 29th Avenue South to 25th Avenue South
(i) Essex Street, from 200 feet west of 17th Avenue South to 17th Avenue South
(6) Streets beginning with the letter "F":
(a) 14th Avenue South, from 300 feet north of Alton Street to 600 700 feet
south of Alton Street (MC#1167)
(b) 15th Avenue South, from 300 feet north of Alton Street to Alton Street
(7) Streets beginning with the letter "G":
(a) Grove Avenue, from 20 feet east of Sampson Street to 200 140 feet east of
Lincoln Street (MC#1163)
(8) Streets beginning with the letter "H":
(b) Hill Street, from 100 feet north of Mead Street to 100 feet south of Chestnut
Street
(9) Streets beginning with the letter "I":
(10) Streets beginning with the letter "J":
(11) Streets beginning with the letter "K":
(12) Streets beginning with the letter "L":
(a) Lincoln Street, from 200 40 feet north of Clyde Avenue to 140 feet south of
Grove Avenue (MC#1163)
(b) Lincoln Street, from Peach Street to 300 feet south of Chestnut Street
(c) Lincoln Street, from 200 feet north of Clyde Avenue to 200 feet south of
Grove Avenue
(d) Lincoln Street, from 100’ south of Witter Street to 100’ north of Birch Street
(MC#1167)
(13) Streets beginning with the letter "M":
(a) Mead Street, from 100 feet west of Hill Street to
(14) Streets beginning with the letter "N":
(15) Streets beginning with the letter "O":
(b) Oak Street, from 7th 6th Street to 200 feet east of 11th Street (MC#1168)
(16) Streets beginning with the letter "P":
(b) Peach Street, from Lincoln Street to 7th Street South
(e) Prospect Street, from 8th Street North to 200 feet east of 11th Street North
(MC#1168)
(17) Streets beginning with the letter "Q":
(18) Streets beginning with the letter "R":
(19) Streets beginning with the letter "S":
(a) 6th Street South, from 200 feet north of Peach Street to Apple Street
(b) 7th Street South, from Oak Street to 200 feet south of Oak Street
(c) 7th Street South, from 200 feet north of Peach Street to Apple Street
(d) 16th Avenue South, from 300 feet north of Alton Street to Alton Street
(MC#1158)
(f) 16th Street South, from100’ south of East Riverview Expressway to 100’
south of Pepper Avenue (MC#1165)
(g) 17th Avenue South, from 400 feet north of Alton Street to 200’ south of
Essex Street (MC#1167)
(h) 17th Avenue South, from 200 feet north of West Grand Avenue to West
Grand Avenue (MC#1080)
(j) Saratoga Street, from 200 feet west of 8th Street North to 200 feet east of
8th Street North
(k) 7th Street South, from Two Mile Avenue to 140’ south of Two Mile Avenue
(MC#1163)
(20) Streets beginning with the letter "T":
(c) 10th Avenue South, from 75 feet south of Gardner Street to 50 feet north of
5
2nd Avenue South (MC#1163)
(e) 12th Street South, from 140 feet north of Chestnut Street to 140 feet south
of Dewey Street (MC#1163)
(f) 13th Avenue South, from 300 feet north of Alton Street to 700 feet south of
Alton Street (MC#1167)
(g) 13th Street South, from140 feet north of Chestnut Street to 140 feet south
of Dewey Street (MC#1163)
(h) 25th Avenue South, from 300 feet north of Engler Drive to Engler Drive
(i) 27th Avenue South, from 300 feet north of Engler Drive to Engler Drive
(j) 28th Street North, from 100 feet south of Norton Street to Washington Street
(l) Two Mile Avenue, from 40 feet east of Lincoln Street to 140 feet west of 8th
Street South (MC#1163)
(21) Streets beginning with the letter "U":
(22) Streets beginning with the letter "V":
(23) Streets beginning with the letter "W":
(a) Washington Street, from 300 200 feet west of 28th Street North to 300 980
feet west of 32nd Street North (MC#1163)
(24) Streets beginning with the letter "X":
(25) Streets beginning with the letter "Y":
(26) Streets beginning with the letter "Z":
(b) School Crossings. The speed limit shall be 20 miles per hour on the following intersections of
streets when children are present:
(5) 8th Street at its intersection with Baker Street (MC#1080)
(6) 8th Street at its intersection with East Grand Avenue (MC#1080)
(7) 8th Street at its intersection with Oak Street (MC#1080)
(8) 8th Street at its intersection with Saratoga Street (MC#1080)
(9) 8th Street North at its intersection with Prospect Street (MC#546)
(10) 8th Street South at its intersection with Grove Avenue
(12) 9th Street at its intersection with Prospect Street (MC#1080)
(13) 10th Street at its intersection with Prospect Street (MC#1080)
(14) 11th Street at its intersection with Prospect Street (MC#1080)
(15) 13th Avenue at its intersection with West Grand Avenue
(17) 17th Avenue at its intersection with Alton Street (MC#1080)
(18) 17th Avenue at its intersection with Essex Street (MC#1080)
(19) 17th Avenue at its intersection with Hale Street (MC#1080)
(20) 17th Avenue at its intersection with West Grand Avenue
(25) 28th Street, 600 feet north of Washington Street (MC#1080)
(27) Alton Street at its intersection with 15th Avenue (MC#1080)
(28) Alton Street at its intersection with 16th Avenue (MC#1080)
(29) Alton Street at its intersection with 13th Avenue (MC#1080)
(37) East Grand Avenue at its intersection with 8th Street South
(38) East Grand Avenue at its intersection with 11th Street (MC#1080)
(39) East Grand Avenue at its intersection with Lincoln Street
(42) Lincoln Street at its intersection with Clyde Street (MC#1080)
(43) Oak Street at its intersection with 11th Street (MC#1080)
(45) Oak Street at its intersection with 11th Street (MC#1080)
(46) Oak Street at its intersection with 7th Street (MC#1080)
(47) Oak Street at its intersection with 10th Street (MC#1080)
(52) West Grand Avenue at its intersection with 13th Avenue (MC#1080)
(53) West Grand Avenue at its intersection with 17th Avenue (MC#1080)
340.004 THROUGH STREETS AND CONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS
(1) Stop Signs Installed.
6
(a) Through Streets Designated. In the interest of public safety, and pursuant to authority granted
by Wisconsin law, the following streets in the City of Wisconsin Rapids are declared to be
through streets:
(1) Through streets beginning with the letter "A":
(a) Airport Avenue, from 1st Street South, except at Lincoln Street and 8th Street
South
(b) Alton Street at its intersection with 13th Avenue South, 15th Avenue South,
and 16th Avenue South (MC#1167)
(c) Apple Street, from 12th Street South to 16th Street South
(d) Apricot Street, from 1st Street North to Baker Drive, except at its
intersections with 3rd Street North, Plover Street, and 11th Street North
(e) Ash Street, from 1st Street North to its easterly end
(f) Avon Street at its intersection with 9th Street South
(2) Through streets beginning with the letter "B":
(a) Baker Drive, from its intersection with Baker Street to the north city limits
(b) Baker Street, from its intersection with 1st Street North and Market Street
through 18th Street North, except at 8th Street North (MC#374)
(c) Birch Street, from 4th Street South to Lincoln Street
(d) Boles Street, from 21st Avenue South to 29th Avenue South, except at 25th
Avenue South
(e) Bonow Avenue, from 6th Avenue to the north city limits
(3) Through streets beginning with the letter "C":
(a) Carey Street, between 18th Avenue South and 29th Avenue South, except at
25th Avenue South and 29th Avenue South (MC#1076)
(b) Chase Street, from 3rd Avenue South to the west city limits, except at its
intersection with West Riverview Expressway, 17th Avenue South, 21st
Avenue South, and 25th Avenue South
(c) Chestnut Street, from 3rd Street to the east city limits, except at its
intersection with Lincoln Street, 8th Street South, 16th Street South, and East
Riverview Expressway (STH 54) (MC#950)
(d) Cliff Street at its intersection with Greenwood Drive
(e) Clyde Avenue, from Lincoln Street to 8th Street South
(f) Clyde Avenue, at its intersection with 2nd Street South (MC#743)
(g) Commerce Drive, between 40th Street and 48th Street (MC#1044)
(h) Condo Drive, State Trunk Highway 13 to Menomonee Street (MC#908)
(4) Through streets beginning with the letter "D":
(a) Daly Avenue, from 1st Street South through 6th Street South, except at
Lincoln Street
(b) Daly Avenue at its intersections with 14th Street South, Lily Lane, 17th
Street South, and 19th Street South
(c) Dewey Street, from 5th Street South to 8th Street South
(d) Dewey Street at its intersection with 9th Street South (MC#366)
(e) Dewey Street, from 3rd Street South to Lincoln Street
(f) Dura Beauty Lane at its intersection with Rainbow Drive
(5) Through streets beginning with the letter "E":
(a) 8th Avenue North, from West Grand Avenue to High Street
(b) 8th Avenue South at its intersection with Gardner Street
(c) 8th Street, from Washington Street to the south city limits, except at its
intersections with Baker Street, East Grand Avenue, Chestnut Street, East
Riverview Expressway, Pepper Avenue, Airport Avenue, Two Mile Avenue,
Kuhn Avenue, and Griffith Avenue
(d) 11th Street, from its junction with Plover Street through Dewey Street, except
at its intersections with Baker Street, Oak Street, East Grand Avenue, and
Chestnut Street
7
(e) 18th Avenue South at its intersection with Alton Street
(f) 18th Street South at its intersection with Daly Avenue (MC#366)
(g) East G Street at its intersection with 19th Street South (MC#729)
(h) East Grand Avenue, from 3rd Street South to 16th Street South, except at its
intersections with Lincoln Street and 8th Street South
(i) East Jackson Street, from Lincoln Street to the Jackson Street Bridge, except
at its intersection with 3rd Street and Market Street (MC#1151)
(j) Edgewood Place at its intersection with North Avenue
(k) Elm Street at its intersection with Mead Street
(6) Through streets beginning with the letter "F":
(a) 1st Avenue South, from West Grand Avenue to 3rd Avenue South
(b) 1st Street North, from Baker/Market Streets intersection to the north city
limits, except at Drake Street and Franklin Street during official swimming
pool hours
(c) 1st Street South, from East Riverview Expressway to Two Mile Avenue
(d) 4th Avenue North, from Jackson Street to the north city limits
(e) 4th Street, from Jackson Street to Chestnut Street, except at its intersection
with East Grand Avenue (MC#1150)
(f) 5th Avenue North, from Bonow Avenue to the north city limits, except at
Wilson Street (MC#682)
(g) 5th Street North, from Saratoga Street to Baker Street
(h) 5th Street South at its intersection with Lee Street (MC#315)
(I) 5th Street South at its intersection with Wyatt Avenue
(j) 14th Street South at its intersection with Clyde Avenue, Grove Avenue, Sweat
Avenue, Township Avenue, and Cook Avenue (MC#641) (MC#747)
(k) 15th Avenue North at its intersection with Fremont Street
(l) 15th Street South at its intersection with Sweat Avenue (MC#431)
(m) 15th Street South at its intersection with Township Avenue
(n) 48th Street, from the north city limits to the south city limits (MC#1044)
(o Fremont Street, from 4th Avenue North to 15th Avenue North, except at its
intersections with 7th Avenue and 10th Avenue (MC#682)
(7) Through streets beginning with the letter "G":
(a) Garfield Street, from Birth Street to Witter Street
(b) Gaynor Avenue, from its intersection with 2nd Avenue South (west-bound)
and 17th Avenue South (east-bound) to the west city limits
(c) Goodnow Avenue at its intersection with 11th Street South
(d) Griffith Avenue, from 8th Street South to the east side of the westerly city
limits on the city's east side (MC#438)
(e) Grove Avenue, from 1st Street South to 8th Street South, except at Sampson
Street and Lincoln Street
(f) Grove Avenue at its intersection with 11th Street South (MC#373)
(8) Through streets beginning with the letter "H":
(a) Harrison Street at its intersection with 5th Avenue North (MC#507)
(b) High Street, from 4th Avenue North to 19th Avenue North, except at its
intersection with 10th Avenue North and 17th Avenue North
(c) Hill Street at its intersection with Spruce Street
(d) Huntington Boulevard, from 8th Street South to 16th Street South, except at
its intersection with 12th Street South
(9) Through streets beginning with the letter "I":
(a) Industrial Street at its intersection with 29th Avenue North (MC#654)
(10) Through streets beginning with the letter "J":
(a) Jefferson Street at its intersection with 21st Avenue North (MC#390)
(b) Johnson Street at its intersection with 2nd Avenue South
(11) Through streets beginning with the letter "K":
8
(a) Kingston Road, through from Baker Drive to 29th Street North
(12) Through streets beginning with the letter "L":
(a) LaVigne Street at its intersection with 2nd Street North
(b) Lee Street at its intersection with 6th Street South (MC#398)
(c) Lincoln Street, from East Grand Avenue to Two Mile Avenue, except at its
intersections with Chestnut Street, East Riverview Expressway, Lincoln
Street, and Grove Avenue (MC#786)
(d) Lincoln Street at its intersections with Thalacker Avenue, Ruby Avenue, and
Maple Manor Drive (MC#438)
(e) Lincoln Street at its intersections with Pine Avenue and Brianwood Avenue
(13) Through streets beginning with the letter "M":
(a) Market Street at its intersection with Avon Street
(b) McKinley Street, at 6th Avenue North, west-bound traffic only
(c) Miller Avenue, from 1st Street South to Sampson Street
(d) Miller Avenue, from Lincoln Street to 7th Street South
(14) Through streets beginning with the letter "N":
(a) 9th Avenue North at its intersections with 8th Avenue North, McKinley Street
and Harrison Street (MC#377) (MC#1034)
(b) 9th Street South at its intersection with Grape Street
(c) 19th Avenue South at its intersection with Clark Street
(d) Norton Street at its intersection with 26th Street North (MC#613)
(15) Through streets beginning with the letter "O":
(a) Oak Street, from East Jackson Street to 16th Street, except at its
intersection with 8th Street
(b) Oak Street at its intersection with 20th Street and 28th Street (MC#950)
(16) Through streets beginning with the letter "P":
(a) Peach Street at its intersection with 19th Street South
(b) Peach Street at its intersection with 7th Street South (MC#800)
(c) Peach Street, from S.T.H. 54 (East Riverview Expressway) to 32nd Street
South (MC#852)
(d) Pepper Avenue, from Golf Course Road to 16th Street South, except at its
intersections with 1st Street South, Lincoln Street and 8th Street South
(e) Piltz Avenue at its intersections with 2nd Street South and 4th Street South
(f) Pleasant View Drive at its intersections with 2nd Street North and 3rd Street
North
(g) Plover Street, from 1st Street North to its junction with 11th Street North,
except at 3rd Street North
(h) Prospect Street at its intersection with 9th Street North
(17) Through streets beginning with the letter "Q":
(18) Through streets beginning with the letter "R":
(a) Reddin Road, from 4th Avenue to the north city limits
(b) Riverview Expressway, from the northwest city limits to the northeast city
limits, except at Wilson Street, High Street, West Grand Avenue, Chase
Street, 2nd Avenue south, 3rd Avenue South, Lincoln Street, 8th Street, South,
16th Street South, County Trunk W, and Washington Street. (MC#852)
(c) Rosecrans Street, from 10th Avenue North to 17th Avenue North
(19) Through streets beginning with the letter "S":
(a) 2nd Avenue South, from its junction with 1st Avenue South to the south city
limits, except at West Riverview Expressway
(b) 2nd Street South, from East Grand Avenue to its intersection with Mead
Street
(c) 7th Avenue South at its intersection with Goggins Street
(d) 7th Street South, from Daly Avenue to Pepper Avenue
(e) 7th Street South at its intersection with Pine Avenue
9
(f) 16th Avenue South at its intersection with Clark Street
(g) 16th Street South, from Griffith Avenue through Monroe Street, except at its
intersections with Two Mile Avenue, Airport Avenue, East Riverview
Expressway, Chestnut Street, Peach Street, Baker Street, and Apricot Street
(MC#908)
(h) 17th Avenue, from Bonow Avenue to Gaynor Avenue, except at its
intersections with West Grand Avenue and Chase Street
(i) Sampson Street, from Daly Avenue to Two Mile Avenue, except at Pepper
Avenue and Airport Avenue
(j) Saratoga Street, from East Jackson Street to the east city limits, except at its
intersection with 8th Street North, 11th Street North, 16th Street North, East
Riverview Expressway (STH 54), and 32nd Street (MC#950)
(l) Spring Street, from 1st Street North to Baker Drive (Highway 54)
(m) Strodman Avenue, from 1st Street South to Sampson Street
(n) Strodman Avenue at its intersection with Rapids Street
(o) Sweat Avenue at its intersection with 9th Street South, 11th Street South,
and 13th Street South (MC#1129)
(20) Through streets beginning with the letter "T":
(a) 3rd Avenue South, from West Grand Avenue through its intersection with 1st
Avenue (MC#921)
(b) 3rd Street, from Jackson Street to East Riverview Expressway, except at its
intersection with East Grand Avenue
(c) 3rd Street North, from Drake Street to its northerly end except at its
intersection with Plover Street and Apricot Street
(d) 3rd Street South, from Miller Avenue to Two Mile Avenue, except at its
intersections with Grove Avenue, Pepper Avenue, and Airport Avenue
(e) 10th Avenue North, from Rainbow Drive to Brown Street (MC#622)
(f) 10th Avenue North, from West Grand Avenue through Jefferson Street
(MC#622)
(g) 10th Avenue South, from Chase Street to 2nd Avenue South
(h) 10th Street North at its intersection with Prospect Street
(i) 10th Street South at its intersection with Grape Street
(j) 10th Street South at its intersections with Sweat Avenue, Grove Avenue, and
Goodnow Avenue
(k) 12th Avenue North at its intersection with McKinley Street
(l) 12th Avenue South, from West Grand Avenue to Chase Street
(m) 12th Street North at its intersection with Washington Street
(n) 12th Street North, from Baker Street to Oak Street, except at Saratoga Street
(MC#370)
(o) 12th Street South, from East Grand Avenue to Airport Avenue, except at
Chestnut Street, East Riverview Expressway, and Pepper Avenue
(p) 20th Street North at its intersection Baker Street
(q) 20th Street South at its intersection with Cook Avenue (MC#438)
(r) 20th Street South at its intersection with Whitrock Avenue and Murgy Drive
(MC#818)
(s) 21st Avenue South, from West Grand Avenue to Gaynor Avenue
(t) 23rd Street North, from Evergreen Lane to Washington Street, except at
Irving Street (MC#613)
(u) 24th Street at its intersection with Oak Street and 23rd Street South
(MC#950)
(v) 25th Avenue South, from Gaynor Avenue through Engel Road, except at its
intersection with West Grand Avenue
(w) 26th Street North at its intersections with Amundson Street and Franklin
Street
10
(x) 27th Avenue South at its intersection with Engler Drive (MC#679)
(y) 28th Street North at its intersections with Norton Street and Amundson
Street
(z) 29th Avenue North, from Industrial Street to Engel Road (MC #1076)
(aa) 32nd Street North, from Washington Street through Kingston Road
(ab) Taylor Avenue, from 1st Street South to Lincoln Street, except at its
intersection with Sampson Street
(ac) Township Avenue, from 8th Street South to 14th Street South
(ad) Two Mile Avenue, from 1st Street South through 16th Street South, except at
Lincoln Street and 8th Street South
(21) Through streets beginning with the letter "U":
(22) Through streets beginning with the letter "V":
(23) Through streets beginning with the letter "W":
(a) Washington Street, from Baker Drive to 32nd Street North, except at East
Riverview Expressway (STH 54) (MC #950)
(b) Washington Street at its intersections with 15th Street North and 18th
Street North (MC#821)
(c) West Grand Avenue, from the west city limits through 1st Avenue, except at
its intersections with 17th Avenue, West Riverview Expressway, Jackson
Street, and 3rd Avenue
(d) West Jackson Street, from West Grand Avenue through 2nd Avenue
(MC#1125)
(e) Whitrock Avenue, from the west city limits to the east city limits, except at 8th
Street, 16th Street, and 20th Street (MC#950)
(f) Wilson Street at its intersection with 5th Avenue (MC#682)
(g) Wisconsin Street at its intersection with 7th Street North
(h) Witter Street, from 4th Street South to Mead Street
(i) Wood Avenue at its intersection with 10th Street South
(24) Through streets beginning with the letter "X":
(25) Through streets beginning with the letter "Y":
(26) Through streets beginning with the letter "Z":
(b) Designation of Location of Stop Signs. In the interest of public safety, stop signs will be
installed at the following locations to control traffic on the streets over which the Wisconsin
Rapids Common Council has exclusive jurisdiction.
(1) On 1st Street North, at Drake Street and Franklin Streets, only during official
swimming pool hours
(2) On 1st Street North, at its intersection with Oak Street, for south-bound traffic
(MC#782)
(3) At the southwest corner of the intersection of LaVigne Street and 3rd Street North
(4) At the southwest corner of the intersection of McKinley Street and 6th Avenue North,
for east-/west-bound traffic entering the intersection
(5) At the southeast corner of the intersection of 6th Avenue North and McKinley Street,
for north-bound traffic
(6) South-bound traffic on 2nd Street North at its intersection with Oak Street
(7) On 6th Street South at its intersection with Apple Street
(8) On Peach Street, with its intersection with 6th Street South
(9) South-bound 6th Street South at its intersection with Peach Street
(10) North-bound 4th Street South at its intersection with Birch Street (MC#318)
(11) On Burt Street at its intersections with Dewey Street and 6th Street South (MC#342)
(12) On Boles Street at its intersection with 29th Avenue South (MC#487)
(13) On Pepper Avenue, at Golf Course Road (MC#617)
(14) On the northwest corner of 4th Avenue and High Street (MC#780)
(15) On all dead end streets that end with an intersection with another street ("T"
intersections) (MC#844)
11
(16) 240 feet north of 3rd Avenue South at the crosswalks at the entrance to the Lowell
Center. (MC#1061)
(17) 350 feet north of 3rd Avenue South at the crosswalks at the main entrance to the
Centralia Center. (MC#1061)
(c) Designation of Location of Four-way Stops. In the intersect of public safety, four-way stop
signs shall be installed at the following intersections to control traffic on the street over which
the Wisconsin Rapids Common Council has exclusive jurisdiction. The intersection of:
(1) 1st Street South and Pepper Avenue (MC#851)
(2) 2nd Street and East Grand Avenue (MC#1125)
(3) 3rd Avenue and West Grand Avenue (MC#1125)
(4) 3rd Street and East Grand Avenue (MC #1125)
(5) 3rd Street North and Apricot Street
(6) 3rd Street North and Drake Street
(7) 3rd Street North and Plover Street
(8) 12th Street South and Chestnut Street for the duration of the 8th Street
South/Riverview Expressway construction detour (MC#732)
(9) 14th Avenue South and Alton Street
(10) 16th Street South and Airport Avenue (MC#1034)
(11) 16th Street South and Chestnut Street
(12) 16th Street South and Peach Street
(13) 17th Avenue South and Chase Street
(14) 32nd Street North and Washington Street
(15) Lincoln Street and Chestnut Street
(16) Lincoln Street and Grove Avenue
(17) Lincoln Street and Two Mile Avenue
(18) Lincoln Street and Pepper Avenue (MC#786)
(19) East Grand Avenue and Lincoln Street / East Jackson Street(MC#1263)
(2) Controlled Intersections Designated. In the interest of public safety, and with approval of the
Wisconsin Rapids Common Council, the following intersections are declared controlled intersections
and traffic control signals shall be installed thereon in conformity with the Wisconsin Official Traffic
Control Device Manual and the provisions of this code. The intersection of:
(a) 2nd Avenue South with West Riverview Expressway
(e) 6th Avenue, West Grand Avenue, and West Jackson Street
(f) 8th Street South and Airport Avenue
(g) 8th Street South and Griffith Avenue
(h) 8th Street South and Kuhn Avenue
(i) 8th Street South and Pepper Avenue
(j) 8th Street South and Two Mile Avenue
(k) 17th Avenue with West Grand Avenue
(l) Baker Street with 8th Street North
(n) Chase Street with West Riverview Expressway
(o) Chestnut Street with 8th Street South
(p) County Trunk W with 24th Street South (MC#1080)
(q) East Grand Avenue with 8th Street South
(t)
(u) East Jackson Street, Market Street, and 3rd Street South (MC#1151)
(v) East Riverview Expressway with 3rd Street South
(w) East Riverview Expressway with 8th Street South
(x) East Riverview Expressway with 12th Street South
(y) East Riverview Expressway with 16th Street South (MC#761)
(z) East Riverview Expressway with Lincoln Street
(aa) East Riverview Expressway at County Trunk W (MC#852)
(ab) East Riverview Expressway at Washington Street (MC#852)
12
(ac) West Grand Avenue with West Riverview Expressway
(ad) West Grand Avenue with 25th Avenue (MC#1080)
(ae) West Riverview Expressway with High Street
(af) West Riverview Expressway with Wilson Street
(3) Yield Signs to be Erected. The city traffic engineer is authorized to erect yield right-of-way signs
conforming to the Wisconsin Official traffic Control Device Manual at the following intersections on
highways in the exclusive jurisdiction of the city. The provisions of Section 349.07(7)(a), Wisconsin
State Statutes, shall apply.
(a) Yield Right of Way. In the interest of public safety, and with approval of the Wisconsin Rapids
Common Council, yield right-of-way signs shall be erected so that traffic on the first-named
streets shall yield right-of-way to traffic approaching on the streets being entered at the
following locations.
(1) 2nd Street South at its intersection with Woodland Drive (MC#402)
(2) 5th Street South at its intersection with Dewey Street (MC#543)
(3) 7th Avenue at its intersection with Fremont Street (MC#682)
(4) 7th Street North at its intersection with Avon Street (MC#511)
(5) 7th Street South at its intersection with Daly Avenue
(6) 9th Street South at its intersection with Apple Street
(7) 9th Street South at its intersection with East G Street (MC#676)
(8) 10th Street South at its intersection with Dewey Street
(9) 10th Street South at its intersection with Apple Street
(10) 11th Avenue South at its intersection with Alton Street
(11) 15th Avenue South at its intersection with Alton Street
(12) 15th Street South at its intersection with Peach Street (MC#533)
(13) 17th Avenue South at its intersection with 2nd Avenue South (MC#792)
(14) 17th Street North at its intersection with Washington Street (MC#821)
(15) 18th Avenue South at its intersection with Hale Street (MC#650)
(16) 19th Avenue South at its intersection with Alton Street (MC#479)
(17) 20th Avenue South at its intersection with Alton Street (MC#511)
(18) 21st Street North at its intersection with Irving Street (MC#773)
(19) 22nd Avenue South at its intersection with Wickham Avenue
(20) 23rd Street North at its intersection with Irving Street (MC#613)
(21) 31st Street North at its intersection with Amundson Street (MC#915)
(22) Apricot Street at its intersection with 22nd Street North (MC#836)
(23) Avon Street at its intersection with 10th Street North (MC#976)
(24) Boles Street at its intersection with 13th Avenue South (MC#498)
(25) Engler Drive at its intersection with 25th Avenue South (MC#503)
(26) Essex Street at its intersection with 18th Avenue South (MC#511)
(27) Essex Street at its intersection with 20th Avenue (MC#507)
(28) Franklin Street at its intersection with 22nd Street North (MC#836)
(29) Garfield Street at its intersection with Hill Street
(30) Goggins Street at its intersection with 8th Avenue South
(31) Hale Street at its intersection with 20th Avenue South (MC#407)
(32) Hill Street at its intersection with Elm Street
(33) Irving Street at its intersection with 22nd Street North (MC#836)
(34) Lyon Street at its intersection with Boles Street
(35) Mead Street at its intersection with Hill Street
(36) McKinley Street at its intersection with Canal Street
(37) Park Street at its intersection with 13th Avenue (MC#483)
(38) Park Street at its intersection with Boles Street (MC#424)
(39) Peach Street at its intersection with 9th Street South
(40) Peach Street at its intersection with 14th Street South (MC#681)
(41) Pear Street at its intersection with 9th Street South
(42) Pear Street at its intersection with 10th Street South (MC#676)
13
(43) Plumb Street at its intersection with 9th Street South
(44) South Strawberry Lane at its intersection with North Strawberry Lane (MC#905)
(45) Woodbine Street at its intersection with Boles Street
(46) Wylie Street at its intersection with 8th Street North (MC#681)
(b) Yield Right-of-way; Right Turns. In the interest of public safety, and with the approval of the
Wisconsin Rapids Common Council, yield right-of-way signs shall be erected at the following
locations so that right-turning traffic on the first-named street shall yield the right-of-way to
traffic approaching on the streets being entered for the specific traffic conditions:
(1) 1st Street North, for south-bound traffic turning west onto 1st Street North at its
intersection with Baker Street
(2) 1st Street North, for south-bound traffic turning east onto East Jackson Street
(3) 2nd Avenue South, for north-bound traffic turning east onto Riverview Expressway
(4) 2nd Avenue South, for south-bound traffic turning west onto Riverview Expressway
(5) 3rd Avenue North, for south-bound traffic turning west onto West Jackson Street
(6) 3rd Street South, for south-bound traffic turning west onto Riverview Expressway
(7) 3rd Street South, for north-bound traffic turning east onto Riverview Expressway
(8) 5th Avenue North, for north-bound traffic turning east onto Bonow Avenue
(9) 8th Street North, for north-bound traffic turning east onto Baker Street
(10) 8th Street South, for south-bound traffic turning west onto Riverview Expressway
(11) 8th Street South, for north-bound traffic turning east onto Riverview Expressway
(12) 12th Street South, for north-bound traffic turning onto Riverview Expressway
(13) 12th Street South, for south-bound traffic turning onto Riverview Expressway
(14) 16th Street North, for north-bound traffic turning east onto Baker Street
(15) 16th Street South, for south-bound traffic turning west onto West Riverview
Expressway (MC#761)
(16) Chase Street, for east-bound traffic turning south onto West Riverview Expressway
(17) Chase Street, for west-bound traffic turning north onto West Riverview Expressway
(18) Gaynor Avenue, for east-bound traffic turning south onto 17th Avenue South
(19) High Street, for east-bound traffic turning onto Riverview Expressway
(20) High Street, for west-bound traffic turning onto Riverview Expressway
(21) Lincoln Street, for south-bound traffic turning west onto Riverview Expressway
(22) Lincoln Street, for north-bound traffic turning east onto Riverview Expressway
(23) Market Street, for north-bound traffic turning east onto Baker Street
(24) Peach Street, for west-bound traffic turning north onto Lincoln Street
(25) West Grand Avenue at its intersection with Jackson Street, for east-bound traffic
turning south onto West Grand Avenue
(26) West Grand Avenue, for east-bound traffic turning south onto Riverview Expressway
(27) West Jackson Street at its intersection with 4th Avenue North, for east-bound traffic
turning south onto West Jackson Street
(4) Operators to Obey Traffic Control Devices. Every operator of a vehicle approaching an intersection at
which an official traffic control device is erected, in accordance with this section and Section 340.002
of this code, shall obey the direction of such official traffic control device as required by the Wisconsin
State Statutes incorporated by reference in Section 340.001 of this code. Operators of vehicles
approaching a stop sign shall stop before entering a highway, as requested by Section 346.46,
Wisconsin State Statutes. Operators approaching intersections at which a yield sign has been installed
shall yield right-of-way to other vehicle, as required by Section 346.18(6), Wisconsin State Statutes.
(5) Through Streets and Controlled Intersections; Fold-down Stop Signs. In the interest of public safety
and pursuant to authority granted by Wisconsin law, the following streets in the City of Wisconsin
Rapids are declared to be through streets when the traffic control signal fails to function and the stop
signs are unfolded by the police department.
(a) 8th Street South at its intersection with Airport Avenue
(b) 8th Street South at its intersection with Chestnut Street
(c) 8th Street South at its intersection with Pepper Avenue
(d) 8th Street South at its intersection with Two Mile Avenue
14
(e) Baker Street at its intersection with Market Street and 1st Street North
(f) Baker Street at its intersection with 8th Street North
(g) East Riverview Expressway at its intersection with Lincoln Street
(h) East Riverview Expressway at its intersection with 3rd Street South
(i) East Jackson Street at its intersection with 3rd Street North
(j) East Grand Avenue at its intersection with 3rd Street South
(k) East Grand Avenue at its intersection with 2nd Street South
(l) East Grand Avenue at its intersection with Lincoln Street
(m) East Riverview Expressway at its intersection with 12th Street South
(n) East Riverview Expressway at its intersection with Washington Street (MC#852)
(o) West Grand Avenue at its intersection with 17th Avenue
(p) West Grand Avenue at its intersection with 3rd Avenue
(q) West Jackson Street (east leg) and West Grand Avenue (west leg) at its intersection with 6th
Avenue (north leg) and West Grand Avenue (south leg)
(r) West Jackson Street at its intersection with 3rd Avenue North
(s) West Jackson Street (south leg) and 4th Avenue (north leg) at its intersection with West
Jackson Street (west leg)
(t) West Riverview Expressway at its intersection with Chase Street
(u) West Riverview Expressway at its intersection with 2nd Avenue South
(v) West Riverview Expressway at its intersection with Wilson Street
(w) West Riverview Expressway at its intersection with High Street
(6) Designation of Locations of Four-way Stops at Controlled Intersections (Fold-down Stop Signs). In the
interest of public safety and pursuant to authority granted by Wisconsin law, four-way stops shall be
installed when traffic control signals fail to function by folding them down by the police department at
the following intersections:
(a) East Grand Avenue and 8th Street South
(b) West Grand Avenue and West Riverview Expressway
(c) East Riverview Expressway and 8th Street South (MC#761)
(d) East Riverview Expressway and 16th Street South (MC#761)
(e) East Riverview Expressway and County Trunk W
340.005 ONE-WAY STREETS, SAFETY ZONES, SAFETY ISLANDS, MID-BLOCK CROSSWALKS, TURNS, AND
LANES
(1) One-way Streets. The following streets, or portions thereof, maintained by the City of Wisconsin Rapids
are hereby designated one-way streets and no person shall drive or operate a vehicle on any such
street, or portion thereof, except in the direction designated below:
(a) In an easterly direction on Apple Street from its intersection with 6th Street South to its
intersection with 7th Street South
(b) In an easterly direction on Baker Street from its intersection with 17th Street North to its
intersection with 18th Street North
(c) In a southerly direction on 1st Street North from its intersection with East Jackson Street to its
intersection with Oak Street (MC#782)
(d) In a northerly direction on 2nd Street North from its intersection with East Jackson Street to
its intersection with the parking area adjacent to Market Street
(e) In a northerly direction on 3rd Avenue North, from McKinley Street to Grant Street (in effect
until 05/01/92) (MC#578)
(f) In a northerly direction on 4th Avenue South from its intersection with Johnson Street to its
intersection with West Grand Avenue
(g) In a northerly direction on 7th Street South from its intersection with Apple Street to its
intersection with East Grand Avenue (MC#587)
(h) In a northerly direction on 11th Avenue North from its intersection with McKinley Street to its
intersection with High Street
(i) In a northerly direction on 2nd Street North from its intersection with Oak Street to its
intersection with East Jackson Street (MC#782)
15
(j) In a southerly direction on 4th Street South from its intersection with East Grand Avenue to its
intersection with Birch Street (MC#316)
(k) In a southerly direction on 6th Street South from its intersection with East Grand Avenue to its
intersection with Apple Street (MC#1142)
(l) In a westerly direction on Johnson Street from its intersection with 3rd Avenue South to its
Intersection with 4th Avenue South
(m) In a southerly direction on 1st Avenue South from its intersection with West Grand Avenue to
its intersection with 3rd Avenue South
(2) Safety Zones and Islands. The city traffic engineer is directed to designate and mark safety zones and
safety islands and cause them to be constructed in accordance with the Wisconsin Uniform Traffic
Control Device Manual.
(a) Safety Median Islands. Safety islands shall be provided in the following locations on:
(1) East Jackson Street between its intersections with 2nd Street North and 3rd Street
North
(2) East Jackson Street between its intersections with 3rd Street North and Saratoga
Street
(3) East Jackson Street between its intersections with Saratoga and 4th Street North
(4) East Riverview Expressway between its intersections with 3rd Street South and
Lincoln Street
(5) East Riverview Expressway between its intersections with 3rd Street South and
Riverview Bridge
(6) East Riverview Expressway between its intersections with 8th Street South and 12th
Street South
(7) East Riverview Expressway between its intersections with 12th Street South and 16th
Street South
(8) East Riverview Expressway between its intersections with Lincoln Street and 8th
Street South
(9) East Riverview Expressway between its intersections with 16th Street South and
22nd Street South (MC#761)
(10) Lincoln Street between its intersections with Birch Street and Witter Street
(11) Lincoln Street between its intersections with East Grand Avenue and its intersection
with Birch Street and Peach Street
(12) Market Street between its intersections with 3rd Street North and Avon Street
(13) Market Street between its intersections with Baker Street and Avon Street
(14) West Jackson Street between its intersections with 2nd Avenue North and 3rd
Avenue North
(15) West Jackson Street between its intersections with 3rd Avenue North and 4th Avenue
North
(16) West Jackson Street between its intersections with West Grand Avenue, 6th Avenue,
and 4th Avenue North
(17) West Grand Avenue between its intersections with 8th Avenue and West Riverview
Expressway
(18) West Grand Avenue between its intersections with West Riverview Expressway and
6th Avenue
(19) West Riverview Expressway between its intersections with 2nd Avenue South and
Riverview Expressway Bridge
(20) West Riverview Expressway between its intersections with Chase Street and 2nd
Avenue South
(21) West Riverview Expressway between its intersections with Hale Street and Chase
Street
(22) West Riverview Expressway between its intersections with West Grand Avenue and
Hale Street
(23) West Riverview Expressway between its intersections with West Grand Avenue and
High Street
16
(24) West Riverview Expressway between its intersections with High Street and Wilson
Street
(25) West Riverview Expressway between its intersections with Wilson Street and Reddin
Road
(26) West Riverview Expressway between its intersections with Reddin Road and
Edgewood Place
(b) Safety intersection islands. Safety intersection islands shall be provided at the following
locations, at the intersection of:
(1) 1st Avenue South, 3rd Avenue South, and 8th Avenue South
(2) 1st Street North, Baker Street, and Market Street
(3) 2nd Avenue South, Gaynor Avenue, and 17th Avenue South
(4) 3rd Street and East Grand Avenue
(5) 8th Street North and Baker Street
(6) 8th Street and East Grand Avenue
(7) 8th Street South and Pepper Avenue
(8) 8th Street South and Clyde Avenue, the south side of the intersection (MC#950)
(9) 16th Street North and Baker Street
(10) Baker Drive, Baker Street, and 18th Street North
(11) East Jackson Street and 1st Street
(12) East Jackson Street and 4th Street North
(13) East Jackson Street and Oak Street
(14) East Jackson Street and 3rd Street North
(15) East Riverview Expressway and 8th Street South
(16) East Riverview Expressway and Lincoln Street
(17) East Riverview Expressway and 3rd Street South
(18) East Riverview Expressway and 12th Street South
(19) Lincoln Street and Birch Street
(20) Lincoln Street and East Grand Avenue
(21) West Jackson Street and 2nd Avenue North
(22) West Jackson Street and 3rd Avenue North
(23) West Jackson Street and 4th Avenue North
(24) West Grand Avenue, 6th Avenue, and West Jackson Street
(25) West Riverview Expressway and 2nd Avenue South
(26) West Riverview Expressway and Chase Street
(27) West Riverview Expressway High Street
(28) West Riverview Expressway and West Grand Avenue
(c) Driving Over Safety Zones or Islands Prohibited. Whenever safety zones or safety islands are
marked in accordance with the Wisconsin Uniform Traffic Control Device Manual, no operator
of a vehicle shall at any time drive through or over the safety zones or island.
(3) Turns Prohibited.
(a) Right turns Prohibited. No operator of any vehicle shall make a right turn at any of the
following locations.
(1) From east-bound East Grand Avenue onto 7th Street
(2) From east-bound East Jackson Street onto 1st Street
(3) From east-bound High Street onto 11th Avenue North
(4) From east-bound Peach Street onto 7th Street South
(5) From east-bound Saratoga Street onto 8th Street, between 8:00 a.m. and 8:45 a.m.
and between 3:15 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., on school days (MC#546)
(6) From east-bound West Grand Avenue onto 4th Avenue
(7) From south-bound 18th Street onto Baker Street
(8) From west-bound East Grand Avenue onto 2nd Street
(9) From west-bound Birch Street onto 4th Street South (MC#316)
(10) From west-bound Oak Street onto 2nd Street
(11) From west-bound Oak Street onto 8th Street, between 8:00 a.m. and 8:45 a.m. and
17
between 3:15 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., on school days (MC#546)
(12) From north-bound 16th Street South onto East Riverview Expressway, between 7:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m. and between 2:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., when pedestrians are
present. (MC#1138)
(b) Left Turns Prohibited. No operator of any vehicle shall make a left turn at any of the following
locations.
(1) From east-bound Birch Street onto 4th Street South (MC#316)
(2) From east-bound East Grand Avenue onto 2nd Street South
(3) From east-bound Oak Street onto 8th Street, between 8:00 a.m. and 8:45 a.m. and
between 3:15 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., on school days (MC#546)
(4) From north-bound 1st Street North into the swimming pool parking area
(5) From north-bound 18th Street North onto Baker Street
(6) From west-bound East Grand Avenue onto 7th Street South
(7) From west-bound East Jackson Street onto 1st Street North
(8) From west-bound High Street onto 11th Avenue North
(9) From west-bound Peach Street onto 7th Street South
(10) From west-bound Prospect Street onto 8th Street, between 8:00 a.m. and 8:45 a.m.
and between 3:15 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., on school days
(11) From west-bound Saratoga Street onto 8th Street, between 8:00 a.m. and 8:45 a.m.
and between 3:15 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., on school days (MC#546)
(12) From west-bound Taylor Avenue onto 8th Street South
(13) From west-bound West Grand Avenue onto 4th Avenue
(14) From north-bound 16th Street North onto Michael Drive from 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.
on school days. (MC#1043)
(c) Right Turn on Red Signal Prohibited. No operator of any vehicle shall make a right turn on a
red signal at the following locations.(MC#1263)
(d) U-turns Prohibited. U-turns are prohibited at the following locations.
(1) 2nd Avenue South from West Riverview Expressway to the south city limits
(2) 4th Avenue North from West Jackson Street to the city limits
(3) 8th Street from Baker Street to the south city limits
(4) 17th Avenue North from West Grand Avenue to Bonow Avenue
(5) All signalized intersections
(6) Baker Street from 1st Street North to the city limits
(7) Chestnut Street from 8th Street to the city limits
(8) Grand Avenue from the west city limits to 8th Street South
(9) Grove Avenue from 600 feet west of Lincoln Street to 200 feet east of Lincoln Street
(MC#462)
(10) Jackson Street from West Grand Avenue to East Grand Avenue
(11) Lincoln Street from 100 feet north of Pepper Avenue to 200 feet south of Grove
Avenue (MC#462)
(12) Oak Street, the 700 block (MC#440)
(13) Riverview Expressway from the north city limits to the east city limits
(14) Pursuant to authorization of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, U-turns are
prohibited on State Highways 13, 34, 54, and 73 within the City of Wisconsin Rapids.
(4) Mid-block Crosswalks. The following locations shall be official pedestrian crosswalks where properly
marked:
(a) 4th Avenue North, between High Street and Fremont Street (MC#598)
(b) 10th Avenue South between Gardner Street and 2nd Avenue South
(c) Baker Street between Market Street and 5th Street North
(d) Chestnut Street between Hill Street and Cliff Street
(e) Dura Beauty Lane between Rainbow Drive and 5th Avenue North (two crosswalks)
(5) Miscellaneous Lane and Turn Controls. The city traffic engineer is authorized, when in his or her
judgement the safety of the situation requires, to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent
to intersections directing that a different course from that specified in Section 346.31, Wisconsin
18
Statutes, be traveled by vehicles turning at the intersection and to mark the lanes for traffic
designating separate lanes for slow moving traffic or for traffic moving in a particular direction.
340.006 PEDESTRIANS, NON-MOTORIZED TRAFFIC, EXCEPT BICYCLES, PROHIBITED ON FREEWAYS,
STREETS, AND EXPRESSWAYS (MC#745)
Pedestrians and non-motorized traffic, except bicycles, are prohibited on freeways and expressways. When
signs conforming to the Uniform Traffic Control Device Manual are erected at all points of access to such
highways, no pedestrian shall walk or no person shall ride a non-motorized vehicle upon the following freeways,
streets, and expressways:
(1) 8th Street South from its intersection with Oak Street through the Two Mile Avenue intersection,
except bicycles
(2) Baker Drive viaduct (MC#352)
(3) Grand Avenue Bridge from the 2nd Street intersection through the 1st Avenue intersection
(4) Jackson Street Bridge from the 1st Street North intersection to the 2nd Avenue Intersection
(5) Riverview Expressway from the north city limits to the east city limits, except bicycles
340.007 NO PASSING ZONE
(1) Designated. No passing zones shall be marked with unbroken yellow lines on pavement indicating the
beginning and end of such zones on any street within the jurisdiction of the City of Wisconsin Rapids in
accordance with standards and procedures adopted by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation.
(a) 1st Avenue South from 2nd Avenue South to 100 feet north of 8th Avenue South
(b) 1st Avenue South from West Grand Avenue to Johnson Street
(c) 1st Street North from Ash Street to the city limits
(d) 1st Street North from Jackson Street Bridge to Apricot Street
(e) 2nd Avenue South, south-bound, from Boles Creek to Moyer Street
(f) 2nd Avenue South from 350 feet south of Gaynor Avenue to 200 feet north of Gaynor Avenue
(g) 2nd Avenue South from Park Street to 1st Avenue South
(h) 2nd Avenue South, north-bound, from Moyer Street to May Street
(I) 2nd Avenue South from Seneca Road to Hurley Street
(j) 2nd Street South from East Grand Avenue to Birch Street
(k) 3rd Avenue from Goggins Street to West Jackson Street
(l) 3rd Avenue South from 1st Avenue South to Gardner Street
(m) 3rd Street South from Alder Street to Chestnut Street
(n) 3rd Street from East Jackson Street to Birch Street
(o) 4th Avenue North from West Jackson Street to McKinley Street
(p) 6th Avenue from Bonow Avenue to Dura Beauty Lane
(q) 8th Street North from Baker Street to Wisconsin Street
(r) 8th Street South from Oak Street to East Grand Avenue
(s) 16th Street North from Baker Street to Wisconsin Street
(t) 16th Street South from 100 feet north of Chestnut Street to 100 feet south of Chestnut
Street
(u) 16th Street South from 350 feet north of East Riverview Expressway to 300 feet south of East
Riverview Expressway
(v) 17th Avenue North from High Street to Alton Street
(w) 17th Avenue South from Wickham Avenue to 2nd Avenue South
(x) Baker Street from 16th Street North to 17th Street North
(y) Baker Drive from 17th Street North to the city limits
(z) Baker Street from 1st Street North to 9th Street North
(aa) Bonow Avenue between 17th Avenue and 6th Avenue
(ab) Chase Street from 155 feet east of West Riverview Expressway to 50 feet west of 12th
Avenue South
(ac) Chestnut Street from 6th Street South to 9th Street South
(ad) Dura Beauty Lane from 6th Avenue to 500' west of Wisconsin Central Limited transfer track
(ae) East Grand Avenue, west-bound, from 9th Street South to the Grand Avenue Bridge
19
(af) Gaynor Avenue from 2nd Avenue South to 18th Avenue South
(ag) Grand Avenue Bridge, east-bound
(ah) Hales Street from West Riverview Expressway to 8th Avenue South
(ai) Jackson Street Bridge
(aj) Lincoln Street from D Street to Spruce Street
(ak) Lincoln Street from Dewey Street to Daly Avenue
(al) Pepper Avenue from 7th Street South to 10th Street South
(am) Riverwood Drive from 1st Street South to the end of the curve
(2) Passing Prohibited. When no passing zone markers or signs, giving notice thereof, are erected or
placed on the pavement, as provided in this section, no person shall operate a vehicle so as to
overtake or pass another vehicle or drive to the left of the center of the roadway in designated no
passing zones.
340.008 TRUCK ROUTES
(1) Weight Limits and Heavy Traffic Routes (MC#832)
(a) Operation of a Vehicle Whose Weight is in Excess of Five Tons. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate any motor vehicle whose weight is in excess of five tons over any street in
the City of Wisconsin Rapids, which is not a county trunk, state highway, or federal highway, or
which is not designated as a truck route, except as follows. Note: Marked business routes of
state highways are not truck routes.
(1) Operating while actually engaged in deliveries or pickup to business or residence
from the nearest designated truck route.
(2) Going to or from the place the vehicle is kept by the owner and/or operator. The
vehicle must be parked off-street.
(3) Going to or from points within the city for purpose of having the vehicle serviced,
repaired, or while being tested.
(4) When operating a truck which is customarily used to transport workmen or
equipment and while being so used.
(b) Machinery and Equipment with Lugs. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any
machinery or piece of equipment, which is equipped with lugs, on any street in the City of
Wisconsin Rapids.
(c) Marking of Truck Routes. Designated truck routes and truck access routes shall have all sign
posts painted highway yellow, as practical.
(d) The following streets are designated truck routes by the City of Wisconsin Rapids:
(1) County Highway F.
(2) 25th Avenue North from West Grand Avenue to Engel Road
(3) Bonow Avenue from Wilson Street to 17th Avenue North, and Wilson Street, from
State Trunk Highway 34 to Bonow Avenue
(4) County Highway W
(5) Highway 13
(6) Highway 34
(7) Highway 54
(8) Highway 73
(9) Industrial Street, from STH 73 to 25th Avenue North (MC#1175)
(10) County Highway Z (MC#1175)
(e) The following is a list of streets designated as truck access routes. The designation truck
access route is the route a truck must take for deliveries or repairs to a certain area. It is not a
through route for truck movements in the city.
(1) LaVigne Street from 1st Street North to 3rd Street North
(2) 1st Street North, from Jackson Street to Spring Street
(3) Spring Street, from 1st Street North to Plover Street
(4) 29th Avenue North, from Industrial Street to Engel Road (MC#1175)
(5) Jefferson Street, from 29th Avenue North to the east cul de sac (MC#1175)
(6) Jefferson Street, from the west cul-de-sac to 17th Avenue North (MC#1175)
20
(7) Engel Road, from 29th Avenue North to 17th Avenue North (MC#1175)
(8) Industrial Court, from 25th Avenue North to the east cul-de-sac (MC#1175)
(9) 21st Avenue North, from Industrial Street to Jefferson Street (MC#1175)
(10) Brown Street, from the west cul-de-sac to 17th Avenue North (MC#1175)
(11) 23rd Avenue North, from Engel Road to Nash Road (MC#1175)
(12) Nash Road, from 23rd Avenue North to 17th Avenue North (MC#1175)
(13) McKinley Street, from the west cul-de-sac to 4th Avenue North (MC#1175)
(14) High Street, from STH 13 and 34 to 4th Avenue North (MC#1175)
(15) 4th Avenue North, from West Jackson Street to Fremont Street (MC#1175)
(16) West Grand Avenue, from STH 13, 34, and 73 to West Jackson Street (MC#1175)
(17) West Jackson Street, from West Grand Avenue to 1st Street North (MC#1175)
(18) 48t Street North, from STH 54 to Commerce Drive (MC#1175)
(19) Commerce Drive, from 40th Street North to 56th Street North (MC#1175)
(20) 40th Street North, from Commerce Drive to the south cul-de-sac (MC#1175)
(2) Height Limits and High Traffic Routes.
(a) Operating a truck whose height is in the overall excess of 13.5 feet. It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate any motor truck whose height is in the overall excess of 13.5 feet but
less than 14.5 feet over any street in the City of Wisconsin Rapids, which is not a county
trunk, state highway, or federal highway, or which is not designated as a truck route, except
as follows:
(1) Operating while actually engaged in deliveries or pickups to business or residence
from the nearest designated truck route
(2) Going to or from garage of owner and operator
(3) Going to or from points within the city for purpose of having the truck serviced,
repaired, or while being tested
(4) When operating a truck which is customarily used to transport workmen or
equipment and while being so used
(b) Operating a truck whose height is in the overall excess of 14.5 feet. It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate any motor truck whose height is the overall excess of 14.5 feet without
a permit approved by the police department, engineering department, and the Water Works
and Lighting Commission authorized representatives.
340.009 SCHOOL BUS WARNING LIGHTS
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 346.48(2)(b).2, Wisconsin Statutes, adopted by reference in the
municipal code, school bus operators shall use flashing red lights in residential and business districts when
pupils or other authorized passengers are to be loaded or unloaded at locations at which there are no traffic
signals. Such flashing red warning lights shall be activated at least 100 feet prior to stopping for purposes of
loading and unloading and shall continue until such persons have crossed the street or highway before being
loaded or after being unloaded. The provisions of this ordinance do not apply to special needs buses that pull
over to the curb in front of the residences of the student to be picked up or dropped off. (MC#862)
340.010 MOTOR VEHICLES ON PEDESTRIAN WAY, BOULEVARDS, OR OVERPASSES
No person shall operate or park any motor vehicle on any pedestrian way, boulevard (portion between curb and
cutter and the right-of-way line), pedestrian overpass, or bike trail within the City of Wisconsin Rapids except
municipal or county maintenance and emergency vehicles. (MC#398)
340.011 OBSTRUCTION OF RAILROAD CROSSING
No person or corporation shall leave standing or stop or permit or allow to stand any railroad train, engine, or
car upon any street, alley, or highway crossing within the City of Wisconsin Rapids so as to obstruct public
travel for a greater period of time than ten minutes without opening said street, or crossing for at least ten
minutes.
340.012 SNOWMOBILE REGULATIONS
(1) No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any street, highway, alley, or public right- of-way within the
21
City of Wisconsin Rapids, except as provided for on the snowmobile routes designated herein.
(2) Pursuant to the authority granted to the City under s. 350.18, Wis. Stats., the following routes are
designated snowmobile routes in the City:
Industrial Street, from 800 feet from West Grand Avenue/State Highway 73, to the 26th Avenue
alleyway.
The 26th Avenue alleyway, from Industrial Street to 700 feet south of Industrial Street.
25th Avenue South, from Industrial Court to 200 feet south of the railroad track crossing.
(3) The following restrictions are placed on the use of City snowmobile routes:
A. City streets designated as snowmobile routes shall be marked with uniform
snowmobile route signs in accordance with s. 350.13, Wis. Stats. No person may
do any of the following in regard to signs marking City snowmobile routes:
1. Intentionally remove, damage, deface, move, or obstruct any uniform
snowmobile route or trail sign or standard of the type established by the
State of Wisconsin, Department of Natural Resources or intentionally
interfere with the effective operation of any uniform snowmobile route
or trail sign or standard if the sign or standard is legally placed by the
state, any municipality, or any authorized individual.
2. Possess any uniform snowmobile route or trail sign or standard of the
type established by the State of Wisconsin, Department of Natural
Resources for the warning, instruction, or information of the public,
unless he or she obtained the uniform snowmobile route or trail sign or
standard in a lawful manner. Possession of a uniform snowmobile route
or trail sign or standard creates a rebuttable presumption of illegal
possession.
B. Operation shall be subject to all provisions of s. 350.04 (2), Wis. Stats., and any
other provision of chapter 350, Wis. Stats., which is adopted as a part of this
ordinance by reference, pursuant to s. 350.18, Wis. Stats.
1. Snowmobiles shall be operated on the extreme right side of the roadway.
2. Left turns shall be made as safely as possible from any position
depending on snow cover and other prevailing conditions.
3. Snowmobile operators shall yield right-of-way to other vehicular traffic
and pedestrians.
4. All snowmobile operators shall observe posted roadway speed limits.
5. All snowmobile operators shall ride single file.
6. All snowmobile operators shall slow the vehicle to 10 mph or less when
operating within 150 feet of a dwelling or business
7. Snowmobile operation is not permitted on state trunk highways or
connecting highways except as provided under s. 350.02, Wis. Stats.
(4) The penalties under s. 350.11, Wis. Stats., are adopted and incorporated by reference.
340.013 PENALTY
Forfeiture for Violation of Moving Traffic Regulations. Forfeitures for violations of any moving traffic regulation
set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes adopted by reference in this ordinance shall conform to the forfeiture
penalty permitted to be imposed for violations of the comparable Wisconsin Statutes, including any variations
or increases for subsequent offenses.
340.014 CITATIONS
(1) Uniform Citations and Complaints. The Wisconsin Uniform Traffic Citation and Complaint described
and defined in the Wisconsin Statutes shall be used for enforcement of all provisions of this code
except those provisions which describe or define non-moving traffic violations.
(2) Traffic Violation and Registration Program. The city shall participate in the Traffic Violation and
Registration Program established in Sections 85.13 and 345.28 of the Wisconsin Statutes and
Wisconsin Administrative Code TRANS-128. Required procedures and forms of notices to violators and
the Department of Transportation shall be prepared by the city attorney.
22
340.015 REFERENCE TO WISCONSIN STATUTES
(1) Statutes Specifically Incorporated by Reference. Whenever this ordinance incorporates by reference
specific sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, such reference shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes of
1981-1982 as from time to time amended, repealed, or modified by the Wisconsin Legislature.
(2) General References. General references in this ordinance to Wisconsin statutory sections or chapters
describing or defining procedures or authority for enactment or enforcement of local traffic regulations
shall be deemed to refer to the most recent enactments of the Wisconsin Legislature describing or
defining such procedures or authorities.
340.016 STORAGE FEES FOR SEIZED VEHICLES (MC#645)
(1) The City of Wisconsin Rapids Police Department shall charge a fee of $2.00 per day for vehicles stored
by them pursuant to an order of seizure under Chapter 346, Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) Storage fees shall be collected pursuant to the formula set forth in Chapter 346 of the Wisconsin
Statutes relating to the disposal of seized vehicles.
340.017 IMMOBILIZATION OF VEHICLES (MC#646)
(1) Fees for Immobilization of Vehicles Pursuant to Chapter 346, Wisconsin Statutes. Any party, whose
vehicle is immobilized pursuant to an order of immobilization, under Section 346, Wisconsin Statutes,
shall pay a fee of $50.00 to the Wisconsin Rapids Police Department at the time the vehicle is
immobilized.
(2) Damages for Lost, Damaged, or Destroyed Immobilization Devices. If an immobilization device is lost,
damaged, or destroyed while connected to a vehicle, the owner shall be liable for the cost of replacing
the immobilization device including, but not limited to, any costs incurred by the Wisconsin Rapids
Police Department in attempting to recoup the cost of the device.
340.018 COMPRESSION BRAKE REGULATION
(1) No person shall use motor vehicle brakes within the City of Wisconsin Rapids which are in any way
activated or operated by the compression of the engine of a motor vehicle, or any unit or part thereof,
except in an emergency situation.
(2) Any person who shall violate this ordinance shall pay a forfeiture of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00)
nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus court costs. (MC#864)
Note: Since approval was not obtained from the WisDOT, section 340.019 is null and void.
340.020 USE OF HAND-HELD MOBILE TELEPHONES AND MOBILE ELECTRONIC DEVICES WHILE
DRIVING (MC#1117)
(1) For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings:
(a) "Mobile telephone" means a cellular, analog, wireless or digital telephone capable of sending
or receiving telephone communications without an access line for service.
(b) "Using" or "use" means holding a hand-held mobile telephone to, or in the immediate proximity
of, the user's ear.
(c) "Hand-held mobile telephone" means a mobile telephone with which a user engages in a call
using at least one hand.
(d) "Hands-free accessory" means an attachment, add-on, built-in feature, or addition to a mobile
telephone, whether or not permanently installed in a motor vehicle, that, when used, allows
the vehicle operator to maintain both hands on the steering wheel.
(e) "Hands-free mobile telephone" means a hand-held mobile telephone that has an internal
feature or function, or that is equipped with an attachment or addition, whether or not
permanently part of such hand-held mobile telephone, by which a user engages in a call
without the use of either hand, whether or not the use of either hand is necessary to activate,
deactivate or initiate a function of such telephone.
(f) "Engage in a call" means talking into or listening on a hand-held mobile telephone, but does
not include holding a hand-held mobile telephone to activate, deactivate or initiate a function
of such telephone.
23
(g) "Immediate proximity" means the distance that permits the operator of a hand-held mobile
telephone to hear telecommunications transmitted over such hand-held mobile telephone,
but does not require physical contact with such operator's ear.
(h) "Mobile electronic device" means any hand-held or other portable electronic equipment
capable of providing data communication between two or more persons, including a text
messaging device, a paging device, a personal digital assistant, a laptop computer,
equipment that is capable of playing a video game or a digital video disk, or equipment on
which digital photographs are taken or transmitted, or any combination thereof, but does not
include any audio equipment or any equipment installed in a motor vehicle for the purpose of
providing navigation, emergency assistance to the operator of such motor vehicle or video
entertainment to the passengers in the rear seats of such motor vehicle.
(2) (a) Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, no person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a
highway, as defined in s. 343.305 (1) (b), Wis. Stats., while using a hand-held mobile
telephone to engage in a call or while using a mobile electronic device while such vehicle is in
motion. A driver of a motor vehicle who types, sends or reads a text message with a hand-held
mobile telephone or mobile electronic device while such vehicle is in motion shall also be in
violation of this section.
(b) A driver of a motor vehicle who holds a hand-held mobile telephone to, or in the immediate
proximity of, his or her ear while such vehicle is in motion is presumed to be engaging in a call
within the meaning of this section. The presumption established by this subdivision is
rebuttable by evidence tending to show that the driver was not engaged in a call.
(c) The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed as authorizing the seizure or
forfeiture of a hand-held mobile telephone or a mobile electronic device, unless otherwise
provided by law.
(d) Subdivision (a) of this subsection does not apply to:
(1) the use of a hand-held mobile telephone for the sole purpose of communicating with
any of the following regarding an emergency situation: An emergency response
operator; a hospital, physician's office or health clinic; an ambulance company; a fire
department; or a police department, or
(2) any of the following persons while in the performance of their official duties and
within the scope of their employment: A peace officer, a firefighter or an operator of
an ambulance or authorized emergency vehicle, or a member of the armed forces of
the United States, while operating a military vehicle, or
(3) the use of a hands-free mobile telephone.
(3) Any person who violates subsection (2) of this section shall be fined not more than one hundred
dollars [except that the fine shall be suspended for a first time violator who provides proof of
acquisition of a hands-free accessory subsequent to the violation but prior to the imposition of a fine]
for a first violation, one hundred fifty dollars for a second violation and two hundred dollars for a third
or subsequent violation.