Village of Weston Municipal Code Table of Contents page 1
VILLAGE OF WESTON MUNICIPAL CODE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
OFFICIALS of the VILLAGE OF WESTON, WISCONSIN
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION
PREFACE
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
ARTICLE II. VILLAGE BOARD
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
DIVISION 2. MEETINGS
DIVISION 3. COMMITTEES
ARTICLE III. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
DIVISION 2. ADMINISTRATOR
DIVISION 3. CLERK/HUMAN RESOURCES DIRECTOR
DIVISION 4. FINANCE DIRECTOR/TREASURER
DIVISION 5. ASSESSOR
DIVISION 6. ATTORNEY
DIVISION 7. DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS and UTILITIES
ARTICLE IV. BOARD OF REVIEW
ARTICLE V. PUBLIC RECORDS
Chapter 3
RESERVED
Chapter 4
VIDEO AND CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE PROVIDERS
Chapter 5
RESERVED
Chapter 6
ALCOHOL BEVERAGES
Village of Weston Municipal Code Table of Contents page 2
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
ARTICLE II. LICENSES AND FEES
ARTILCE III. ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapters 7 - 9
RESERVED
Chapter 10
ANIMALS
ARTICLE I. ANIMAL CONTROL AND LICENSING ARTICLE II. DANGEROUS ANIMALS
ARTICLE III. HUNTING
Chapters 11 - 13
RESERVED
Chapter 14
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
ARTICLE II. BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION CODES
DIVISION 1. BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
DIVISION 2. COMMERCIAL ELECTRICAL CODES AND REGULATIONS
ARTICLE III. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
DIVISION 1. INSPECTOR
DIVISION 2. PERMITS AND FEES
DIVISION 3. INSPECTIONS AND ORDERS
ARTICLE IV. DEMOLITION/RAZING OF BUILDINGS
ARTICLE V. HOUSE AND BUILDING NUMBERING
Chapters 15 - 17
RESERVED
Chapter 18
BUSINESSES
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
ARTICLE II. ADULT ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
ARTICLE III. EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEM
ARTICLE IV. DIRECT SALES
ARTICLE V. SLAUGHTERHOUSES, STOCKYARDS, JUNKYARDS, AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS ARTICLE VI. MASSAGE
Village of Weston Municipal Code Table of Contents page 3
ARTICLE VII. PAWNBROKERS AND SECONHAND DEALERS
ARTICLE VIII. SHOWS, CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS
ARTICLE IX. WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Chapters 19 - 21
RESERVED
Chapter 22
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Chapter 23 - 25
RESERVED
Chapter 26
COURT
Chapters 27 - 29
RESERVED
Chapter 30
ELECTIONS
Chapters 31 - 33
RESERVED
Chapter 34
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE I. FIRE COMMISION
ARTICLE II. FIRE PREVENTION
Chapters 35 - 37
RESERVED
Chapter 38
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapters 39 - 41
RESERVED
Chapter 42
LAW ENFORCEMENT
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Village of Weston Municipal Code Table of Contents page 4
ARTICLE II. COMMENCMENT OF ACTION AND FORM OF CITATION IN MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATION CASES
Chapters 43 - 45
RESERVED
Chapter 46
MOBILE HOMES and MOBILE HOME COMMUNITIES
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
ARTICLE II. MANUFACTURED and MOBILE HOME COMMUNITIES
Chapters 47 - 49
RESERVED
Chapter 50
NUISANCES
Chapters 51 - 53
RESERVED
Chapter 54
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
ARTICLE II. MINORS
ARTICLE III. TOBACCO, SMOKING AND PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES
ARTICLE IV. PROPERTY
Chapters 55 - 57
RESERVED
Chapter 58
PARKS AND RECREATION
Chapter 59 - 61
RESERVED
Chapter 62
PLANNING COMMISSION
Chapters 63 - 65
RESERVED
Chapter 66
Village of Weston Municipal Code Table of Contents page 5
SOLID WASTE
Chapter 67
REGULATION OF SPECIAL EVENTS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
Chapters 68 - 69
RESERVED
Chapter 70
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PLACES
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
ARTIUCLE II. EXCAVATIONS
Chapter 71
STREET ACCESS CONTROL
ARTICLE I. INTRODUCTION
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE III. ACCESS CONTROL STANDARDS FOR DRIVEWAYS
ARTICLE IV. SPACING STANDARDS FOR STREETS
ARTICLE V. ACCESS DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR DRIVEWAYS
ARTICLE VI. ACCESS DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR STREETS
Chapters 72 - 73
RESERVED
Chapter 74
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
ARTICLE III. PLATS
ARTICLE IV. REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
ARTICLE V. GENERAL ADDITION REQUIREMENTS ARTICLE VI. DESIGN STANDARDS
ARTICLE VII. DIVISIONS OTHER THAN SUBDIVISIONS
Chapters 75 - 77
RESERVED
Chapter 78
TAXATION AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
ARTICLE I IN GENERAL
Village of Weston Municipal Code Table of Contents page 6
ARTICLE II ROOM TAX
ARTICLE III. SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
Chapters 79 - 81
RESERVED
Chapter 82
TRAFFIC AND VEICLES
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL ARTICLE II. SNOWMOBILES
ARTICLE III. BICYCLES
ARTICLE IV. MINIBIKES AND SELF-PROPELLED DEVICES
ARTICLE V. ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE AND UTILITY TERRAIN VEHICLE ROUTES AND OPERATION ON HIGHWAYS WITHIN THE VILLAGE OF WESTON
ARTICLE VI. SPEED LIMITS
Chapters 83 - 85
RESERVED
Chapter 86
UTILITIES
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
ARTICLE II. WATER UTILITY
DIVISION I. GENERALLY
DIVISION II. OPERATING RULES
DIVISION III. SERVICE RULES
DIVISION IV. METERS
DIVISION V. CONNECTIONS, FEES AND CHARGES
ARTICLE III. WELLS
ARTICLE IV. SEWERAGE UTILITY
ARTICLE V. STORMWATER UTILITY
DIVISION I. STORWATER UTILITY
DIVISION II. POST CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
DIVISION III. CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION
DIVISION IV. ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION
ARTICLE VI. REFUSE AND RECYCLING UTILITY
Chapters 87 - 89
RESERVED
Chapter 90
VEGETATION
Village of Weston Municipal Code Table of Contents page 7
Chapter 91 - 93
RESERVED
Chapter 94
ZONING ARTICLE I. INTRODUCTION
ARTICLE II. ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARD ZONING DISTRICTS
ARTICLE III. LAND USES ALLOWED IN ZONING DISTRICTS
ARTICLE IV. LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS
ARTICLE V. DENSITY, INTENSITY, BULK REGULATIONS
ARTICLE VI. OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS
ARTICLE VII. FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS
ARTICLE VIII. SHORELAND OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS
ARTICLE IX. SHORELAND-WETLAND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
ARTICLE X. BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS
ARTICLE XI. LANDSCAPING AND PRESERVATION STANDARDS
ARTICLE XII. GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
ARTICLE XIII. SIGNS
ARTICLE XIV. NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT
ARTICLE XV. NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES, STRUCTURES AND SITES
ARTIVLE XVI. PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE XVII. DEFINITIONS
Chapter 95 - 99
RESERVED
Chapter 100
CHARTER ORDINANCE, CLERK
Village of Weston Municipal Code Preface page 1
OFFICALS
of the
VILLAGE OF
WESTON, WISCONSIN
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION AND AMENDMENT
__________
Barbara Ermeling
Village President
__________
Mark Maloney
Kevin Ostrowski
Wally Sparks
Hooshang Zeyghami
Jon Ziegler
Village Board
__________
Matt Yde
Village Attorney
__________
Keith Donner
Interim Village Administrator
__________
Sherry Weinkauf
Clerk
Village of Weston Municipal Code Preface page 2
PREFACE
This Code contains a complete amendment of the general and permanent ordinances of the Village of Weston, Wisconsin as of: (Date)
Source materials used in the amending and preparation of the Code historically were the 1982 Code, and amending ordinances through Ordinance of 12-15-2015 (or Date). The source of each section where applicable, is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code.
Source materials are also accessed by the use of hyperlinks to their original source such as; Wisconsin State Statutes, Wisconsin Administrative Code, State of Wisconsin Constitution, International Code, Federal law and other varied sources.
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order where possible, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchline to facilitate usage. These catchlines are not to be construed as the ordinances which are detailed further in the texts. Notes which tie related sections of this Code together have been included. Notes which refer to a relevant state law, state code, federal law, or other governing code have been linked to the source code via the use of hyperlinks. A table (State Law Reference Table) listing where the referenced code is located within the code is included at the end of these codes.
Chapter and Section Numbering System
The chapter and section number system used in this Code is similar to many used in state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts or in some Chapters three parts separated by a point. The figure before the point refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the point refers to the position of the section within the chapter. The third figure, where used after the second point refers to the position of a subsection of the primary section. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1.101, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6.100. Where there is a second point and a third figure is used, that further delineates subsections as in chapter 94 is 94.9.01. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintain when possible when including new chapters.
Index
An index has been prepared. Each particular item of information that a person would be seeking is located under a general title such as; ANIMALS or BUILDINGS, however this does not mean that every possible iteration is to be found. The terminology, some of which is couched
Village of Weston Municipal Code Preface page 3
in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used to local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. The Village web site provides for a search of all items provided which may assist in the location of a particular item. However, the method of search may not be fruitful on its first try and several tries with different search criteria may be required.
Bookmarks and Hyperlinks
These documents are accessible by the use of the Village of Weston web site with an internet connected computer. The documents have been created with Microsoft Word© 2016. Each chapter has a Table of Contents which is hyperlinked from the section number in the Table of Contents to the location of the section in the document (these are referred to as “bookmarks”).
Each citing of an outside notation, state statute, administrative code, federal law, or other outside source of information has been linked by the use of external hyperlinks, which can be viewed by simply placing the cursor over the blue colored and underlined hyperlink, pressing the “ctrl” key then left click. This action should take you to the source origin of the cited reference. (These are referred to as “external hyperlinks”)
Code Cross References
A Code Cross Reference code Table has been provided to assist in locating where specific codes have adopted, cited or made reference to other statutes, administrative codes, federal, international or other source information. This code cross reference code table lists; the outside code, statute, data, source, etc. then lists where that particular code, statute, data, source is cited in the code by section number. NOTE many cited codes, statutes, data, sources are cited in several code sections.
Chapter 1 General Provisions Page 1
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 1.100. Title; effective date; citation.
Sec. 1.101. Definitions and rules of construction.
Sec. 1.102. Titles, chapters, sections.
Sec. 1.103. Catchlines of sections.
Sec. 1.104. References and editor's notes.
Sec. 1.105. History notes.
Sec. 1.106. Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances.
Sec. 1.107. Code does not affect prior offenses, penalties, rights.
Sec. 1.108. Repeal of ordinances.
Sec. 1.109. Ordinances not repealed.
Sec. 1.110. Repeal of repealed acts.
Sec. 1.111. General penalty.
Sec. 1.112. Jurisdiction over children who are 12 years of age and older.
Sec. 1.113. Costs to be included in forfeiture.
Sec. 1.114. Supplementation of Code.
Sec. 1.115. Clerk/treasurer to file documents incorporated by reference.
Sec. 1.116. Adoption of state statutes.
Sec. 1.117. Severability of provisions.
__________
* State Law References--Authority to codify ordinances, Wis. Stat. § 66.0103.
Chapter 1 General Provisions Page 2
Sec. 1.100. Title; effective date; citation.
These ordinances shall be known as the "Municipal Code of the Village of Weston, Wisconsin" and shall take effect from and after passage and publication as required by the Wisconsin Statutes. All references shall be cited by section number (Example: Sec. 6.105). For references to the provisions of Chapter 82 of this Code, the section of this Code shall be cited together with the specific citation of the applicable Wisconsin Statute (Example: Secs. 82.100--341.04).
(Code 1982, § 14.10) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 1.101. Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the ordinances:
Acts of agent. When a provision requires an act to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
Board, village board. Whenever the terms "board" and "village board" are used without qualification, they shall read as if the words "of Weston, Wisconsin" followed such terms.
Code. Whenever the term "Code" is used without further qualification, it shall mean the "Municipal Code of the Village of Weston, Wisconsin," as designated in Sec. 1.100.
County. The term "county" shall mean the County of Marathon, Wisconsin.
et seq.An abbreviation for the Latin phrase et sequentes meaning “and the following.” It is commonly used to include numbered lists, pages or sections after the first number is stated, such as the Definitions and rules of construction are found in Chapter 2 Administration Sec. 1.101 et seq.
May. The term "may" shall be construed as being permissive.
Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month.
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. If any oath or affirmation is required to be taken, such oath or affirmation shall be taken before and administered before some officer authorized by the laws of this state, to administer oaths, at the place where the oath or affirmation is required to be taken or administered, unless otherwise expressly directed, and, when necessary, duly certified by such officer. If an oath is administered, it shall end with the words "so help me God." In actions and proceedings in the courts, a person may take an oath or affirmation in communication with the administering officer by telephone or audiovisual means.
Chapter 1 General Provisions Page 3
Officers and employees generally. Whenever any officer or employee is referred to by title, such as "clerk/treasurer" or "health officer," such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the Village of Weston, Wisconsin."
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
Person. The term "person" extends and applies to natural persons, firms, corporations, associations, partnerships, or other bodies politic, and all entities of any kind capable of being sued unless plainly inapplicable.
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property.
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively.
Property. The term "property" shall include real, personal and mixed property.
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Reasonable time or notice. In all cases when an enactment shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or a reasonable notice is to be given to any person, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt execution of such duty or compliance with such notice.
Regulations, code. Whenever in this Code reference is made to any "regulations" or "code" of any government or board, bureau, commission or agency, such terms shall mean the regulations in effect on the effective date of this Code unless the context clearly provides otherwise.
Shall. The term "shall" will be construed as being mandatory.
Sheriff. The term "sheriff" shall be construed as if followed by the words "of Marathon County, Wisconsin."
Signature. *If the signature of any person is required by law it shall always be the writing of such person or, if the person is unable to write, the person's mark or the person's name written by some other person at the person's request and in the person's presence.
State Law References--Similar provisions, Wis. Stat. § 990.01(38).
Singular and plural; male and female. Every word in this Code and in any ordinance importing the masculine gender may stand and be applied to females as well as males, and every word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several
Chapter 1 General Provisions Page 4
persons or things as well as to one person or thing; but these rules of construction shall not be applied to any provisions which shall contain any express language excluding such construction or when the subject matter or context of such provisions may be repugnant thereto.
State. The term "state" shall mean the State of Wisconsin.
Street. The term "street" shall include any highway, street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane or viaduct in the village dedicated or devoted to public use.
Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, either alone or with others.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
Time computation.
(1) The time within which an act is to be done or a proceeding had or taken shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. When any such time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday and of any legal holiday, from 12:00 midnight to 12:00 midnight, shall be excluded.
(2) If the last day within which an act is to be done or a proceeding had or taken falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, the act may be done or the proceeding had or taken on the next secular day.
(3) When the last day within which a proceeding is to be had or taken or an act done, which consists of any payment to or the service upon or the filing with any officer, agent, agency, department or division of the state or any county, city, village, town, school district or other subdivision of the state, of any money, return, statement, notice or other document falls on a Saturday and the duly established official office hours of such officer, agent, agency, department or division to which such payment is to be made or with which such return, statement, report, notice or other document is required to be filed do not include any office hours on such Saturday, the proceeding may be had or taken or such act may be done on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday.
(4) Regardless of whether the time limited in any statute for the taking of any proceeding or the doing of any act is measured from an event or from the date or day on which such event occurs, the day on which such event took place shall be excluded in the computation of such time.
(5) The term "legal holiday," as used in this definition, means any statewide legal holiday provided in Wis. Stat. § 995.20. When an act is permitted to be done by the use of the
Chapter 1 General Provisions Page 5
postal service and the last day within the time prescribed by law for performing such act falls on a legal public holiday under federal law, or other holiday designated by the president such that the postal service does not receive registered mail or make regular deliveries on that day, the day shall be considered a legal holiday for purposes of this definition.
Village. The term "village" shall mean the Village of Weston, Wisconsin.
Wis. Stats., Wis Stat. or statute. The abbreviation "Wis. Stats.", “Wis Stat.”, or the word "statute" shall mean the official Wisconsin Statutes, or Statute, as amended.
Written; in writing.* The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
State Law References--Similar provisions, Wis. Stat. § 990.01(48).
Year.* The term "year" shall mean a calendar year.
State Law References--Similar provisions, Wis. Stat. § 990.01(49).
§, §§. The symbol § shall mean section, singular. The symbol §§ shall mean sections plural or multiples.
(Code 1982, § 14.01) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 1.102. Titles, chapters, sections.
(1) Reference to this Code. All references to titles, chapters, sections, subsections or paragraphs refer to this Code unless otherwise indicated.
(2) Conflicting provisions. If the provisions of the different chapters of this Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of such chapter.
(Code 1982, § 14.02) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 1.103. Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 1 General Provisions Page 6
Sec. 1.104. References and editor's notes.
References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling nor meant to have any legal effect.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 1.105. History notes.
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 1.106. Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code so far as they are the same as those of the Code of the Village of Weston and of ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code shall be considered as a continuation of such ordinances and not new enactments.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 1.107. Code does not affect prior offenses, penalties, rights.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code.
(Code 1982, § 14.06) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 1.108. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances adopted by the village board prior to the effective date of this Code and inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Code are hereby repealed, except those ordinances and parts mentioned in Sec. 1.110.
(Code 1982, § 14.03) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 1.109. Ordinances not repealed.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code:
(1) Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred before the effective date of this Code.
Chapter 1 General Provisions Page 7
(2) Any administrative ordinances of the village not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code, including but not limited to letting contracts without bids and releasing persons from liability.
(3) Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance, including CATV.
(4) Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, grading, repairing, vacating, etc., any street, alley or public way in the village.
(5) Any appropriation ordinance.
(6) Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes or levying special assessments or taxes.
(7) Any ordinance prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, ATV and snowmobile routes, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load weights of vehicles or loading zones.
(8) Any land use, zoning or rezoning ordinance or amendment to the zoning map or requiring dedication of land for parks and recreation.
(9) Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the village.
(10) Referendum ordinances and ordinances relating to the establishment of bulkhead lines.
(11) Any ordinance providing for local improvements and prescribing utility rates and fees.
(12) Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any ordinance extending the boundaries of the village.
(13) Any ordinance setting salaries of village officers and employees or any personnel regulations.
(14) Any temporary or special ordinances.
(15) Any ordinance establishing grades, curb lines and widths of sidewalks in the public streets and alleys.
(16) Any ordinance regarding the lighting of streets and alleys.
(17) Any ordinance naming public grounds and parks.
Chapter 1 General Provisions Page 8
(18) Any ordinance regarding the establishment of wards, ward boundaries and election districts.
(19) Any charter ordinance unless repealed by charter ordinance.
(20) Any ordinance releasing persons from liability.
(21) Any ordinance regarding construction of public works.
(22) Any ordinance regarding water, sewer, solid waste, and electric rates, rules and regulations and sewer and water main construction.
(23) The village's schedules of fees and charges.
(24) Any ordinance regarding wage scales.
All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section. All ordinances are on file in the clerk/treasurer's office.
(Code 1982, § 14.04) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 1.110. Repeal of repealed acts.
No act of part of any act repealed by subsequent act of the board shall be deemed to be revived by the repeal of such repealed act, nor shall any ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore repealed be considered reordained or reenacted by virtue of the provisions of Sec. 1.108.
(Code 1982, § 14.05) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 1.111. General penalty.
(a) Forfeiture. Unless another penalty is expressly provided in this Code or in any ordinance of the village, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a forfeiture, which shall be as follows:
(1) First offense. For the first offense, a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00, together with costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
(2) Second offense. Any person found guilty of violating any ordinance or provision of this Code who shall previously have been convicted of a violation of the same ordinance or provision shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than
Chapter 1 General Provisions Page 9
$50.00 nor more than $500.00 for each such offense, together with costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid, but not to exceed six months.
(3) Continuing violations. The village may charge each day as a separate offense for continuing violations.
(b) Execution against defendant's property.
(1) Whenever any person fails to pay any forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of a court for violation of this Code or ordinance of the village, the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the defendant, or after the defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution against the property of the defendant for such forfeiture and costs.
(2) The imposition of a forfeiture does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise.
(c) Violations, injunctions, abatement and removal. It shall be unlawful to violate any of the provisions of this Code or order of the board or any Committee or Commission designated by the board. In case of any violation appropriate legal action or proceedings may be commenced to enjoin a violation of this ordinance, or seek abatement or removal. In addition, those actions commenced on behalf of the village may seek a forfeiture or penalty as outlined in this section.
(Code 1982, § 14.07; Ord. of 12-26-2009) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
State Law References--Penalty for violation of ordinances, Wis. Stat. § 66.0109; bail generally, Wis. Stat. § 66.0111; outstanding unpaid forfeitures, Wis. Stat. § 66.0115; actions for violations of municipal ordinances, Wis. Stat. § 66. 0114; fees of municipal courts, Wis. Stat. § 814.65; collection of forfeitures generally, Wis. Stat. § 778.10.
Sec. 1.112. Jurisdiction over children who are 12 years of age and older.
(a) Adoption of state statute. Wis. Stats. § 938.17(1) and § 938.17(2) are adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth in this section.
(b) Provisions of Code applicable to children who are 12 years of age or older. Subject to the provisions and limitations of Wis. Stats. § 938.17(1) and § 938.17(2), complaints alleging a violation of any provision of this Code and Wis. Stat. § 118.163 against children 12 years of age or older may be brought on behalf of the village and may be prosecuted utilizing the same procedures in such cases as are applicable to adults charged with the same offense.
Chapter 1 General Provisions Page 10
(c) Additional prohibited acts. In addition to any other provisions of this Code, no underage person as defined in Wis. Stat. § 125.02(20m) shall own, possess, ingest, buy, sell, trade, use a beverage, give away, or otherwise control any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage in violation of Wis. Stats. Chapter 125.
(d) Penalties.
(1) Violations of Wis. Stats. Chapter 125. The penalties for a violation of any provision of Wis. Stats. Chapter 125 incorporated in this Code by reference shall be in conformity with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 125.07(4)(bs), 125.07(4)(c)..
(2) No incarceration as penalty. Except as might otherwise be provided by law, the court shall not impose incarceration as a penalty for any person convicted of an offense prosecuted under this section.
(3) Forfeitures. Except as otherwise provided, any child 12 years of age or older who shall violate any provision of this Code shall be subject to a forfeiture in conformity with Wis. Stats. §§ 125.07(4)(bs), 125.07(4)(c), to wit: A minimum forfeiture of $25.00 and the maximum forfeiture that may be imposed on an adult for committing such a violation allowing up to 12 months for the payment of such forfeiture. In default of payment of such forfeiture, the court may suspend any license issued under Wis. Stats. Chapter 29 or suspend the child's operating privilege as defined in Wis. Stat. § 340.01(40) for not less than 30 days, nor more than 90 days.
(e) Victim notification. Each known victim of a child's act shall receive timely notice of the information required under Wis. Stat. § 938.346. , which statute is incorporated in this section by reference.
(Ord. of 3-7-1994, § 1) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 1.113. Costs to be included in forfeiture.
Whenever a forfeiture is imposed as punishment of any offense or when a penalty or forfeiture is recovered for doing any act or neglecting to do any act by virtue of any of the provisions of this Code, the judgment shall also include the costs of prosecution and shall provide for imprisonment in the county jail for default in payment of such fine, penalty, forfeiture or costs. All judgments shall be thus rendered, whether the provision under which a prosecution or proceeding is had shall specifically so direct or not.
(Code 1982, § 14.08) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 1 General Provisions Page 11
Sec. 1.114. Supplementation of Code.
When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, non-substantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ________ through ________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and
(5) Make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.
State Law References--Code of ordinances generally, Wis. Stat. § 66.0103.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 1.115. Clerk/treasurer to file documents incorporated by reference.
Whenever in this Code any standard, code, rule, regulation or other written or printed matter, other than the Wisconsin Statutes or other sections of this Code, are adopted by reference, they shall be deemed incorporated in this Code as if fully set forth in this Code. The clerk/treasurer is directed and required to file, deposit and keep in the office a copy of the code, standard, rule, regulation or other written or printed matter, as adopted. Materials so filed, deposited and kept shall be public records open for examination, with proper care, by any person during the clerk/treasurer's office hours, subject to such orders or regulations the clerk/treasurer may prescribe for their preservation.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 1 General Provisions Page 12
Sec. 1.116. Adoption of state statutes.
Whenever in this Code state statutes are adopted by reference, such adoption shall include all amendments to such statutes.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 1.117. Severability of provisions.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by reason of any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase. The village board declares that it would have passed this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Code, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases may be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
(Code 1982, § 14.09) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 2 Administration Page 1
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION*
Article I. In General
Sec. 2.100. Fees and charges.
Article II. Village Board
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.200. How constituted.
Sec. 2.201. President.
Sec. 2.202. Powers.
Sec. 2.203. Acquisition and disposal of property.
Sec. 2.204. Village finances.
Sec. 2.205. Construction of powers.
Division 2. Meetings
Sec. 2.206. Generally.
Sec. 2.207. Regular meetings.
Sec. 2.208. Special meetings.
Sec. 2.209. Adjournments.
Sec. 2.210. Meetings shall be public.
Sec. 2.211. Call to order.
_________
* Cross References--Any administrative ordinances of the village not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code, including but not limited to letting contracts without bids and releasing persons from liability saved from repeal, § 1.110(2); Administration and Enforcement of building regulations, Chapter 14 Article III.; Civil Emergencies, Chapter. 22; Court, Chapter 26; Elections, Chapter 30; Law Enforcement; Chapter 42; Planning Commission, Chapter 62; Administration and Enforcement of Subdivision Regulations, Chapter 74 Article II.; Taxation and Special Assessments, Chapter 78; Utilities, Chapter 86; Administration and Enforcement of Zoning Regulations, Sec. 94.16.15; Zoning Board of Appeals, Sec. 94.16.13.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 2
Sec. 2.212. Attendance; leave of absence.
Sec. 2.213. Disturbance, how suppressed.
Division 3. Committees
Sec. 2.214. Standing committees.
Sec. 2.215. Committee of the whole.
Sec. 2.216. Revolving loan fund committee.
Sec. 2.217. Special committees.
Article III. Officers and Employees
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.300. Appointive officials.
Sec. 2.301. Filling of vacancies.
Division 2. Administrator
Sec. 2.302. Appointment, term of office and removal.
Sec. 2.303. Functions and duties.
Sec. 2.304. Cooperation.
Sec. 2.305. Compensation.
Sec. 2.306. Residency.
Division 3. Clerk/Human Resource Director
Sec. 2.307. Appointment.
Sec. 2.308. Duties.
Sec. 2.309. Compensation.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 3
Division 4. Finance Director/Treasurer
Sec. 2.310. Appointment.
Sec. 2.311. Duties.
Sec. 2.312. Compensation.
Sec. 2.313 Receipts and earnings.
Division 5. Assessor
Sec. 2.314. Appointment.
Sec. 2.315. Compensation.
Division 6. Attorney
Sec. 2.316. Appointment.
Sec. 2.317. Compensation.
Division 7. Director of Public Works and Utilities
Sec. 2.318. Appointment.
Sec. 2.319. Qualifications/Duties.
Sec. 2.320. Compensation.
Article IV. Board of Review
Sec. 2.400. Adoption of statutes.
Sec. 2.401. How constituted.
Sec. 2.402. Clerk.
Sec. 2.403. Compensation.
Sec. 2.404. Time and place of meetings.
Sec. 2.405. Confidentiality of Income and Expense Records.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 4
Article V. Public Records
Sec. 2.500. Definitions.
Sec. 2.501. Duty to maintain records.
Sec. 2.502. Legal custodian(s).
Sec. 2.503. Public access to records.
Sec. 2.504. Access procedures.
Sec. 2.505. Limitations on right to access.
Sec. 2.506. Destruction of records.
Sec. 2.507. Preservation through microfilm.
Sec. 2.508. Records retention.
Article VI. Disposition of Public and Personal Property
Sec. 2.600. Purpose.
Sec. 2.601. Surplus criteria.
Sec. 2.602. Disposition of surplus property.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 5
ARTICLE I IN GENERAL*
Sec. 2.100. Fees and charges.
All fees and charges required by the village are set by the board from time to time in the village fee schedule, and none of the provisions of this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect such fees and charges.
ARTICLE II VILLAGE BOARD*
DIVISION 1 GENERALLY
Sec. 2.200. How constituted.
The trustees of the village shall constitute a board to be designated "Village Board of Weston," four of whom shall constitute a quorum, except when otherwise provided by law. The president may administer oaths and affidavits in all matters pertaining to the affairs of the village. Meetings of the board shall be held in the municipal center. Such board shall have the duties and powers as provided in this article.
(Code 1982, § 1.10(1): Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.201. President.
The president shall be by virtue of the office a trustee, and shall preside at all meetings of the board, and have a vote as trustee. The president shall sign all ordinances, rules, bylaws, regulations, commissions, licenses and permits adopted or authorized by the board and all orders drawn on the treasury except as provided by Wis. Stat. § 66.0607. The president shall maintain peace and good order, see that the ordinances are faithfully obeyed, and in case of disturbance, riot or other apparent necessity appoint as many special marshals as the president shall deem necessary, who for the time being shall possess all the powers and rights of constables. The president shall have charge of the village jail, which the president shall conduct in the manner provided in Wis. Stat. § 62.09(13)(c); but the president may delegate this duty to the constable or any police officer of the village.
(Ord. of 12-10-2011)
State Law References--Similar provisions, Wis. Stat. § 61.24.
__________
* Cross References--Elections, Chapter 30.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 6
Sec. 2.202. Powers.
(a) General grant. Except as otherwise provided by law, the board shall have the management and control of the village property, finances, highways, streets, navigable waters and the public service, and shall have power to act for the government and good order of the village, for its commercial benefit and for the health, safety, welfare and convenience of the public, and may carry its powers into effect by license, regulation, suppression, borrowing, taxation, special assessment, appropriation, fine, imprisonment, and other necessary or convenient means.
(b) Cooperation with other municipalities. The board, on behalf of the village, may join with other villages or cities in a cooperative arrangement for executing any power or duty in order to attain greater economy or efficiency, including joint employment of appointive officers and employees.
(c) Temporarily Incapacitated. The board will appoint a Vice President who will discharge the duties of the President if they are temporarily incapacitated because of physical or mental disability.
(Ord. of 12-10-2011 and Ord. No. 15-030 of 12-09-2015)
Sec. 2.203. Acquisition and disposal of property.
The board may:
(1) Acquire property, real or personal, within or outside the village, for parks, libraries, recreation, beautification, streets, water systems, sewage or waste disposal, harbors, improvement of watercourses, public grounds, vehicle parking areas, and for any other public purpose;
(2) Acquire, improve and beautify real property within or contiguous to the village, by means other than condemnation, for industrial sites;
(3) Construct, own, lease and maintain buildings on such property for instruction, recreation, amusement and other public purposes; and
(4) May sell and convey such property.
(5) Condemnation shall be as provided by Wis. Stats. Chapter 32.
(Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.204. Village finances.
The board may:
Chapter 2 Administration Page 7
(1) Levy and provide for the collection of taxes and special assessments;
(2) Refund any tax or special assessment paid, or any part thereof, when satisfied that it was unjust or illegal;
(3) Generally manage the village finances.
The board may loan money to any school district located within the village or within which the village is wholly or partially located in such sums as are needed by such district to meet the immediate expenses of operating the schools, and the board of the district may borrow money from the village accordingly and give its note for the money. No such loan shall be made to extend beyond August 30 next following its making or in an amount exceeding half the estimated receipts for such district as certified by the department of education and the local school clerk. The rate of interest on any such loan shall be determined by the village board.
State Law References--Similar provisions, Wis. Stat. § 61.34(1 through 4).
(Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.205. Construction of powers.
For the purpose of giving to villages the largest measure of self-government in accordance with the spirit of ARTICLE XI Section 3, of the Wisconsin State Constitution, it is declared that this article shall be liberally construed in favor of the rights, powers and privileges of the village to promote the general welfare, peace, good order and prosperity of the village and its inhabitants.
(Ord. of 12-10-2011)
DIVISION 2 MEETINGS
Sec. 2.206. Generally.
The board shall be vested with all the powers of the village not specifically given some other officer. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum, but a less number may adjourn from time to time. The president shall preside at all meetings when present. In the president's absence the board may select another trustee to preside. Regular meetings shall be held at such time as may be prescribed by bylaws. Special meetings may be called by any two trustees in writing, filed with the village clerk, who shall thereupon seasonably notify all the trustees of the time and place of the meetings in the manner directed by the bylaws. All meetings shall be open to the public. The board shall keep a record of all its proceedings, and the board shall cause the proceedings to be posted in the manner under Wis. Stat. § 985.02(2). The proceedings for the purpose of publication shall include the substance of every official action taken by the board. Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring the republication of any proceeding,
Chapter 2 Administration Page 8
ordinance or other matter or thing that has already been published according to law; nor shall
anything in this section be construed to relieve the village from publishing any proceeding,
ordinance or other matter or thing required by law to be published. Notwithstanding the
provisions of Wis. Stat. § 985.08(4), the fee for any such publication shall not exceed the rates
specified in Wis. Stat. § 985.08(1). The board has power to preserve order at its meetings,
compel attendance of trustees and punish nonattendance, and it shall be judge of the election and
qualification of its members. The president and board may by a three-fourths vote of all the
members of the board determine that an annual salary be paid the president and trustees. Salaries
heretofore established shall so remain until changed by ordinance and shall not be increased or
diminished during their terms of office.
(Ord. 09-04-2007; Ord. of 12-10-2011)
State Law References--Similar provisions, Wis. Stat. § 61.32.
Sec. 2.207. Regular meetings.
The regular meetings of the board shall be held at the municipal center on the first and third
Monday, of each month at 6:00 p.m. Any regular meeting falling on a legal holiday shall be
rescheduled at the preceding meeting.
(Code 1982, § 1.18(1); Ord. of 4-22-2011; Ord. of 12-10-2011; Amended via Ord. 16-051,
12/22/2016; Amended via Ord. 19-008, 05-14-2019)
Sec. 2.208. Special meetings.
Special meetings of the board may be called by the president at such times as he may appoint by
oral or written notice of the purpose and time thereof to each member, which notice shall be
given within a reasonable time prior to the meeting.
(Code 1982, § 1.18(2); Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.209. Adjournments.
Any regular or special meeting of the board may be adjourned by a majority of the members
present at a board meeting.
(Code 1982, § 1.18(3); Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Chapter 2 Administration Page 9
Sec. 2.210. Meetings shall be public.
Except as provided in Wis. Stat. § 19.85, all regular meetings of the Board shall be open and public, and all its procedures shall be recorded by the Village Clerk or under their authorization in record books kept for that purpose.
(Code 1982, § 1.18(4); Ord. of 12-10-2011; Ord. of 6-21-2013)
Sec. 2.211. Call to order.
The President shall promptly call each meeting of the Board to order at the hour fixed for the holding of such meeting. In case of the absence of the President, the senior Trustee shall call the meeting to order, and the Trustees present shall elect one of their number president pro tem.
(Code 1982, § 1.18(5); Ord. of 12-10-2011; Ord. of 6-21-2013)
Sec. 2.212. Attendance; leave of absence.
No member of the Board, the Village Clerk, the Chief of Police or designee whose duty it shall be to attend a Board meeting shall absent themselves from the meetings of the Board unless for illness or other good cause without first having obtained an authorized absence.
(Code 1982, § 1.18(6); Ord. of 12-10-2011; Ord. of 6-21-2013)
Sec. 2.213. Disturbance, how suppressed.
Whenever any disturbance or disorderly conduct shall occur in board meetings or rooms or halls adjacent to such meetings, the President or other presiding officer of the Board shall have power and authority by and with the aid of the Chief of Police or designee in attendance upon the meeting of the Board to cause the meeting to be cleared of all persons except members and officers of the Board.
(Code 1982, § 1.18(7); Ord. of 12-10-2011; Ord. of 6-21-2013)
DIVISION 3 COMMITTEES
Sec. 2.214. Standing committees.
(a) Appointments. The President appoints standing committees of the Village, subject to confirmation by the Board. The appointments to each Committee will be made at the first Village Board meeting in May. Standing committees shall review such matters as
Chapter 2 Administration Page 10
may be referred to them by the Board and shall submit recommendations for Board action. The Administrator and President, except where the President is designated a member of a Committee, shall serve on each committee as ex officio members.
(b) Conflicting provisions. While this section represents guidelines detailing committee roles and responsibilities, the provisions regarding the Administrator shall prevail in any area in which a conflict arises. In any instance where statutes may conflict with these provisions, the statutes shall apply.
(c) Membership. Unless otherwise noted, each committee shall consist of five members, two of which shall be Village Trustees. The President shall not serve as the chairperson of any committee, unless expressly designated by law.
(d) Established. The following standing committees are established:
(1) Finance Committee.
a. Present the annual budget to the Board first in temporary form for a public hearing, and in final form for board approval. To enable the committee to prepare the budget, all budget requests shall be filed with the Administrator in a timely fashion to allow the Administrator to prepare a recommended budget for consideration by the committee.
b. Monitor expenditures, supervise collection of accounts and coordinate and investigate village borrowing.
c. Review requests for non-budgeted or emergency expenditures and make recommendations to the full Board.
d. Review any proposed changes in Village insurance coverage and risk management programs.
e. Recommend establishment of user and license fees.
f. Coordinate Village requests for grant funding.
g. Make recommendations on the issuance and conditions of issuance of licenses and franchises.
h. Supervise the cable television franchise and conduct negotiations relating to such franchise.
i. In cooperation with the Administrator, recommend Board consideration of policies and procedures regarding the financial operations of the Village and the delivery of services to the public.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 11
j. Consider any other matter the Board may refer.
(2) Human Resources.
a. Advise the board regarding potential and pending litigation involving the Village.
b. In cooperation with the Administrator, recommend for Board consideration policies and procedures regarding personnel issues of the Village.
c. Oversee the selection of contract services for labor negotiation services.
d. Monitor, in cooperation with the Administrator, the general personnel policies for the Village, including such things as sick leave, vacations, holidays and leaves of absence.
e. In cooperation with the Administrator, review and make recommendations for additions and deletions of positions to the Board and make recommendations regarding disciplinary actions involving Village employees.
f. Make recommendations to the Board for establishment of a village safety program and, after such a program is in place, supervise such program.
g. Act on all matters so enumerated in the Village of Weston Employee Policy and Procedure Manual as being assigned to the Human Resources Committee.
h. Consider any other matter the Board may refer.
(3) Public Works and Utility Committee.
a. Review and recommend a property and infrastructure budget to the Administrator and Finance Committee.
b. In cooperation with the Administrator, recommend Board consideration of appropriate policies and procedures regarding public works, utility operations, property and buildings operations and the delivery of services to the public.
c. Coordinate the Village's refuse collection activities.
d. Recommend actions regarding use and maintenance of Village streets.
e. Review and finalize the annual capital improvements program.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 12
f. Review bidding documents and requests for proposals for capital projects for public works projects. Review contractor proposals and bids for all authorized public works construction, and recommend contract awards to the Board for appropriate action.
g. Be responsible for the construction and maintenance of all Village streets and sidewalks, the operation and maintenance of all sewer and water systems, and make appropriate recommendations to the board regarding the operation, maintenance and improvements to such systems.
h. Develop and recommend policies and guidelines for public works projects and activities such as special assessments.
i. Review and approve any unusual requests for use of village buildings.
j. Review and recommend any proposed changes, improvements, remodeling, additions, etc., to the municipal building, other village buildings or other property.
k. Recommend policy guidelines regarding public improvements.
l. Mediate disputes between property owners and the Village regarding public improvements.
m. Review bidding documents and requests for proposals (RFPs) for municipal building projects. Review contractor proposals and bids for all authorized municipal building construction and recommend contracts to the board for appropriate action.
n. Review traffic and pedestrian safety matters and recommend needed action for Board approval.
o. Develop emergency operation plans.
p. Consider any other matter the Board may refer.
(4) Parks and Recreation Committee.
a. Prepare and maintain long-range plans for parks and recreational facilities.
b. Recommend the acquisition, purchase, acceptance by gift, sale or such other disposition of property and/or equipment to the Board for appropriate action.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 13
c. Prepare and submit grant applications to the appropriate agencies for the acquisition and development of parks and recreational facilities.
d. Operate and maintain the Village park and recreational trail system.
e. Review and recommend a parks and recreation budget to the Administrator and Finance Committee.
f. In cooperation with the Administrator, recommend Board consideration of policies and procedures regarding parks and parkway operations and the delivery of such services to the public.
g. In cooperation with the Community Development Authority govern, manage, improve and care for all public parks and parkways located within the Village.
h. Consider any other matter the Board may refer.
(5) Community Development Authority.
a. Need. The Village declares that a need for blight elimination, slum clearance, urban renewal programs and community development projects and housing projects exists in the Village of Weston.
b. Creation. Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.1335 the Village hereby creates a housing and community development authority which shall be known as the “Community Development Authority” of the Village of Weston. It is a separate body politic for the purpose of carrying out blight elimination, slum clearance, urban renewal programs and projects and housing projects.
c. Powers and Duties. The Community Development Authority has all powers, duties and functions set out in Wis. Stats.§§ 66.1201 and 66.1333 for housing and redevelopment authorities. As to all housing projects initiated by the Community Development Authority it shall proceed under Wis. Stat. § 66.1201. As to all projects relating to blight elimination, slum clearance, urban renewal and redevelopment programs the Community Development Authority shall proceed under Wis. Stats. §§ 66.1105, 66.1301 to 66.1329, 66.1331, or 66.1337 as determined appropriate by the Village Board on a project by project basis.
d. Appointment of Members. The Village President shall, with the confirmation of the Board, appoint seven (7) resident persons having sufficient ability and experience in the fields of urban renewal, community development and housing, as Commissioners of the Community Development Authority. Two (2) of the Commissioners shall be members
Chapter 2 Administration Page 14
of the Board and shall serve during their term of office as Board trustees. The terms of non-Board members shall be four (4) years.
e. Consider any other matter the Board may refer.
(e) President to designate chairpersons; other appointments. The President shall designate the chairperson of each standing committee. All committee appointments except designation of chairperson shall be subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the Board.
(f) Chairperson to designate a Trustee to discharge members’ duties. In the absence of a meeting quorum the Chairperson may appoint a Village Trustee to discharge a committee member’s duties.
(g) Term of office. Unless otherwise noted, the term of office for each committee shall be for three years, and shall become effective after appointment at the first Village Board meeting in May. Terms of office for Village Trustees shall be one year of their elected term.
(h) Meetings. Each standing committee shall meet as necessary to accomplish the responsibilities of each committee. All committee meetings shall convene at the municipal building unless otherwise noticed.
[Ord. of 9-18-2000, § 1; Ord. of 5-21-2001(1), § 1; Ord. of 4-22-2011; Ord. of 12-10-2011; Ord. of 6-21-2013; Ord. of 02-21-2014; Ord. No. 15-007 of 6-16-2015; Amended via Ord. 15-012, 6-17-15; Ord. No. 15-030 of 12-09-2015; Ord. No. 18-001 of 01-20-2018; Ord. No. 18-010 of 03-29-2018; Ord. No. 19-009 of 8-21-2019; Ord. No. 20-006 of 5-12-2020]
Sec. 2.215. Committee of the whole.
The president may call for a meeting of the entire board as a committee of the whole for discussion on any matter. The president shall be chairperson of the committee of the whole.
(Ord. of 12-10-2011; Ord. 16-051, 12/22/2016)
Sec. 2.216. Revolving loan fund committee.
A revolving loan fund committee is established composed of seven citizen members who shall be responsible for the management of the village's revolving loan program, consistent with state requirements.
(Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Chapter 2 Administration Page 15
Sec. 2.217. Special committees.
The president may, from time to time, appoint such special committees as he deems advisable or as provided for by motion or resolution by the board stating the number of members and object thereof to perform such duties as may be assigned to them.
ARTICLE III OFFICER AND EMPLOYEES*
DIVISION 1 GENERALLY
Sec. 2.300. Appointive officials.
(a) Term. All appointive officials, except as otherwise provided, shall hold their office for the term of two years and until their successors are lawfully appointed and qualified.
(b) Filling of vacancies. Vacancies in appointive offices shall be filled by appointment for the residue of the unexpired term by the appointing power and in the manner prescribed in this division for making regular full-term appointments.
(c) Certificate of appointment. When an appointive official has filed the oath and bond as required, the village clerk/human resource director shall issue to him a certificate of appointment. If the appointment is to a commission, the appointee shall file the certificate with the secretary of the commission.
(Code 1982, §§ 1.03(2), 1.05(3), 1.06(2); Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.301. Filling of vacancies.
A vacancy shall occur in case of the dismissal or death of any official or in case of the removal of any officer from the Village, or when any officer elected or appointed in, for or from any part of the Village shall remove his residence without the limits of such Village, or when any official shall refuse or neglect for 20 days after notice of his election or appointment to qualify and enter upon the discharge of his duties.
(Code 1982, § 1.06(3); Ord. of 12-10-2011)
__________
* Cross References--Any ordinance setting salaries of village officers and employees or any personnel regulations saved from repeal, § 1.110(13).
Chapter 2 Administration Page 16
DIVISION 2 ADMINISTRATOR
Sec. 2.302. Appointment, term of office and removal.
The Village Administrator shall be appointed by a majority vote of the Board on the basis of merit with due regard to training, experience, administrative ability and general fitness for the office. The Village Administrator shall hold office for an indefinite term subject to removal at any time by a majority vote of the Board. This section, however, shall not preclude the Board from establishing other employment terms and conditions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code or statute.
(Ord. of 7-29-1991, § 1(2, 5); Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.303. Functions and duties.
The Village Administrator, subject to the limitations defined in resolutions and ordinances of the Village, statutes and administrative rules, shall be the chief administrative officer of the Village, responsible only to the President and the Board for the proper and efficient administration of the business and affairs of the Village with powers and duties as follows:
(1) General duties.
a. Be responsible for the administration of all day-to-day operations of the village government, including the monitoring of all ordinances, resolutions, board meeting minutes, statute and administrative rules.
b. Maintain a plan of administration, including an organization chart, which defines the authority and responsibility for all non-statutory positions of the Village; and submit it to the Board for adoption as the official organization and administrative procedure plan for the Village and make suggestions for amendments and/or changes when needed.
c. Establish when necessary administrative procedures to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of the village government consistent with current practices in local government and not inconsistent with subsection (1)c. of this section or the directives of the President and Board.
d. Serve as ex officio nonvoting member of all boards, commissions and committees of the Village, except as specified by the Village Board or statute. Serve as an alternate for the village president, and/or village trustees, and/or other village committee members and representatives on all non- Village, (except the Everest Metro Police Department Joint Finance Committee and the S.A.F.E.R. Board of Directors) boards, commissions, and committees, except as directed by the village board, by-law, or statute.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 17
e. Keep informed concerning current federal, state and county legislation and administrative rules affecting the Village, and submit appropriate reports and recommendations to the board.
f. Represent the village in matters involving legislative and intergovernmental affairs as authorized and directed as to that representation by the President and Board.
g. Act as public information officer for the Village, with the responsibility of assuring that the news media are kept informed about the operations of the Village and that all open meeting rules and regulations are followed.
h. Establish and maintain procedures to facilitate communications between citizens and village government to assure that complaints, grievances, recommendations and other matters receive prompt attention by the responsible official, and to assure that all such matters are expeditiously resolved.
i. Promote the economic well-being and growth of the Village through public and private sector cooperation.
j. The Administrator shall be the head of emergency management services for the Village of Weston per Wis. Stat. § 323.14(1)(b)(2).
(Ord. No. 15-030 of 12-09-2015; Ord. No. 19-004 of 2/21/2019)
(2) Responsibilities to the Board.
a. Carry out all directives of the President and Board that require administrative implementation and make prompt and complete reports to the president and board of any difficulties or problems encountered.
b. Attend all meetings of the Board, assisting the President and the Board as required in the performance of their duties.
c. In coordination with the President, the Board, and the village clerk, ensure that appropriate agendas are prepared to all meetings of the board, all board committees, and all other appropriate committees and commissions of the Village, together with such supporting material as may be required, with nothing in this subsection being construed as to give the Village Administrator authority to limit or in any way prevent matters from being considered by the board, or any of its committees and commissions.
d. Assist in the preparation of ordinances and resolutions as requested by the President or the Board, or as needed.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 18
e. Keep the President and Board regularly informed about the activities of the Village Administrator's office by oral or written report at regular and special meetings of the board.
(Ord. No. 15-030 of 12-09-2015)
(3) Personnel.
a. Be responsible for the administrative direction and coordination of all employees of the Village according to established organization procedures.
b. Recommend to the board the hiring, appointment, promotion, and suspension of department heads. Recommend to the board the termination of certain department heads, except for statutory officers.
c. In consultation with the appropriate department head, be responsible for the hiring, appointment, promotion, and when necessary for the good of the Village, the suspension or termination of employees below the department head level.
d. Nothing in this section shall preclude an employee from exercising their grievance rights under state law.
e. Serve as personnel officer for the Village with responsibilities to see that complete and current personnel records, including specific job descriptions, for all village employees are kept; evaluate in conjunction with department heads the performance of all employees on a regular basis; recommend salary and wage scales for village employees not covered by collective bargaining agreements; develop and enforce high standards of performance by village employees; assure that village employees have proper working conditions; work closely with department heads to promptly resolve personnel problems or grievances.
f. Assist in labor contract negotiations and collective bargaining issues.
g. Work closely with department heads to assure that employees receive adequate opportunities for training to maintain and improve their job-related knowledge and skills and act as the approving authority for requests by employees to attend conferences, meetings, training schools, etc., provided that funds have been budgeted for these activities.
h. All duties as so enumerated in the Village of Weston Employee Policy and Procedure Manual as being assigned to the Administrator.
(Ord. No. 15-030 of 12-09-2015; (Ord. No. 18-010 of 03-27-2018)
Chapter 2 Administration Page 19
(4) Budgeting.
a. Be responsible for preparation of the annual village budget in accordance with guidelines as may be provided by the Board, and in coordination with department heads and pursuant to statute, for review and approval by the president and the Board prior to submission to the annual budget hearing.
b. Administer the budget as adopted by the Village at its annual budget hearing.
c. Keep informed concerning the availability of federal, state and county funds for local programs. Assist department heads and the board in obtaining these funds under the direction of the president and the board.
(Ord. of 7-29-1991, § 1(4); Ord. of 12-10-2011; Ord. No. 15-030 of 12-09-2015)
Sec. 2.304. Cooperation.
All officials, employees and the Administrator of the Village shall cooperate with one another so that the village government shall function effectively and efficiently.
(Ord. of 7-29-1991, § 1(5); Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.305. Compensation.
The Village Administrator shall receive such compensation as the Board shall prescribe.
(Ord. of 7-1-1991, § 1(5)(c); Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.306. Residency.
Refer to Section 2.303(1)(j).
(Ord. of 7-29-1991, § 1(3); Ord. of 12-10-2011; Ord. No. 15-030 of 12-09-2015)
DIVISION 3 CLERK/EMPLOYEE RESOURCE MANAGER
Sec. 2.307. Appointment.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 20
Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 61.197(1), the combined position of Village Clerk/Employee Resources Manager shall be through the appointment of a person by a majority of the members of the Board and for the term specified in Wis. Stat. § 61.23(1).
(Ord. of 9-17-1996, § 1(a); Ord. of 12-10-2011; Ord. No. 18-010 of 03-27-2018)
Sec. 2.308. Duties.
The Village Clerk/Employee Resources Manger shall have those duties as provided by statute and this Code.
(Ord. of 9-17-1996, § 1(b); Ord. of 12-10-2011; Ord. No. 18-010 of 03-27-2018)
Sec. 2.309. Compensation.
The Village Clerk/Employee Resources Manager shall receive such compensation as the Board shall prescribe and pursuant to the provisions of this Code.
(Ord. of 9-17-1996, § 1(c); Ord. of 12-10-2011; Ord. No. 18-010 of 03-27-2018)
DIVISION 4 FINANCE DIRECTOR/TREASURER
Sec. 2.310. Appointment.
Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 61.197(1), the combined position of Village Finance Director/Treasurer shall be through the appointment of a person by a majority of the members of the Board and for the term specified in Wis. Stat. § 61.23(1).
(Ord. of 9-17-1996, § 1(a); Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.311. Duties.
a. Report regularly to the Board on the current fiscal position of the village.
b. Supervise the accounting system of the Village and ensure that the system employs methods in accordance with current professional accounting practices.
c. In consultation with the appropriate department heads, serve as the purchasing agent for the Village, supervising all purchasing and contracting for supplies and services, subject to the purchasing procedures established by the Board and any limitation contained in statute.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 21
d. The Village Finance Director/Treasurer shall have those duties as provided by statute and this Code.
(Ord. of 9-17-1996, § 1(b); Ord. of 12-10-2011; Ord. No. 15-030 of 12-09-2015)
Sec. 2.312. Compensation.
The Village Finance Director/Treasurer shall receive such compensation as the Board shall prescribe and pursuant to the provisions of this Code.
(Ord. of 9-17-1996, § 1(c); Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.313. Receipts and earnings.
Whenever any village officer or employee is required to turn over any receipts or earnings to the Village Finance Director/Treasurer monthly, such funds received by him during the month shall be turned over on or before the tenth day of the succeeding calendar month.
(Code 1982, § 1.25; Ord. of 12-10-2011)
DIVISION 5 ASSESSOR
Sec. 2.314. Appointment.
The Village Assessor shall be appointed by the Board.
(Code 1982, § 1.02(2)(a); Ord. of 12-10-2011)
State Law References--Selection of officers, Wis. Stat. § 61.197(1).
Sec. 2.315. Compensation.
The Village Assessor shall receive such compensation as the Board shall prescribe.
(Code 1982, § 1.02(2)(b); Ord. of 12-10-2011)
DIVISION 6 ATTORNEY
Sec. 2.316. Appointment.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 22
The Village Attorney shall be appointed by the Board. The attorney need not be a resident of the Village.
(Code 1982, § 1.02(1)(a); Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.317. Compensation.
The Village Attorney shall receive such compensation as the Board shall prescribe.
(Code 1982, § 1.02(1)(b); Ord. of 12-10-2011)
DIVISION 7 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS AND UTILITIES
Sec. 2.318. Appointment.
The Village Director of Public Works and Utilities shall be appointed by the Board.
(Code 1982, § 1.02(3)(a); Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.319. Qualifications/Duties
(1) Qualifications. The Village Director of Public Works and Utilities shall be a registered professional civil engineer licensed to practice in the state at the time of his employment or within six months thereafter. He shall also have had practical engineering experience aggregating at least five years, not less than two of which shall have been in the field of municipal engineering or public works management.
(2). Duties. In addition to other duties as shall from time to time be determined by the Village Board, the Director of Public Works shall supervise the operation and maintenance of the stormwater facilities and all appurtenant structures connected to the system.
(Code 1982, § 1.02(3)(b); Ord. of 3-15-04; Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.320. Compensation.
The Village Director of Public Works and Utilities shall receive such compensation and expense allowance as the Board shall prescribe.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 23
(Code 1982, § 1.02(3)(c); Ord. of 12-10-2011)
ARTICLE IV BOARD OF REVIEW*
Sec. 2.400. Adoption of statutes.
The duties and functions of the Village Board of Review shall be as prescribed by statute, particularly as set forth in Wis. Stat. §§ 70.46 and 70.47.
(Code 1982, § 1.13(5); Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.401. How constituted.
The Trustees of the Village shall comprise the Village Board of Review.
(Code 1982, § 1.13(1); Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.402. Clerk.
The Village Clerk/Human Resource Director shall be the village clerk of the Board of Review and keep an accurate record of all proceedings.
(Code 1982, § 1.13(2); Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.403. Compensation.
The members of the Board of Review, except members who are full-time employees or officers of the Village, shall receive such compensation as shall be established by the board. It shall be the duty of the Village Assessor to attend the sessions of the Board of Review.
(Code 1982, § 1.13(3); Ord. of 12-10-2011)
_________
* Cross References--Taxation and Special Assessments, Chapter 78.
State Law References--Boards of review generally, Wis. Stat. § 70.46.
Sec. 2.404. Time and place of meetings.
The Board of Review shall meet annually on the second Monday of May at the municipal center. The board shall proceed as outlined in Wis. Stat. § 70.47.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 24
(Code 1982, § 1.13(4); Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.405. Confidentiality of Income and Expense Records.
TITLE AND PURPOSE
This ordinance is entitled Village of Weston Ordinance Relating to Confidentiality of Income and Expense Records. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide confidentiality of the records of taxpayers who provide income and expense record information to the Village Assessor under Wis. Stat. § 70.47(7)(af), and to exempt that information from being subject to the right of inspection or copying as a public record under Wis. Stat.§ 19.35(1).
AUTHORITY
The Village Board of the Village of Weston, Marathon County, Wisconsin, has the specific authority under Wis. Stat.§ 70.47(7)(af), to provide confidentiality to taxpayers of certain income and expense records provided to the Village Assessor by those taxpayers for purposes of valuation of real property in the Village of Weston, owned by those taxpayers.
ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE
This ordinance, adopted by a majority of the Village Board on a roll call vote with a quorum present and voting and proper notice having been given, adopts by reference Wis. Stat.§ 70.47(7)(af), providing for the confidentiality of information regarding income and expenses.
ADOPTION BY REFERENCE AND CONFIDENTIALITY REQUIREMENT
Wis. Stat. § 70.47(7)(af), is adopted by reference. Income and expense information provided by a property owner to the Village Assessor for the purpose of establishing valuation for assessment purposes by the income method of valuation shall be confidential and not a public record open to inspection or copying under Wis. Stat. § 19.35(1). Unless a court determines that the information is inaccurate, the information provided to the assessor is not subject to the right of inspection or copying as a public record under Wis. Stat. § 19.35(1).
EXCEPTIONS TO CONFIDENTIALITY
A Village officer in the Village of Weston may make public disclosure or allow access to income and expense information provided by a property owner to the Village Assessor for the purpose of establishing valuation for assessment purposes by the income method of valuation in his or her possession as provided below:
A. The Village Assessor shall have access to the provided income and expense information in the performance of his or her duties.
B. The Board of Review may review the provided income and expense information when needed, in its opinion, to decide upon a contested assessment.
C. Any person or body who has the right or whose duty in his or her office is to
Chapter 2 Administration Page 25
review the provided income and expense information shall have access to the information.
D. A Village officer who is complying with a court order may release the provided income and expense information in accordance with the court's order.
E. If the provided income and expense information has been determined by a court to be inaccurate, the information is open and public.
F. If the property owner has provided written approval for public disclosure or limited disclosure to that person, and the Village Board of the Village of Weston has approved the disclosure, the provided income and expense information is open and public to the extent approved.
PENALTY PROVISIONS
Any person, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity that fails to comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, pay a forfeiture of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, plus the applicable surcharges, assessments, and costs for each violation. Each day a violation exists or continues constitutes a separate offense under this ordinance. In addition, the Village Board may seek injunctive relief from a court of record to enjoin further violations.
SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this ordinance or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this ordinance that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this ordinance are severable.
(Ord. of 7-21-2011; Ord. of 12-10-2011)
ARTICLE V PUBLIC RECORDS
Sec. 2.500. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Authority - means any of the following Village entities having custody of a Village record: an office, Village official, agency, board, commission, committee, department or public body corporate and politic created by constitution, resolution, law, ordinance, rule or order; or a formally constituted subunit of the foregoing.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 26
Custodian - means that officer, department head, division head, or employee of the Village designated under Sec. 2.502 or otherwise responsible by law to keep and preserve any Village records or file, deposit or keep such records in his or her office, or is lawfully in possession or entitled to possession of such public records and who is required by this section to respond to requests for access to such records.
Record - means any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual, or electromagnetic information is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical form or characteristics, which has been created or is being kept by an authority. A record includes, but is not limited to, handwritten, typed or printed pages, maps, charts, photographs, films, recordings, tapes (including computer tapes), computer printouts and optical disks. A record does not include drafts, notes, preliminary computations and like materials prepared for the originator's personal use or prepared by the originator in the name of a person for whom the originator is working; materials which are purely the personal property of the custodian and have no relation to his or her office; materials to which access is limited by copyright, patent or bequest; and published materials in the possession of an authority other than a public library which are available for sale, or which are available for inspection at a public library.
Sec. 2.501. Duty to Maintain Records.
(a) Except as provided under Sec. 2.506, each officer and employee of the Village shall safely keep and preserve all records received from his or her predecessor or other persons and required by law to be filed, deposited or kept in his or her office or which are in the lawful possession or control of the officer or employee or his or her deputies, or to the possession or control of which he or she or they may be lawfully entitled as such officers or employees.
(b) Upon the expiration of an officer's term of office or an employee's term of employment, or whenever the office or position of employment becomes vacant, each such officer or employee shall deliver to his or her successor all records then in his or her custody and the successor shall receipt therefore to the officer or employee, who shall file said receipt with the Village clerk. If a vacancy occurs before a successor is selected or qualifies, such records shall be delivered to and receipted for by the clerk, on behalf of the successor, to be delivered to such successor upon the latter's receipt.
(Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.502. Legal Custodian(s).
Chapter 2 Administration Page 27
(a) The Village Clerk, or in his/her absence or disability or in the case of vacancy, the Deputy Clerk, is hereby designated the legal custodian of all Village records.
(b) Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the Village clerk or the clerk's designee shall act as legal custodian for the Village Board and for any committees, commissions, boards, or other authorities created by ordinance or resolution of the Village Board.
(c) For every authority not specified in (a) or (b) of this subsection (c), the authority's chief administrative officer is the legal custodian for the authority, but the officer may designate an employee of his or her staff to act as the legal custodian.
(d) Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in his or her absence or the absence of his or her designee.
(e) The legal custodian shall have full legal power to render decisions and to carry out the duties of an authority under Wis. Stat. § 19.21 et seq., , and this article. The designation of a legal custodian does not affect the powers and duties of an authority under this article.
(Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.503. Public Access to Records.
(a) Except as provided under Sec. 2.505, any person has a right to inspect a record and to make or receive a copy of any record as provided in Wis. Stat. § 19.35(1).
(b) Records will be available for inspection and copying during all regular office hours.
(c) If regular office hours are not maintained at the location where records are kept, the records will be available for inspection and copying upon at least 48 hours' advance notice of intent to inspect or copy.
(d) A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those available to Village employees to inspect copy or abstract a record.
(e) The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may impose other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an original record if the record is irreplaceable or easily damaged.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 28
(f) A requester shall be charged a fee to defray the cost of locating and copying records as follows:
(1) The cost of photocopying shall be twenty-five cents per page. Said cost has been calculated not to exceed the actual, necessary and direct cost of reproduction.
(2) If the form of a written record does not permit copying, the actual and necessary cost of photographing and photographic processing shall be charged.
(3) The actual full cost of providing a copy of other records not in printed form on paper, such as films, computer printouts and audio or videotapes, shall be charged.
(4) If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost thereof shall also be charged.
(5) There shall be no charge for locating a record unless the actual cost therefore exceeds fifty dollars, in which case the actual cost shall be determined by the legal custodian and billed to the requester.
(6) The legal custodian shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees and may require a cash deposit adequate to assure payment if such estimate exceeds $50.
(7) Elected and appointed officials of the Village shall not be required to pay for public records they may reasonably require for the proper performance of their official duties.
(8) The legal custodian may provide copies of a record without charge or at a reduced charge where he or she determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public interest.
(g) Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 19.34, and the guidelines therein listed, each authority shall adopt, prominently display and make available for inspection and copying at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a notice containing a description of its organization and the established times and places at which, the legal custodian from whom, and the methods whereby, the public may obtain information and access to records in its custody, make requests for records, or obtain copies of records, and the costs thereof.
(Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Chapter 2 Administration Page 29
Sec. 2.504. Access Procedures.
(a) A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal custodian. A request shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably describes the requested record or the information requested. However, a request for a record without a reasonable limitation as to subject matter or length of time represented by the record does not constitute a sufficient request. A request may be made orally, but a request must be in writing before an action to enforce the request is commenced under Wis. Stat. § 19.37. Except as provided below, no request may be refused because the person making the request is unwilling to be identified or to state the purpose of the request. No request may be refused because the request is received by mail, unless prepayment of a fee is required under Subsection 2.503(f)(6). A requester may be required to show acceptable identification whenever the requested record is kept at a private residence or whenever security reasons or federal law or regulations so require.
(b) Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as practicable and without delay, either fill the request or notify the requester of the authority's determination to deny the request in whole or in part and the reasons therefor. If the legal custodian, after conferring with the Village Attorney, determines that a written request is so general as to be unduly time consuming, the party making the request may first be required to itemize his or her request in a manner which would permit reasonable compliance.
(c) A request for a record may be denied as provided in Sec. 2.505. If a request is made orally, the request may be denied orally unless a demand for a written statement of the reasons denying the request is made by the requester within five business days of the oral denial. If a written request is denied in whole or in part, the requester shall receive a written statement of the reasons for denying the request. Every written denial of a request shall inform the requester that if the request for the record was made in writing, then the determination is subject to review upon petition for a writ of mandamus under Wis. Stat. § 19.37(1), or upon application to the Attorney General or a district attorney.
(Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.505. Limitations on Right to Access.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 30
(a) As provided by Wis. Stat. § 19.36, the following records are exempt from inspection under this section:
(1) Records specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal law or authorized to be exempted from disclosure by state law;
(2) Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law enforcement purposes if federal law or regulations require exemption from disclosure or if exemption from disclosure is a condition to receipt of aids by the state;
(3) Computer programs, although the material used as input for a computer program or the material produced as a product of the computer program is subject to inspection; and
(4) A record or any portion of a record containing information qualifying as a common law trade secret.
(b) As provided by Wis. Stat. § 43.30, public library circulation records are exempt from inspection under this section.
(c) In responding to a request for inspection or copying of a record which is not specifically exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after conferring with the Village Attorney, may deny the request, in whole or in part, only if he or she determines that the harm to the public interest resulting from disclosure would outweigh the public interest in full access to the requested record. Examples of matters for which disclosure may be refused include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Records obtained under official pledges of confidentiality which were necessary and given in order to obtain the information contained in them;
(2) Records of current deliberations after a quasi-judicial hearing;
(3) Records of current deliberations concerning employment, dismissal, promotion, demotion, compensation, performance, or discipline of any Village officer or employee, or the investigation of charges against a Village officer or employee, unless such officer or employee consents to such disclosure;
(4) Records concerning current strategy for crime detection or prevention;
Chapter 2 Administration Page 31
(5) Records of current deliberations or negotiations on the purchase of Village property, investing of Village funds, or other Village business whenever competitive or bargaining reasons require nondisclosure;
(6) Financial, medical, social or personal histories or disciplinary data of specific persons which, if disclosed, would be likely to have a substantial adverse effect upon the reputation of any person referred to in such history or data;
(7) Communications between legal counsel for the Village and any officer, agent or employee of the Village, when advice is being rendered concerning strategy with respect to current litigation in which the Village or any of its officers, agents or employees is or is likely to become involved, or communications which are privileged under Wis. Stat. § 905.03.
(d) If a record contains information that may be made public and information that may not be made public, the custodian of the record shall provide the information that may be made public and delete the information that may not be made public from the record before release. The custodian shall confer with the Village Attorney prior to releasing any such record and shall follow the guidance of the Village Attorney when separating out the exempt material. If in the judgment of the custodian and the Village Attorney there is no feasible way to separate the exempt material from the nonexempt material without unreasonably jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt material, the entire record shall be withheld from disclosure.
(Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.506. Destruction of Records.
(a) Village officers may destroy the following nonutility financial records of which they are the legal custodians and which are considered obsolete, after completion of any required audit by the bureau of municipal audit or an auditor licensed under Wis. Stats. Chapter 442, but not less than seven years after payment or receipt of any sum involved in the particular transaction, unless a shorter period has been fixed by the State Public Records Board pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 16.61(3)(e), and then after such shorter period:
(1) Bank statements, deposit books, slips and stubs;
(2) Bonds and coupons after maturity;
Chapter 2 Administration Page 32
(3) Canceled checks, duplicates and check stubs;
(4) License and permit applications, stubs and duplicates;
(5) Payrolls and other time and employment records of personnel included under the Wisconsin Retirement Fund;
(6) Receipts;
(7) Vouchers, requisitions, purchase orders and all other supporting documents pertaining thereto;
(8) Special assessment records, after final payment is made.
(9) General Assessment rolls and related records, including board of review minutes.
(10) Municipal contracts and papers relating thereof.
(11) Insurance policies.
(b) Village officers may destroy the following utility records of which they are the legal custodians and which are considered obsolete after completion of any required audit by the bureau of municipal audit or an auditor licensed under Wis. Stat. Chapter 442, subject to State Public Service Commission regulations, but not less than seven years after the record was effective unless a shorter period has been fixed by the State Public Records Board pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 16.61(3)(e), and then after such a shorter period, except that water stubs, receipts of current billings and customers' ledgers may be destroyed after two years:
(1) Water and sewer stubs and receipts of current billings;
(2) Customer's ledgers;
(3) Vouchers and supporting documents pertaining to charges not included in plant accounts;
(4) Other utility records with the written approval of the State Public Service Commission.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 33
(c) Village officers may destroy the following records of which they are the legal custodian and which are considered obsolete, but not less than seven years after the record was effective unless another period has been set by statute, and then after such a period, or unless a shorter period has been fixed by the State Public Records Board pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 16.61(3)(e), and then after such a shorter period:
(1) Assessment rolls and related records, including board of review minutes;
(2) Contracts and papers relating thereto;
(3) Correspondence and communications;
(4) Financial reports other than annual financial reports;
(5) Insurance policies;
(6) Justice dockets;
(7) Oaths of office;
(8) Reports of boards, commissions, committees and officials duplicated in the official council minutes;
(9) Resolutions and petitions;
(10) Voter record cards.
(d) Unless notice is waived by the State Historical Society, at least sixty days' notice shall be given the State Historical Society prior to the destruction of any record as provided by Wis. Stat. § 19.21(4)(a).
(e) Any tape recordings of a governmental meeting of the Village may be destroyed, erased or reused no sooner than ninety days after the minutes of the meeting have been approved and published, if the purpose of the recording was to make minutes of the meeting.
(Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.507. Preservation Through Microfilm.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 34
Any Village officer or the director of any department or division of Village government may
keep and preserve public records in his or her possession by means of microfilm or other
photographic reproduction method. Such records shall meet the standards for photographic
reproduction set forth in Wis. Stat. § 16.61(7)(a) and (b), and shall be considered original records
for all purposes. Such records shall be preserved along with other files of the department or
division and shall be open to public inspection and copying according to the provisions of state
law and of sections Secs. 2.503 through 2.505 of this Chapter.
(Ord. of 12-10-2011)
Sec. 2.508. Records Retention.
WISCONSIN MUNICIPAL RECORDS RETENTION SCHEDULE
UTILITY RECORDS (Sewer, Water & Electric)
Refer to Sec. 2.506(b) Destruction of Records.
WORK PERMITS - Until Child turns 21.
SALES & USE TAX RETENTION
Returns, schedules, work papers, etc. - 6 years.
REAL PROPERTY RECORDS RETENTION
Deeds – Permanent.
Opinions of title – Permanent.
Abstracts and certificates of title – Permanent.
Title insurance policies – Permanent.
Plats – Permanent.
Easements – Permanent.
Leases - 7 years after termination of lease and destroy.
Vacation or alteration of plat – Permanent.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 35
ASSESSMENT RECORDS RETENTION
Final assessment roll – Permanent.
Personal property blotters - 7 Years.
Assessment workroll - 2 Years.
Assessment property cards - Until superseded.
ACCOUNTING DOCUMENTS
ACCOUNTS PAYABLE RETENTION
Purchase invoices - 7 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Vouchers - 7 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE RETENTION
Accounts receivable invoices - 7 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Receipts - 7 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Collection blotters - 1 year after audit and destroy.
JOURNALS, REGISTERS & LEDGER RETENTION
Receipts journal - 15 years and destroy.
Voucher/order registers - 15 years and destroy.
General journal - 15 years and destroy.
Journal voucher - 15 years and destroy.
Appropriation journal - 15 years and destroy.
Appropriation journal voucher - 15 years and destroy.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 36
General ledger - 15 years and transfer to the State Historical Society for preservation with authority to weed.
Trial Balance - Until audited and destroy.
PAYROLL RETENTION
Payroll support records - 2 years and destroy provided the record has been audited
Employee’s withholding allowance certificate - 5 years after being superseded and destroy.
Employee’s Wisconsin withholding exemption certificate - 5 years after being superseded and destroy.
Employee enrollment and waiver cards - 2 years after being superseded or terminated and destroy.
Employee earning records - 5 years and destroy.
Payroll check register - 5 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Payroll distributing record - 5 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
PAYROLL RETENTION
Payroll voucher - 5 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Canceled payroll checks - 5 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Wage and tax statement - 5 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Report of Wisconsin income tax withheld - 5 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Employer’s annual reconciliation of Wisconsin income tax withheld from wages - 5 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Federal deposit tax stubs - 5 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 37
Quarterly report of federal income tax withheld - 5 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Annual report of federal income tax withheld - 5 years and destroy.
State’s quarterly report of wages paid - 5 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Monthly memorandum report - 5 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Quarterly report, payroll summary - 5 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Premium due notices - 5 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
PURCHASING RETENTION
Purchase requisitions - 1 year after purchase order issued.
Purchase orders - 7 years and destroy.
Receiving report - 7 years and destroy.
Bids, successful - 7 years after the contract has expired and destroy.
PURCHASING RETENTION
Bids, unsuccessful - 1 year after purchase order issued.
Inventory of property - Retain until superseded and destroy.
BUDGETS AND AUDITS RETENTION
Budget worksheets - 3 years and destroy.
Minutes of the board of estimates – Permanent.
Final budget – Permanent.
Audit reports – Permanent.
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS RETENTION
Chapter 2 Administration Page 38
Preliminary resolution - 2 years and destroy provided a copy of the report is on file with the public works project records.
Report on special assessment notice and hearing - 2 years and destroy provided a copy of the report is on file with the public works project records.
Waiver of special assessment notice and hearing - 1 year and destroy, or retain 1 year after the final audit resolution is approved and destroy.
Final resolution – Permanent.
Certified special assessment roll - Retain until all assessments are collected or for 7 years whichever is longer.
Statement of new special assessments - 5 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Special assessment payment register - Retain until all assessments are collected or for 7 years, whichever is longer.
BOARD OF REVIEW RETENTION
Form of objection to property assessment and supporting documentation - 7 years after the final action of the Board of Review or the completion of appeal and destroy.
Minutes book of Board of Review - 7 years and then transfer to the state historical society for preservation with authority to weed.
Proceeding of the Board of Review on audio tapes or as stenographic notes including any transcriptions thereof - 7 years after the final action of the Board of Review or the completion of appeal and destroy.
Notice of determinations of the Board of Review - 7 years after the final action of the Board of Review or the completion of appeal and destroy.
TAX CALCULATION RETENTION
Tax levy certification of the school district clerk - 3 years and destroy provided the record has been audited.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 39
Certificates of apportionment - 3 years and destroy provided the record has been audited.
State shared aid payment notices, any and all - Retain 6 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Final worksheet for determining allowable levy - 5 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Statement of taxes - Retain final copy permanently.
Statement of new special assessments - 5 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Statement of sewer service charges - 5 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
General property tax credit certification - 5 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Explanation of property tax credit certification - 5 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Real property tax roll - This record is transferred to the County Treasurer.
Personal property tax roll - Retain 15 years and then transfer to the state historical society for preservation with authority to weed.
TAX COLLECTION RETENTION
Escrow account list Retain until superseded and destroy.
Receipts For cities and villages - retain 7 years and destroy provided record has been audited. For towns, - retain 15 years and destroy.
Receipt stub book - 7 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Tax collection blotters - Retain until audited and destroy.
Statement of taxes remaining unpaid - Retain with the tax roll.
Tax settlement receipt - 5 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Municipal treasurer’s settlement - 5 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 40
Personal property tax roll - 15 years and then transfer to the state historical society for preservation with authority to weed.
LICENSES AND PERMITS RETENTION
Applications accepted and rejected.
All liquor and beer related license applications - 4 years and destroy.
All other license applications - 3 years and destroy.
Receipts - 7 years and destroy.
License stubs All liquor and beer related license stubs - 4 years. All other stubs 3 years and destroy.
Cat and dog licenses monthly reported to county clerk (by treasurer) - 3 years and destroy.
MUNICIPAL BORROWING RETENTION
Bond procedure record - 7 years after bond issue expires and destroy.
Bond register - 7 years after bond issue expires and destroy.
Bond payment register - 7 years after bond issue expires or following payment of all outstanding matured bonds/notes/coupons, whichever is later, and destroy.
Canceled bonds, coupons, and promissory notes - until audited and destroy.
Certificates of destruction - 7 years after bond issue expires or following payment of all outstanding matured bonds/notes/coupons, whichever is later, and destroy.
FIDELITY BOND RETENTION
Fidelity bond - 5 years after bond expires and destroy.
Fidelity bond book - 5 years after last bond entered expires and destroy.
Oath of office - 5 years after the term of service covered by the oath has ended and destroy.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 41
LEGAL OPINIONS RETENTION
Legal opinions – Permanent.
VOTERS, CAMPAIGN & ELECTION RECORDS RETENTION
Active registration cards - Retain the active file as long as current.
Canceled registration cards - 4 years after cancellation and destroy.
Poll list and registry list - 2 years after nonpartisan primary or election, 4 years after partisan primary or election.
Nomination papers - 90 days after the election and destroy.
Certificate listing candidates nominated by caucus - 90 days after the election and destroy.
Campaign registration statements (EB-1) - 6 years and destroy.
Campaign financial reports (EB-2) - 6 years and destroy.
Election notices in cities and villages - 90 days after the election and destroy.
Election notices in towns - 1 year after the date of the election and destroy. If the election is contested - retain one year after the contest has been settled and destroy.
Applications for absentee ballots - 90 days after the election and destroy provided applications for federal elections are retained 22 months and destroy.
Paper ballots and voting machine recorders local elections - 90 days after the election and destroy.
Voting machine recorders may be reactivated 14 days following a primary or 60 days following a spring or general election.
Tally sheets Local elections - 90 days after the election and destroy.
Inspector’s statement of defective and challenged ballots Local elections - 90 days after the election and destroy.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 42
Ballots, voting machine records, tally sheets, inspector statement of defective and challenged.
Ballots federal elections - Retain for 22 months and destroy.
ENGINEERING AND PUBLIC WORKS RETENTION
Field notes – Permanent.
Benchmark books – Permanent.
Section corner monument logs – Permanent.
Aerial photographs - Retain until superseded and destroy.
Village map – Permanent
Water, storm, and sanitary sewer main maps – Permanent.
Profile and grade books – Permanent.
Excavation plans of private utilities – Permanent.
Index to maps – Permanent.
Preliminary subdivision plats - Retain until superseded by the final plat and destroy.
Final subdivision plats – Permanent.
Annexation plats – Permanent
Assessor’s plats – Permanent.
Structure plans for municipal buildings and bridges - Retain for life of the structure and then transfer to the state historical society for preservation with authority to weed.
Annual reports – Permanent.
Records of the board of public works (includes minutes of the meetings of the board and supporting documents submitted to the board) – Permanent.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 43
Records of the plan commission (includes minutes of the meetings of the board and supporting documents submitted to the board) – Permanent.
Records of the zoning board of appeals (includes minutes of the meetings of the board and supporting documents submitted to the board) – Permanent.
House number and address change file – Permanent.
Street vacations and dedications, copies - Retain for active reference life and destroy.
Permits (include permits for the excavation of streets by private utility companies) -3 years and destroy.
Petitions for street and sewer systems - 2 years and destroy.
Special assessment calculations - 2 years and destroy
TV sewer inspections records - Retain until superseded and destroy.
State highway aids program records - 7 years and destroy provided the record has been audited.
PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS & CONTRACTS RETENTION
Notice to contractors - Retain in the contract file 7 years after completion of the project and destroy. For unsuccessful bidders - retain 2 years and destroy.
Certified check - Retain until the contract has been signed and return to bidder.
Bid bond - Retain in the contract file 7 years after completion of the project and destroy. For unsuccessful bidders - retain 2 years and destroy.
Bidder’s proof of responsibility - Retain in the contract file 7 years after completion of the project and destroy. For unsuccessful bidders - retain 2 years and destroy.
Bids - Retain in the contract file 7 years after completion of the project and destroy. For unsuccessful bidders - retain 2 years and destroy.
Affidavit of organization and authority - Retain in the contract file 7 years after completion of the project and destroy. For unsuccessful bidders - retain 2 years and destroy.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 44
Performance bond - Retain in the contract file 7 years after completion of the project and destroy.
Contract - Retain in the contract file 7 years after completion of the project and destroy.
Master project files - retain 20 years and destroy provided the files of architecturally or culturally significant projects are offered to the state historical society.
Blue prints - Retain until superseded by the as-built tracings and destroy.
As-build tracings - Retain for the life of the project and destroy provided the tracings of architecturally or culturally significant projects are offered to the state historical society.
STREETS AND HIGHWAYS RETENTION
Street operations file - 2 years after created or superseded and destroy.
Street and sidewalk maintenance and repair records - 25 years and destroy.
Tree planting, inspection, trimming and removal records - 25 years and destroy.
Stock control records - 2 years after created or superseded and destroy.
Fuel usage reports - 2 years after created or superseded and destroy.
Heavy equipment and vehicle inventory ledger - Retain for the life of the equipment and/or vehicle or until the inventory ledger is superseded and destroy.
Vehicle maintenance histories - Retain for the life of the vehicle and destroy.
Vehicle expense reports - Retain for the life of the vehicle and destroy.
Payroll support records - 2 years and destroy.
Purchasing records - 7 years and destroy provided the record has been audited.
Complaint ledger - 2 years and destroy.
Monthly reports - 2 years and destroy.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 45
Annual reports - Retain permanently.
PARKS RETENTION
Master park plan - Retain permanently.
Plats - Retain permanently.
Aerial photographs - Retain permanently.
Supervisor’s daily report of work completed - 2 years and destroy.
Payroll support records - 2 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Reservation requests - 30 days and destroy. If payment receipts are attached, retain - 7 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Master reservation book - 2 years and destroy.
Records of the park and recreation committee (includes minutes of the meetings of the board and supporting documents submitted to the board) - Retain permanently.
BUILDING PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS RETENTION
Application and permits - For life of structure.
Code compliance inspection reports - For life of structure.
Inspection address file - For life of structure.
Certificates of occupancy - Retain until superseded and destroy.
Energy calculation worksheets - 3 years and destroy.
State approved commercial building plans - 4 years and destroy. Plans for structures and significant remodeling should be transferred to the state historical society for preservation with authority to weed.
Permit fee receipts - 7 years and destroy provided record has been audited.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 46
Permit ledger - 7 years and destroy.
Village attorney’s case file - copy 1 year after the case has been closed and destroy.
Quarter section maps, copies - Retain until superseded and destroy.
Records of the building board of appeals (including minutes of the meetings of the board and supporting documents submitted to the board) - Permanent. Retain office reference copies 5 years and destroy.
Records of the zoning board of appeals (includes minutes of the meetings of the board and supporting documents submit to the board) - Permanent. Retain office reference copies 5 years and destroy.
Records of the plan commission (including minutes of the meetings of the commission and supporting documents submitted to the commission) - Retain permanently.
Sign code advisory committee minutes – Permanent.
SANITATION AND CONSUMER PROTECTION RETENTION
Public swimming pool survey reports, campgrounds and camping survey reports, mobile home park survey reports, recreational and education camp survey reports, restaurant and tavern survey reports, hotels, motels, tourists rooms, and rooming houses survey reports, retain dairy case and mile products reports, retail and wholesale food establishment reports, nursing home survey reports, and vending machine survey reports - 5 years and destroy.
Restaurant license applications - 3 years and destroy.
Retail dairy products licenses - 3 years and destroy.
Food handling and sale permits - 3 years and destroy.
Septic tank permits – Permanent.
Open air burning permits - 6 months and destroy.
Weights and measures, field test reports and package weighting reports - 3 years and destroy.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 47
Complaints and follow-up reports - 5 years from the date the complaint was resolved and destroy.
Utility disconnections in private residence investigation reports - 3 years and destroy.
Request to declare a medical emergency - 3 years and destroy.
COMMITTEE, BOARD & COUNCIL RECORDS RETENTION
Minutes of any kind - Retain permanently.
Audio tapes - Retain one year and destroy or erase tape, 90 days if made only for the purpose of writing the minutes.
Ordinances, resolutions - Retain permanently.
Ordinance book - Retain permanently.
Affidavits of publication - Retain 3 years and destroy provided affidavits of publication of ordinance are maintained permanently in the ordinance book.
All other records - Minimum period seven (7) years.
A NOTE ON RECORDS RETENTION: The State Historical Society no longer has facilities to house records you do not have space for. Heretofore, it was possible to store your permanent records with them. Now if a record is to be retained by your municipality permanently it is incumbent upon your municipality to find a place in which to store it. Wis. Stat. § 19.21(4) now offers a method of destroying records which no longer have to be retained without the need to notify the Historical Society each time you destroy such records. This is accomplished by adopting a Records Retention Schedule and an Ordinance approved by them. Contact the State Historical Society for further information. The Schedule herein (for copyright reasons) is not in the format they wish you to use.
NOTE OF CAUTION: In spite of (and notwithstanding) this retention schedule, if the records you are considering to discard have anything to do with a state or federal grant or federal pass through money C Wisconsin Fund, Wisconsin Development Fund, Community Development Block Grant, Urban Development Block Grant, EPA, EDA, etc., contact the grant agency first. As a rule of thumb, do not even think about discarding these kinds of documents unless 10 years have passed.
Chapter 2 Administration Page 48
(Ord. of 8-6-10; Ord. of 12-10-2011)
ARTICLE VI DISPOSITION OF PUBLIC AND PERSONAL PROPERTY
Sec. 2.600. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and procedures governing the disposition of Village-owned property. This chapter shall be construed and administered in furtherance of the Village’s best interests, and to ensure that Village-owned property is disposed of at or near its fair market value to the extent reasonably practicable.
Sec. 2.601. Surplus criteria.
The Joint Employee-Management Committee may make recommendations to the Property & Infrastructure Committee requesting them to declare personal property surplus if at least one of the following criteria is satisfied:
(a) The Village has or likely soon will have no practical, efficient or appropriate use for the property;
(b) The purpose originally served by the property or its use no longer exists;
(c) The property is damaged, deteriorated or otherwise inoperable, and repairing the same would be unwise or impractical.
Sec. 2.602. Disposition of Surplus property.
Disposition of surplus property shall proceed as provided under this section.
(1) Surplus Property Valued Under one hundred dollars ($100). The Joint Employee-Management Committee may obtain an appraisal of the property prior to disposition thereof. If any member of the Committee has interest in obtaining the item to be appraised, they may not participate in determining the appraised value. With respect to any item of surplus property the estimated fair market value of which does not exceed one hundred dollars ($100), if the Joint Employee-Management Committee finds employee interest in the property they may go through an employee name drawing process, or if there is no employee interest dispose of the item in any commercially reasonable manner.
(2) Surplus Property Valued in Excess of one hundred dollars ($100). The Joint Employee-Management Committee will obtain an appraisal of the property prior to disposition thereof. If any member of the Committee has interest in obtaining the item to be appraised, they may not participate in determining the appraised value. With respect to
Chapter 2 Administration Page 49
any item of surplus property the estimated fair market value of which exceeds one hundred dollars ($100), the Joint-Employee Management Committee shall notify the Property & Infrastructure Committee of their intent to dispose of the property. The Joint Employee Management Committee will provide the Public Works and Utility Committee with a description of the property, its estimated fair market value, and the reason for the surplus declaration. The Joint Employee-Management Committee will make a recommendation to send the item through a bidding process, notifying the public, or send the item to auction.
(3) The Joint Employee-Management Committee will, through a consensus, deem an item unsalable because of obsolescence, wear and tear, or other reason and will make a determination to recycle, dismantle and sell as scrap, or discard.
(Created via Ord. 16-048, 12/7/2016; Amended via Ord. 19-008, 05-14-2019)
Chapter 4 Video and Cable Television Service Providers Page 1
Chapter 4
VIDEO AND CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE PROVIDERS
Sec. 4.100. General Provisions.
Sec. 4.200. Definitions.
Sec. 4.300. Video Service Provider Fee and Public, Educational, and Government Access (PEG) Channel Monetary Support.
Sec. 4.400. Public, Educational, and Government Access (PEG) Channel Requirements.
Sec. 4.500. Police Powers, Design and Construction Standards and Rights of Ways.
Chapter 4 Video and Cable Television Service Providers Page 2
VIDEO AND CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE PPROVIDERS
Sec. 4.100. General Provisions.
The provisions of Wis. Stat. § 66.0420 are hereby incorporated as though fully set forth herein. The additional provisions of this chapter supplement those provisions of the state statues as allowed therein. Any person who owns, leases, operates, controls, constructs or maintains a video service or cable television service shall comply at all times with the provisions herein when constructing, operating or maintaining a video service or cable television service in the Village.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 4.200. Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as those terms are defined in Wis. Stat. § 66.0420(2), which is incorporated by reference as though fully set forth herein.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 4.300. Video Service Provider Fee and Public, Educational, and Government Access (PEG) Channel Monetary Support.
(a) Video Service Provider Fee. Video service providers and cable operators shall pay a video service provider fee to the Village in an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the provider’s gross receipts.
(b) Supporting Documentation. Payment of the fees set forth in sub. (1) above shall be accompanied by documentation verified by an agent or officer with the authority to legally bind the provider that is sufficient for the Village to verify the accuracy of the fees being paid by the provider. The failure to provide such documentation shall subject the provider to a forfeiture of not less than $100 nor more than $5,000 per day until such time the documentation is provided to the Village.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 4.400. Public, Educational, and Government Access (PEG) Channel Requirements.
(a) Number of PEG Channels. Video service providers and cable operators shall provide capacity for up to two (2) PEG channels.
(b) Location of PEG Channels. PEG channels must be carried on any service tier that is viewed by more than fifty percent (50%) of the video service provider’s or cable operator’s customers. Video service providers or cable operators may not charge an extra fee nor require the rental of special equipment in order for their customers to
Chapter 4 Video and Cable Television Service Providers Page 3
view such PEG channels if such fees or equipment are not required to view any of the non-PEG channels on such service tiers.
(c) Quality of PEG Channels. Video service providers and cable operators shall not carry a PEG television signal in a lesser format or lower resolution than that afforded to a non-broadcast digital programmer carried on the video or cable system. The signal quality of PEG channels shall be indistinguishable or better than the signal of the non-PEG channels carried by the video service provider or cable operator.
(d) Origination Points. Video service providers and cable operators shall supply and maintain upstream capacity from all origination points (a/k/a “live drops”) as the Village may identify and shall provide sufficient capacity for carriage of a television signal from each of these origination points at all times.
(e) Substantial Utilization of PEG Channels and PEG Programming.
(1) Procedures for Disconnection Due to Failure to Substantially Utilize PEG Channel
a. Written Notice of Objection to Program as Not Locally Produced. A video service provider or cable operator must provide written notice to the PEG channel director within ten days of the first or original airing of any program that the video service provider or cable operator is objecting to the program as having not been locally produced. Such notice shall describe with particularity the program being objected to, the date and time the program was first aired and the factual basis supporting the objection. Failure to timely provide this notice waives the objection.
b. Written Notification of Failure to Substantially Utilize Channel. A video service provider or cable operator must provide written notification to the PEG channel director within 10 days following any week in which the video service provider or cable operator objects that the PEG channel has not been substantially utilized. Such notice shall describe with particularity the time period being objected to, the dates and times during the week in which qualify programming was not aired and the factual basis supporting the objection. Failure to timely provide this notice waives the objection.
c. Written Notification of Intention to Disconnect, Reprogram or Drop PEG Channel. A video service provider or cable operator must provide 120 days advance written notification to the PEG channel director that the video service provider or cable operator intends to disconnect, reprogram or drop a PEG channel. A video service provider or cable operator may not disconnect, reprogram or drop any PEG channel without providing such timely written notice. Furthermore, should any PEG channel director provide the video service provider or cable operator with a written
Chapter 4 Video and Cable Television Service Providers Page 4
response that the PEG channel was substantially utilized during the time period in question or will be substantially utilized by the municipality, the video service provider or cable operator shall not disconnect, reprogram or drop the PEG channel.
d. Penalty for Failing to Provide Notice. If any video service provider or cable operator disconnects, reprograms or drops any PEG channel without providing notice as required in subs. a. through c. above, the video service provider or cable operator shall be subject to the following:
i. Immediate reinstatement of the PEG channel to its location in the channel line-up prior to the disconnection, reprogramming or dropping of the channel.
ii. A forfeiture of not less than $1,000 nor more than $10,000 for each day that the PEG channel is disconnected, reprogrammed or dropped.
(2) Locally Produced Programming.
a. “Locally produced programming” shall include programming produced by any PEG channel, programming that has not been commercially aired, and programming produced for original airing in the broadcast market in which it was produced. The term “locally produced” shall not require that the programming was created, filmed or produced in the Village of Weston or Marathon County area. PEG stations may share and exchange programming content in order to meet the substantial utilization requirements of Wis. Stat. § 66.0420(5)(b).
(f) Underwriting of Programming. PEG channels may transmit non-commercial programming to subscribers generally or to specific recipients of video service providers or cable operators. Nothing herein shall in anyway prohibit or prevent PEG channels from accepting grants or sponsorships in support of such programming nor shall PEG channels be prohibited from acknowledging such grants or sponsorships before, during or immediately after such PEG programming has been broadcast in such a manner that is similar to the manner in which the Public Broadcasting System (PBS) acknowledges the substantially similar support of its programming content. Such acknowledgements shall comply with the requirements of 47 USC § 399b as though the PEG channel were a public broadcast station.
(g) Notice of Intention to Move PEG Channel Locations or Designations. Any video service provider or cable operator who intends to move any PEG channel from the channel designations in effect at the time this ordinance is enacted may only make such a change after providing 60 days advance written notice to the PEG channel director. Additionally, such video service provider or cable operator shall engage in a
Chapter 4 Video and Cable Television Service Providers Page 5
public education program of such intensity and duration as to reasonably inform the general public of the proposed PEG channel designations.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 4 Video and Cable Television Service Providers Page 6
Sec. 4.500. Police Powers, Design and Construction Standards and Rights of Ways.
(a) Subject to Police Powers. Video service providers and cable operators are subject to the police power of the Village to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety, health and welfare of the public. The grant of a statewide video or cable franchise, does not render or to any extent lose, waive, impair or lessen the lawful powers and rights, now or hereafter vested in the Village under the Constitution and Statutes of the State of Wisconsin to regulate the use of streets and public ways or to regulate any matter affecting the safety, health and welfare of the public. The Village shall make the video service providers’ and cable operators’ history of compliance with such codes and ordinances available to the Department of Financial Institutions so that the Department may determine the providers’ or operators’ legal, financial and technical qualifications to provide video services.
(b) Design, Permits, Construction and Excavation. Video service providers and cable operators shall comply with all applicable Village codes and ordinances and shall be subject to any forfeitures so specified for any violations thereof. The Village shall make the history of compliance with such codes and ordinances available to the Department of Financial Institutions so that the Department may determine the providers’ or operators’ legal, financial and technical qualifications to provide video services.
(Ord. of 1-16-2013)
Chapter 6 Alcohol Beverages Page 1
Chapter 6
ALCOHOL BEVERAGES*
Article I. In General
Sec. 6.100. Provisions of state law adopted by reference.
Sec. 6.101. Penalties.
Article II. Licenses and Fees
Sec. 6.102. License restrictions; delinquent taxes, assessments, other claims.
Sec. 6.103. Retail liquor and beer license fees.
Sec. 6.104. Issuance of alcohol beverage licenses.
Sec. 6.105. Fermented malt beverages; closing hours and restricting hours of sale.
Article III. Adult Entertainment Establishments
Sec. 6.106. Legislative authorization.
Sec. 6.107. Findings of fact.
Sec. 6.108. Intent.
Sec. 6.109. Definitions.
Sec. 6.110. Prohibited acts.
__________
* Cross References--Businesses, Chapter 18; drunkenness, § 54.109.
State Law References--Alcohol beverages generally, Wis. Stats. § 125.01 et seq.
Chapter 6 Alcohol Beverages Page 2
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 6.100. Provisions of state law adopted by reference.
(a) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all provisions of Wis. Stats. Chapter 125, as amended, relating to alcohol beverages, are adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated in this chapter by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter.
(b) Sections of Wis. Stats. Chapter 125 adopted by reference shall include but not be limited to the following:
Wis. Stat. § 125.02
(Definitions)
Wis. Stat. § 125.04
(General licensing requirements)
(c) The Village Board intends to discourage underage possession and consumption of alcohol, even if done within the confines of a private residence, and intends to hold persons civilly responsible who host events or gatherings where persons under 21 years of age possess or consume alcohol regardless of whether the person hosting the event or gathering supplied the alcohol. The Village Board finds:
(1) Events and gatherings held on private or public property where alcohol is possessed or consumed by persons under the age of twenty-one are harmful to those persons and constitute a potential threat to public health requiring prevention or abatement.
(2) Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect underage persons, as well as the general public, from injuries related to alcohol consumption, such as alcohol overdose or alcohol related traffic collisions.
(3) Alcohol is an addictive drug which, if used irresponsibly, could have drastic effects on those who use it as well as those who are affected by the actions of an irresponsible user.
(4) Often, events or gatherings involving underage possession and consumption occur outside the presence of parents. However, there are times when the parent(s) is/are present and condone the activity, and in some circumstances, provide the alcohol.
(5) A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person responsible for hosting an event or gathering where underage possession or consumption occurs.
(d) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings:
Chapter 6 Alcohol Beverages Page 3
(1) “Event or gathering” means any group of three or more persons who have assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
(2) “Host” or “allow” means to aid, conduct, entertain, organize, supervise, control or permit a gathering or event.
(3) “Premises” shall have the meaning under Wis. Stat. § 125.02(14m) , and shall also include all public or private property, regardless of whether said property is described in a license or permit.
(4) “Underage person” is any individual under twenty-one (21) years of age.
(5) “Control” means the power to direct, manage, oversee, supervise, organize, conduct, and shall also mean, hosting, allowing or permitting or sponsoring. A person need not be present on the premises to be in control.
(6) “Knowingly permit” means there must be evidence or a reasonable inference from evidence that the person knew or should have known that consumption of alcoholic beverages would occur.
(d) Prohibited Acts A person is responsible for violating this section if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels or conspires with or otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.
(e) Exceptions.
(1) This chapter does not apply to conduct solely between an underage person and his or her parents while the parent is present and in control of the underage person.
(2) This chapter does not apply to situations where underage persons are lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course and scope of employment.
Wis. Stat. § 125.07
(Underage and intoxicated persons; presence on licensed premises; possession; penalties)
Wis. Stat. § 125.09
(General restrictions)
Wis. Stat. § 125.11(1)
(Penalties--except for imprisonment)
Wis. Stat. § 125.12
(Revocations, suspensions, refusing to issue or renew)
Wis. Stat. § 125.13
(Report of suspension, revocation or imposition of penalty)
Wis. Stat. § 125.14
(Enforcement provisions)
Wis. Stat. § 125.17
(Issuance of operators licenses)
Chapter 6 Alcohol Beverages Page 4
Wis. Stat. § 125.18
(Issuance of managers licenses)
Wis. Stat. § 125.185
(Provisional retail licenses)
Wis. Stat. § 125.25
(Class "A" licenses)
Wis. Stat. § 125.26
(Class "B" licenses)
Wis. Stat. § 125.27
(Class "B" permits)
Wis. Stat. § 125.28
(Wholesalers' licenses)
Wis. Stat. § 125.32
(General restrictions and requirements)
Wis. Stat. § 125.33
(Restrictions on dealings between brewers, wholesalers and retailers)
Wis. Stat. § 125.51
(Retail licenses and permits)
Wis. Stat. § 125.66
(Sale without license; failure to obtain permit; penalties)
Wis. Stat. § 125.67
(Evading provisions of law by giving away intoxicating liquor; penalties)
Wis. Stat. § 125.68
(General restrictions and requirements)
Wis. Stat. § 125.70
(Trade show samples)
(Ord. of 7-23-1984, § 2) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 18-002, 3/27/2018]
Sec. 6.101. Penalties.
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of Wis. Stats. Chapter 125 adopted in this chapter by reference shall be assessed a forfeiture in an amount not exceeding the maximum fine provided in Wis. Stats. Chapter 125 for such violation and in default of payment shall be confined in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days. Any person violating any other provision of this chapter shall upon conviction be punished by a forfeiture in an amount not exceeding $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such fine and costs shall be committed to the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days.
(b) Upon written charges made and filed with the village clerk/treasurer by the chief of police or by any resident of the village that any person has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the village may revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license or permit allowing the sale of alcohol beverages to the premises upon which the violation takes place. The procedures of Wis. Stat. § 125.12(2) shall be followed before any such license may be revoked or suspended.
Chapter 6 Alcohol Beverages Page 5
(c) In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (b) of this section, any person violating this chapter shall upon conviction pay a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $300.00 together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period of 30 days. Each day during which a violation shall continue shall constitute a new and separate offense.
(Ord. of 7-23-1984, § 4; Ord. of 12-5-1990, § 8) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
ARTICLE II LICENSES AND FEES
Sec. 6.102. License restrictions; delinquent taxes, assessments, other claims.
(a) Premises. No initial or renewal alcohol beverage license shall be granted for any premises for which taxes, assessments or other claims of the village are delinquent and unpaid.
(b) Persons. No initial or renewal alcohol license shall be granted to any person delinquent in payment:
(1) Of any taxes, assessments or other claims owed to the village.
(2) Of a forfeiture resulting from a violation of any ordinance.
(3) To the state of any state taxes owed.
(c) Required Period Open for Business. Any establishment for which a Class “A” or Class “B” fermented malt beverage, “Class A” or “Class B” intoxicating liquor or “Class C” wine license has been granted shall be open for business and in full operation within 6 months of granting of such license. In the event any such business is not open and in full operation within 6 months of granting said license it shall be deemed revoked.
(Ord. No. 562, § 1, 6-13-1983, Ord. of 6-28-2006 and Ord. of 9-24-2010) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 6.103. Retail liquor, beer and Operator license fees.
(a) Class A licenses. The annual fees for class A licenses shall be as set by board resolution, and this fee shall be listed in the schedule of licenses and permit fees.
(b) Class B licenses. The annual fees for class B licenses shall be as set by board resolution, and this fee shall be listed in the schedule of licenses and permit fees.
(c) Reserve Class B Liquor Licenses. The fee for reserve Class B Liquor License shall be $10,000.00 for the initial issuance. The annual fee for renewal of a Reserve Class B liquor
Chapter 6 Alcohol Beverages Page 6
license shall be the same as the Class B liquor license fee listed in the schedule of licenses and permit fees.
(d) Class C licenses. The annual fees for a class C license shall be as set by board resolution, and this fee shall be listed in the schedule of licenses and permit fees.
(e) Operator’s Licenses. The fee for an operator's license shall be as set by board resolution, and this fee shall be listed in the schedule of licenses and permit fees and except as otherwise provided shall be issued for one year and shall expire on June 30 of the year for which issued.
(f) Liquor, beer and operator late filing application fee. All renewal applications for liquor, beer and operator licenses shall be filed by the application deadline. A late fee of 10% shall be imposed on any license renewal application filed after the application deadline.
(Code 1982, ord. Of 11-06-06 § 12.03 ; Ord. of 9-24-2010; Ord. of 6-9-2011) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 17-023, 7/26/17]
Sec. 6.104. Issuance of alcohol beverage licenses.
(a) Village of Weston Policy Guidelines for Alcohol Beverage Licenses
(1) Intent. It is the responsibility of the Village Clerk and the Everest Metro Police Department to screen applications for alcohol beverage licenses in the Village of Weston. The Village of Weston adopts the following guidelines in order to specify the reasons for denying, non-renewing or revoking an alcohol beverage license.
All applications for beer, wine or liquor license are forwarded to the Everest Metro Police Department for a background check. The Police Department will review the forwarded application and make a recommendation to the Village Board regarding approval or denial. The Village Board makes the final decision on licensing by either accepting or rejecting the recommendation. If the Village Board denies, revokes, suspends or does not renew a license, that person will be notified, in writing, of the denial and the guideline that was used as reason for the denial.
All applications for an operator’s license are forwarded to the Everest Metro Police Department for a background check. The Police Department will review the forwarded application and make a recommendation to the Village Clerk regarding approval or denial. The Village Clerk will make the final decision on licensing by either accepting or rejecting the recommendation. If the Village Clerk denies, revokes, suspends or does not renew a license, that person will be notified, in writing, of the denial and the guideline that was used as reason for the denial.
The following guidelines are established by the Village Board to provide a framework for which persons are eligible for issuance of an alcohol beverage license (i.e. grounds for denial) and a framework for suspension, revocation or non-renewal.
Chapter 6 Alcohol Beverages Page 7
There is broad discretion retained on behalf of the Village Board to consider each case on an individual basis. Deviation from the guidelines may be allowed if mitigating circumstances exist, which may include, but are not limited to, the particular circumstances documented or the length of time that has expired since the offense.
Individuals granted an alcohol beverage license must act in cooperation with law enforcement to enforce the alcohol beverage laws, drunk driving laws, and assist in minimizing disturbances of the peace and maintaining the safety of the community. Therefore, individuals with a past history of negative or uncooperative contacts with police agencies will be scrutinized; provided, however, that the Village Board shall not discriminate against such applicants based on a prior arrest or conviction record, pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.322, 111.335 and 125.12(1)(b), unless said arrest or conviction record substantially relates to the circumstances of the particular licensed activity. It is with these goals in mind that these guidelines are adopted.
For the purposes of these guidelines, an “alcoholic beverage license”. “license” or “permit” constitutes a retail license or an operator’s license. These guidelines also apply to corporations, limited liability companies, agents and partnerships. A corporation or limited liability company with an arrest or conviction record may be issued a license if the corporation or limited liability company has terminated its relationship with all the individuals whose actions directly contributed to the conviction [Wis. Stat. § 125.04(5)(c)].
The Village Board will only deny renewal of, suspend or revoke a current alcohol beverage license under these guidelines, or other justification provided by law, if the person committed an offense substantially related to the licensed activity within the license year period immediately preceding the year for which the person is seeking renewal or within the license year period in which the suspension or revocation is sought, unless the police chief demonstrates that previous offenses were not considered in the approval of the current license. In the event the person is considered for non-renewal, suspension or revocation as the result of such an offense, the Village Board shall consider all offenses, regardless of when they occurred, to determine the application of these guidelines.
(2) What is meant by substantially related? The law does not specifically define this term although there are many court decisions on the topic. The Wisconsin Supreme Court has stated that the purpose of the test is to assess whether the tendencies and inclinations to behave a certain way in a particular context are likely to reappear later in a related context, based on the traits revealed. The “substantially related” test looks at the circumstances of an offense, where it happened, when, what, etc. compared to the circumstances of the licensed activity. Where does the licensed activity typically occur, when, what is involved in performing the licensed activity, etc. Examples of “substantially related” in the context of an operator’s license: There is a substantial relationship between the illegal purchase, use and sale of controlled substances and engaging in bartending, which involves the purchase and sale of a closely regulated
Chapter 6 Alcohol Beverages Page 8
substance. The same is true for offenses involving alcohol, e.g. drunk driving, selling to underage, possessing and/or consuming as an underage, committing law violations while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, etc.
(3) Guidelines
Guideline 1. Provided the circumstances of the offense substantially relate to the circumstances of the job or licensed activity, any person who has been convicted of any felony, unless duly pardoned, does not qualify for an alcohol beverage license. Wis. Stat. § 125.04(5)(b), (To the extent the other guidelines reference a specific offense, this guideline shall apply if the offense constitutes a felony.)
Guideline 2. Provided the circumstances of the offense substantially relate to the circumstances of the job or licensed activity, any person who has been convicted of or has a current charge pending, for one (1) or more offenses within the last five (5) years or for two (2) or more offenses, arising out of separate incidents, within the last ten (10) years in the following subcategories, does not qualify for an alcohol beverage license:
(a) Violent crimes against the person of another, including but not limited to battery, disorderly conduct, sexual assault, injury by negligent use of a vehicle, intimidation of victim or witness.
(b) Crimes involving cooperation (or lack thereof) with law enforcement officials, including but not limited to, resisting or obstructing a police officer, bribery of public officers/employees, eluding police, bail jumping, hit and run, perjury, or acts/threats of terrorism.
(c) Manufacturing, distributing, delivering a controlled substance or a controlled substance analog; maintaining a drug trafficking place; possessing with intent to manufacture, distribute, or deliver a controlled substance or a controlled substance analog. Wis. Stat. § 111.335(1)(cs).
Guideline 3. Provided the circumstances of the offense substantially relate to the circumstances of the job or licensed activity, any person who has been convicted of or has a current charge pending, for two (2) or more offenses, arising out of separate incidents, within the last five (5) years in the following subcategories, does not qualify for an alcohol beverage license:
(a) Disorderly conduct, criminal damage to property, solicitation of prostitution or other prostitution related offenses, wherein the offense involves an incident at a place that is, or should have been licensed under Wis. Stats. Chapter 125.
(b) Alcohol beverage offenses (under Wis. Stats. Chapter 125 or adopting ordinances excluding administrative violations such as “failure to post license under glass”). (furnishing alcoholic beverages to underage persons shall not be used as grounds for suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of an existing
Chapter 6 Alcohol Beverages Page 9
license unless the licensee has committed two (2) violations within a one (1) year period).
(c) Perjury or false swearing wherein the offense involves an incident at a place that is, or should have been licensed under Wis. Stats. Chapter 125.
(d) Possessing a controlled substance, controlled substance analog without a valid prescription, or possessing drug paraphernalia.
(e) Operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicants or drugs.
(f) Operating a motor vehicle with a prohibited alcohol concentration (PAC) in excess of .08% by weight.
(g) Open intoxicants in public places or in a motor vehicle.
Guideline 4. Provided the circumstances of the offense substantially relate to the circumstances of the job or licensed activity, any person who is a habitual law offender does not qualify for an alcohol beverage license. Wis. Stat. § 125.04(5)(b). For purposes of these guidelines, a habitual offender includes, but is not limited to a person who has committed:
(a) Two (2) or more offenses, each a separate incident, within the immediately preceding one (1) year.
(b) Three (3) or more offenses, each a separate incident, within the immediately preceding five (5) years.
(c) Six (6) or more offenses, each a separate incident, within the preceding ten (10) years.
What is a “habitual law offender?” The term “habitual” refers to multiple convictions or pending charges and could include an offender with two (2) offenses occurring within a relatively short period of time. The term “offender” refers to a person with civil violations such as ordinance convictions and/or misdemeanor convictions (or pending charges), which substantially relate to the licensing activity. A legal opinion rendered by the League of Wisconsin Municipalities states that a person with two drunk driving convictions within the last couple of years would be considered an habitual offender under the alcohol beverage licensing laws. Intoxicating Liquors #890 (1991).
Guideline 5. In addition to the other provisions under these guidelines, pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 125.12, a person’s alcoholic beverage license may be denied, non-renewed, suspended or revoked if the person:
(a) Keeps or maintains a disorderly or riotous, indecent or improper house.
Chapter 6 Alcohol Beverages Page 10
(b) Sold or has given away alcoholic beverages to known habitual drunkards.
(c) Does not possess the qualifications under Chapter 6 of the Weston Ordinances to hold a license.
Guideline 6. Applicants must truthfully and completely fill out applications.
(a) If an applicant provides false information on an application, that application shall be denied and the applicant shall not be eligible to reapply for an alcohol beverage license for a period of one (1) year from the date of denial of such application.
(b) If it is determined that information was intentionally omitted from an application, the application shall be denied and the applicant shall not be eligible to reapply for an alcohol beverage license for a period of one (1) year from the date of denial of such application.
(c) If the Village Clerk or Police Chief determines that information was omitted from an application due to inadvertence, mistake or excusable neglect, the Village Clerk may allow the applicant to submit a corrected application and recommend granting the license if the applicant is otherwise qualified.
(b). No alcohol beverage license shall be issued, except as otherwise provided, unless the individual, partners or agents have completed a responsible beverage server training course. Applicants are exempted from the training course requirement if they meet Wis. Stat. § 125.04(5)(a)5. Operator License applicants may be issued a provisional operator's license if they are enrolled in a training course.
(c). Provisional operator's license. The Village Clerk shall issue a provisional operator's license to a person who has applied for an operator's license. The standards contained in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall apply to any person issued a provisional operator's license. Such license shall be effective for a period of 60 days or until a regular operator's license is issued, whichever event shall first occur. The fee for a provisional operator's license shall be set by the board in the village fee schedule.(d) Provisional retail license. The Village Clerk may issue provisional retail licenses in accordance with Wis. Stat. § 125.185, and the requirements of this section. Such licenses shall be issued within ten days of application. Provisional retail licenses may be issued only to persons applying for Class “A” beer, Class “B” beer, Class “A” liquor, Class “B” liquor, or Class “C” wine authorizing only the activities allowed under that type of license. The fee for a provisional retail license shall be set by the board in the village fee schedule. The provisional retail license shall expire sixty days after issuance or when the person is issued a retail license described in Wis. Stat. § 125.51. The Provisional license may be revoked by the Village Clerk or Police Chief if it is discovered that the holder of the license made any false statement in the application for the license. Prior to issuing the provisional retail license, the Police Chief, shall conduct a background check on the applicant. Such a background check shall occur within ten days of application under this section. The Village
Chapter 6 Alcohol Beverages Page 11
Clerk shall not issue the provisional license until receiving the results of any background
check. The Village Clerk may not issue any provisional license under this section if such
issuance will violate the Village’s quota under Wis. Stats. Chapter 125. No person may
hold more than one provisional retail license for each type of license applied for per year.
(e) Temporary Class “B” (Picnic) beer and Class B” (picnic) wine license. The Village Clerk
may issue Temporary Class “B” (Picnic) beer and Temporary Class B” (picnic) wine
licenses in accordance with Wis. Stat.§ 125.26(1), 125.26(6) and 125.51(1)(a). The fee for
a Temporary beer or wine license shall be set by the board in the village fee schedule.
(f) If an alcohol beverage license application is denied, the applicant has the right to file an
appeal with the Village Clerk within thirty (30) days and appear and be represented before
the Village Board to be heard, to present evidence in favor of the granting of the license,
and to rebut evidence presented in opposition to the granting of the license, at a hearing
held within forty (40) days of the filing of such appeal.
(Code 1982, § 12.04; Ord. of 5-20-1991, §§ 2, 3; Ord. of 9-24-2010; Ord. of 4-22-2011)
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-024, 7/26/2017; Ord. No 20-003, 3-19-
2020]
Sec. 6.105. Fermented malt beverages; closing hours and restricting hours of sale.
Closing hours and restrictions on hours of sale for Class A, Class B, Class C licenses or wineries
shall be in conformity with Wis. Stat. § 125.32(3).
(Code 1982, § 12.07; Ord. of 9-24-2010; Ord. of 12-22-2011) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027,
11/18/2015]
ARTICLE III ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS*
Sec. 6.106. Legislative authorization.
This article is enacted in the interest of the public health, peace, safety, morals and general
welfare of the citizens and inhabitants of the village, pursuant to the state constitution and laws
of the state and the authority of the village and exercising its right to regulate the sale and
consumption of alcohol beverages, pursuant to the 21st Amendment to the Constitution of the
United States.
(Ord. of 12-5-1990, § 2) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 6.107. Findings of fact.
The board finds that evidence has been propounded that indicates that nudity and sexual conduct
and their depiction, coupled with alcohol in public places, beget undesirable behavior, and that
prostitution, attempted rape, rape, murder and assaults on police officers have occurred in and
Chapter 6 Alcohol Beverages Page 12
around establishments dealing in alcohol beverages where nude and sexual conduct and their depiction are permitted.
(Ord. of 12-5-1990, § 4) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
__________
* Cross References--Adult-oriented establishments generally, § 18.103 et seq.
Sec. 6.108. Intent.
(a) It is found that the acts prohibited in Sec. 6.110 encourage the conduct of prostitution, attempted rape, rape, murder, and assaults on police officers in and around establishments dealing in alcohol beverages, that actual and simulated nudity and sexual conduct and their depiction, coupled with alcohol in public places, beget undesirable behavior and conduct among patrons and employees with establishments dealing in alcohol beverages, which results in violation of law and dangers to the health, safety and welfare of the public.
(b) It is the intent of this article to prohibit nudity, gross sexuality, and their simulation and depiction in establishments dealing in alcohol beverages.
(Ord. of 12-5-1990, § 5) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 6.109. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Establishment dealing in alcohol beverages means any business or commercial establishment (whether open to the public at large or where entrance is limited by cover charge or membership requirement), including those licensed by the state for sale and/or service of alcohol beverages, and any bottle club; hotel; motel; restaurant; nightclub; country club; cabaret; meeting facility utilized by any religious, social, fraternal or similar organization; business or commercial establishment where a product or article is sold, dispensed, served or provided with the knowledge, actual or implied, that they will be, or are intended to be mixed, combined with or drunk in connection or combination with an alcohol beverage on the premises of such business or commercial establishment; or business or commercial establishment where the consumption of alcohol beverages is permitted. A private residence, whether permanent or temporary in nature, is not an establishment dealing in alcohol beverages.
(Ord. of 12-5-1990, § 6) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
__________
Cross References--Definitions generally, § 1.101.
Chapter 6 Alcohol Beverages Page 13
Sec. 6.110. Prohibited acts.
(a) No person shall expose to public view his genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage or buttocks or their simulation in an establishment dealing in alcohol beverages.
(b) No female person shall expose to public view any portion of her breast below the top of the areola or their simulation in the establishment dealing in alcohol beverages.
(c) No person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing in alcohol beverages shall suffer or permit any person to expose to public view his genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage or buttocks or their simulation within the establishment dealing in alcohol beverages.
(d No person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing in alcohol beverages shall suffer or permit any female person to expose to public view any portion of her breasts below the top of the areola or their simulation within the establishment dealing in alcohol beverages.
(e) No person shall engage in and no person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing in alcohol beverages shall suffer or permit any sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, any sexual act prohibited by law, touching, caressing, fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals or their simulation within an establishment dealing in alcohol beverages.
(f) No person shall cause and no person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing in alcohol beverages shall suffer or permit the exposition of any graphic representation, including pictures or the projection of film, that depicts human genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, buttocks, female breasts below the top of the areola, sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, any sexual act prohibited by law, touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals or their simulation within any establishment dealing in alcohol beverages.
(Ord. of 12-5-1990, § 7) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 10 Animals Page 1
Chapter 10
ANIMALS*
Article I. Animal Control and Licensing
Sec. 10.100. Purpose and intent.
Sec. 10.101. State code adopted.
Sec. 10.102. Construction and application.
Sec. 10.103. Definitions.
Sec. 10.104. Mistreating animals.
Sec. 10.105. Care of dogs and domesticated animals.
Sec. 10.106. Taking without owner’s consent.
Sec. 10.107. Leading animal from motor vehicle.
Sec. 10.108. Transportation of Animals.
Sec. 10.109. Use of poisonous and controlled substances.
Sec. 10.110. Use of certain devices prohibited.
Sec. 10.111. Instigating fights between animals.
Sec. 10.112. Shooting at caged or staked animals.
Sec. 10.113. Sale of baby rabbits, chicks and other fowl.
Sec. 10.114. Sale of artificially colored animals.
Sec. 10.115. Number of dogs and cats limited.
Sec. 10.116. Restriction on animals other than dogs and cats.
Sec. 10.117. Providing proper food and drink.
Sec. 10.118. Providing proper shelter.
Sec. 10.119. Abandonment of domestic animals.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 2
Sec. 10.120. Vaccination (Rabies control).
Sec. 10.121. Licenses required.
Sec. 10.122. Kennels.
Sec. 10.123. Animal Fanciers.
Sec. 10.124. Commercial animal establishment.
Sec. 10.125. Restrictions on keeping of dogs and cats.
Sec. 10.126. Animals not to run at large.
Sec. 10.127. Disturbance prohibited.
Sec. 10.128. Required removal of animal excreta.
Sec. 10.129. Animals on owners property.
Sec. 10.130. Impounding of animals.
Sec. 10.131. Claiming impounded animals.
Sec. 10.132. Female animals in season.
Sec. 10.133. Requirements for horses and horse-drawn vehicles.
Sec. 10.134. Injured animals.
Sec. 10.135. Animal control agency.
Sec. 10.136. Partition or line fences.
Sec. 10.137. Certain creatures forbidden.
Sec. 10.138. Liability
Sec. 10.139. Penalty
Sec. 10.140. Habitual Animal Offender.
Sec. 10.141 . Severability.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 3
Article II. Dangerous Animals
Sec. 10.200. Dangerous Animals Prohibited.
Sec. 10.201. Definitions.
Sec. 10.202. Procedure for Declaring a Dangerous Animal.
Sec. 10.203. Restrictions.
Sec. 10.204. Procedure for Declaring a Prohibited Dangerous Animal.
Sec. 10.205. Appeal Process for Dangerous and Prohibited Dangerous Animal.
Sec. 10.206. Notification.
Sec. 10.207. Impoundment.
Sec. 10.208. Destruction.
Sec. 10.209. Duration of Dangerous Animal Status.
Sec. 10.210. Penalties for Violations.
Sec. 10.211. Exemptions.
Sec. 10.212. Severability.
Article III. Hunting
Sec. 10.300. Definitions.
Sec. 10.301. Permitted activity zones.
Sec. 10.302. Enforcement and penalties.
________
* Cross References--Slaughterhouses and Stockyards, § 18.130 et seq.; Health and Sanitation, Chapter. 38; Rat Control and Extermination, § 38.102; Agricultural Land Use § 94.4.03
Chapter 10 Animals Page 4
ARTICLE I. ANIMAL CONTROL AND LICENSING
Sec. 10.100. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this ordinance is to promote health, safety and general welfare of animals and the people around them by requiring animals be cared for in such a manner that they will not become a public nuisance, requiring animals be properly fed, sheltered and cared for, requiring the removal of animal defecation from public property and to ensure licensing and rabies vaccination of all dogs and cats within the village.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.101. State code adopted.
All of the provisions of Wis. Stats. Chapter 172, as amended, are hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter with the same force and effect as if fully set forth in this chapter.
(Code 1982, § 6.12(2); Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.102. Construction and application.
This chapter shall not be interpreted as covering any law regulating the trapping of animals, the use of live animals in dog trials or in training of hunting dogs, or the slaughter of animals by persons acting under state and federal law, or taking of animals through hunting or fishing as permitted by law.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.103. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Adult dog means a dog over four (4) months of age.
American Kennel Club (AKC) means a not-for-profit organization established in 1884, which maintains a purebred dog registry, sanctions dog events, and promotes responsible dog ownership. The AKC records the parentage of over 1 million dogs and sponsors more than 15,000 dog events annually. The core value of AKC is to promote and support the human/canine bond.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 5
Animal means any live vertebrate or invertebrate creature either domestic or wild, except a human being, which may be affected by rabies.
Animal, dangerous means any animal that is declared to be dangerous by the humane officer after a temperament test has been conducted on the animal or as defined by Sec. 10.201 of these Ordinances.
Animal fancier means any person who owns or keeps, within or adjoining private residence, four to ten dogs or five to ten cats for personal and noncommercial purposes, which are limited to hunting, tracking, exhibition in dog shows, obedience trials, field trials, dog sledding, animal foster rescue or to enhance or perpetuate a given breed, and who has secured a license for such activity in accordance with the provisions of this title.
Animal shelter, public means a facility operated by a humane society, or a governmental agency or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals.
Animal Welfare Act means federal animal welfare regulations as adopted by the United States Department of Agriculture.
Animal, wild or exotic means apes, coyotes, foxes, wolves, bears, cougars, lynx, bobcats, wild boars, cheetahs, jaguars, lions, tigers, leopards, panthers, ocelots, monkeys, elephants or other similar animals as determined by the humane officer.
At large means to be off the premises of the owner and not under the control of some person, either by leash or otherwise, but a dog or cat within an automobile of its owner or in an automobile of any other person with the consent of the dog's or cat's owner, shall be deemed to be upon the owner's premises.
Breed means a domestic race of dogs (selected and maintained by humans) with a common gene pool and a characterized appearance and function.
Breeder means any person who is breeding purebred dogs or cats in an attempt to improve the breed through controlled propagation, thus achieving carefully desired qualities and traits. Except that the owner of dogs or cats held solely for stud does not qualify as a canine and feline breeder. Under AKC rules, the breeder is the owner, or the lessee, of the dam on the date of a mating that results in a litter. (See Sec. 10.123. Animal Fanciers)
Cat means a domesticated animal of the feline type (Felis domesticus), except for a feral cat.
Cat, altered means a cat which has been certified in writing by a veterinarian as being non-reproductive.
Cat, feral means a cat without owner identification of any kind whose usual and consistent temperament is extreme fear and resistance to contact with people. A feral cat is un-socialized to people.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 6
Cat, unlicensed means a cat for which a required license fee has not been paid, or to which the license tag required by this chapter is not attached.
Circus means a commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public entertainment.
Cruel means causing unnecessary and excessive pain or suffering or unjustifiable pain, injury or death to an animal.
Contracted Facility means an animal facility contracted by the Village to provide shelter and care for impounded animals.
Commercial Animal Establishment shall mean any pet shop, grooming shop or boarding kennel and shall exclude any city pound, humane society, animal shelter or veterinary facility.
Dam, means the female parent of a dog.
Dog means a domesticated animal of the canine type (Canis familiaris); young animals (puppies) of this type are considered dogs. It shall not include any animal which is in whole or in part of the canis lupus or wolf species.
Dog, altered means a dog which has been certified in writing by a veterinarian as being non-reproductive.
Dog, service means any dog individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including, but not limited to, minimal protection work, rescue work, pulling a wheelchair or fetching dropped items.
Dog, unlicensed means a dog for which a required license fee has not been paid, or to which the license tag required by this chapter is not attached.
Domesticated cat or dog means a cat or dog that is socialized to humans and is appropriate as a companion for humans.
Farm animal/poultry means any warm-blooded animal/fowl normally raised on farms and used or intended for use as food/fiber. This includes: horses, ponies, mules, donkeys, cows, pigs, goats, sheep, chickens, ducks and turkeys.
Foster parent, animal means a person who provides temporary care for kittens, puppies, cats and dogs in their homes for 6 months or less at a time. Animals which are in temporary foster care are not required to be licensed.
Grooming shop means a commercial establishment where animals are bathed, clipped or otherwise groomed.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 7
Humane officer or animal control officer means any person designated by the village to enforce State Statutes, adopted by reference, and local ordinances as they pertain to animal control.
Impoundment means the confinement of the animal in a humane and safe manner.
Kennel means a facility where dogs, cats or other animals are kept for 24 hours or more for boarding, training or similar purposes for compensation. This does not include animal shelters or a facility owned or operated by a veterinarian where animals are boarded only in conjunction with the provision of veterinary care.
Litter means the puppy or puppies resulting from a mating.
Marketplace means a direct farm market where multiple growers can sell their goods directly to the consumer or other market in which multiple sellers convene and offer goods or services for sale at one outdoor location or premises.
Owner means any individual, partnership or corporation that has the right of property in an animal or who keeps, harbors, cares for or acts as its custodian or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about or return to his/her property/premises for five or more consecutive days is presumed to be harboring or keeping the animal within the meaning of this article.
Permanent animal exhibition means any spectacle, display, act or event other than circuses, in which animals perform or are displayed, with the exception of education programs presented by persons or organizations with proper state and federal education permits, as required, and which are perpetual in nature and in a stationary location.
Person means and includes all natural persons and any firm, sole proprietorship, limited liability corporation (LLC), partnership, corporation, trust and any association of persons, government agency or political subdivision.
Pet means an animal kept for pleasure rather than utility, which may/may not be susceptible to rabies.
Pet shop means any person, sole proprietorship, limited liability corporation (LLC), partnership or corporation, whether operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise, except for a kennel, that buys, gives away, sells or takes on consignment any species of animal.
Purebred means a dog whose sire and dam belong to the same breed and who are of unmixed descent since recognition of the breed.
Sire means the male parent of a dog.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 8
Temperament testing means evaluating an individual dog's temperament through a series of tests that measure traits including stability, confidence, shyness, friendliness, aggressiveness, protectiveness, prey instincts, play drive, and self-defense instincts, and the ability to distinguish between threatening and nonthreatening situations.
Transient animal exhibition means any spectacle, display, act or event other than circuses, in which animals perform or are displayed, with the exception of education programs presented by persons or organizations with proper state and federal education permits, as required, and which are traveling shows of a temporary duration.
Veterinarian has the meaning as defined in Wisconsin Administrative Code, ATCP 13.
Veterinary hospital or clinic means any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of disease and injuries in animals.
(Ord. of 9-16-1985, § 1(1), Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-033, 9/21/2017]
Sec. 10.104. Mistreating animals
No person may treat any animal, whether belonging to themselves or another, in a cruel manner. Wis. Stat. § 174.13, is hereby adopted. This section does not prohibit bona fide experiments carried on for scientific research or normal and accepted veterinary practices. (See also Sec. 10.103 of this chapter.)
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.105. Care of Dogs and domesticated animals.
All dogs and domesticated animals shall be cared for, maintained and handled in a humane and sanitary manner and in such a way as to prevent noises such as barking, fighting or howling or other disturbance of the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. No domestic animal shall be abandoned or turned loose by its owner. No animal shall be inhumanely confined in a manner which causes or is likely to cause pain, suffering, injury or death.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.106. Taking without owner’s consent.
No person may take a dog or cat of another from one place to another without the owner’s consent, or cause such a dog or cat to be confined or carried out of the village or held for any purpose without the owner’s consent. This section does not apply to law enforcement officers or
Chapter 10 Animals Page 9
humane officers engaged in the exercise of their official duties, or as otherwise permitted in this chapter.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.107. Leading animal from motor vehicle.
No person shall pull or lead any animal upon a village street by attaching the animal by a leash, rope, or other devise to a motor vehicle or a trailer or semitrailer drawn by a motor vehicle.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.108. Transportation of animals.
No person may transport any animal in or upon any vehicle in a cruel manner. Prima facie evidence of a violation of this section shall be that an animal was left in or upon a vehicle for more than twenty minutes, unless attended by a human being who has attained the age of at least ten years. (See also Sec. 10.118 of this chapter.)
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-033, 9/21/2017]
Sec. 10.109. Use of poisonous and controlled substances.
No person may expose any pet animal owned by another to any known poisonous substance or controlled substance listed in Wis. Stat. § 961.14, whether mixed with meat or other food or not, where it is reasonable to anticipate the substance may be eaten by such animal, or for the purpose of harming the animal. This section shall not apply to poison used on one's own premises and designed for the purpose of rodent or pest extermination, nor to the use of a controlled substance used in accepted veterinary practice or in research by persons or organizations regularly engaged in such research.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.110. Use of certain devices prohibited.
No person may directly or indirectly, or by aiding, abetting or permitting the doing thereof, either put, place, fasten, use or fix upon or to any animal used or readied for use for a work purpose or for use in an exhibition, competition, rodeo, circus or other performance, any of the following devices: a bristle bur, tack bur or like device; a poling device used to train a horse to jump, which is charged with electricity or to which have been affixed nails, tacks or other sharp points.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
__________
Cross References--Definitions generally, § 1.101.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 10
Sec. 10.111. Instigating fights between animals.
(a) No person may instigate, promote, finance, aid or abet as a principal, agent, employee or spectator, or participate in the earnings from or intentionally maintain or allow any place to be used for a cockfight, dog fight, bullfight or other fight between the same or different kinds of animals or between an animal and a person. This section does not prohibit events or exhibitions commonly featured at rodeos or bloodless bullfights.
(b) No person may own, possess, keep or train any animal with the intent that the animal be engaged in an exhibition of fighting.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.112. Shooting at caged or staked animals.
No person may instigate, promote, aid or abet as a principal, agent, employee, participant or spectator, or participate in the earnings from or intentionally maintain or allow any place to be used for the shooting, killing or wounding with a firearm or any deadly weapon any animal that is tied, staked out, caged or otherwise intentionally confined in a manmade enclosure, regardless of size.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.113. Sale of baby rabbits, chicks and other fowl.
(a) No person may sell, offer for sale, barter or give away living chicks, ducklings or other fowl without providing proper brooder facilities for the care of such chicks, ducklings or other fowl during the time they are in such person's care, custody or control.
(b) No retailer, as defined in Wis. Stat. § 100.30 (2) (e), may sell, offer for sale, barter or give away living baby rabbits, baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl under two months of age, in any quantity less than six, unless the purpose of selling these animals is for agricultural, wildlife or scientific purposes.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.114. Sale of artificially colored animals.
No person may sell, offer for sale, raffle, give as a prize or premium, use as an advertising device or display living chicks, ducklings, other fowl or rabbits that have been dyed or otherwise colored artificially.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 11
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.115. Number of dogs and cats limited.
(a) The keeping of a large number of dogs or cats poses health, safety and public welfare risks and is deemed a public nuisance.
(b) Cats. Unless the property owner holds a valid kennel license, valid breeder license or a valid animal fancier license, no individual or family unit living together, firm or corporation shall keep more than the following number of cats over the age of four (4) months on any parcel with the following principal land use as defined by Chapter 94 Zoning, Section 94.4.02:
Residential Land Use Type
Number of Cats Allowed
Manufactured Home Community, Multi-Family Residential, Mixed Use Dwelling Unit
2 per lot
Two-Family Residential
4 per unit
Single-Family Detached Residence
4
(c) Dogs. Unless the property owner holds a valid kennel license, valid breeder license, or a valid animal fancier license no individual or family unit living together, firm or corporation shall keep more than the following number of dogs over the age of four (4) months on any parcel with the following principal land use as defined by Chapter 94 Zoning, Section 94.4.02:
Zoning District
Number of Dogs Allowed
Manufactured Home Community, Multi-family Residential, Mixed Use Dwelling Unit
2 per unit
Two-Family Residential
3 per unit
Single-Family Detached Residence
3
(d) Grandfather clause.
(1) Any person who owned, possessed, kept or harbored dogs and/or cats on or before August 8, 2008 in excess of the above allowed number of dogs and/or cats shall be permitted to continue ownership or possession as long as they meet all the requirements set forth under State and Federal Law in addition to those set forth in this Ordinance.
(2) Anyone whose animals fall under the grandfather clause shall have obtained license for the animals within sixty days of the effective date of the original ordinance (August 8, 2008).
Chapter 10 Animals Page 12
i. Any person who successfully obtains license within sixty days of the adoption of this Ordinance shall be permitted to hold, keep, harbor or maintain the number of animals that person had as of the date of the adoption of this Ordinance but shall not be permitted to increase the number of animals. Following death of the licensed animal, the property owner shall not acquire more animals until they have brought the number of animals down to legal limits through attrition.
ii. Any person who has not successfully obtained license for their animal within sixty days of the adoption of this Ordinance shall forfeit the right to keep the animal under the grandfather clause and be deemed to unlawfully possess the animal.
(Ord. of 9-16-1985, § 1(7), Ord. of 8-8-2008; Ord. of 4-20-2012) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 16-050, 12/21/2016; Ord. No 17-033, 9/21/2017]
Sec. 10.116. Restriction on animals other than dogs and cats.
(a) Number. No person shall keep more than three domestic animals, other than dogs or cats, to include rabbits, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, rats or other similar pets, more than two months old on any premises at any place or in any one residence located within the village limits, except in an area zoned for commercial use or in an area zoned for rural residential or agricultural use.
(b) Location and Restraint Required. It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any yard for the housing of small animals, except dogs and cats, closer than one hundred feet to the nearest portion of any building occupied by or in anywise used by human beings, other than the dwelling occupied by the owner or keeper of the animals, or closer than twenty-five feet to the property line of the lot on which such animals are kept for sale within a bona fide produce market, commission house or store for purposes of trade and while so kept are confined in small coops, boxes or cages, or where such animals are kept for purposes of research in a laboratory. Animals so kept or maintained shall be enclosed, with screening or other similar material, on all sides and shall not be allowed to run or fly at large except for homing pigeons.
(c) Odors. Every yard establishment shall be kept so that no offensive, disagreeable or noxious smell or odor shall arise there from to the injury, annoyance or inconvenience of any inhabitant of the neighborhood.
(d) Disposal of Manure. Every yard establishment shall be provided with a watertight and fly tight receptacle for manure, of such dimension as to contain all accumulations thereof, which receptacle shall be emptied sufficiently often and in such manner as to prevent its becoming a nuisance. Such receptacle shall be securely covered at all times except when open during the deposit or removal of manure or refuse there
Chapter 10 Animals Page 13
from. No manure shall be allowed to accumulate except in such receptacle. All such manure, when removed from the receptacle, shall be buried with covering of not less than six inches of earth, or if used as fertilizer, thoroughly spaded into the ground, or shall be removed from the property.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.117. Providing proper food and drink.
No person owning or responsible for confining or impounding any animal may refuse or neglect to supply the animal with a sufficient supply of food and water, as prescribed in this section:
(a) Food. The food shall be sufficient to maintain all animals in good health.
(b) Water. If potable water is not accessible to the animals at all times, it shall be provided daily in sufficient quantity for the health of the animal.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.118. Providing proper shelter.
No person owning or responsible for confining or impounding any animal may fail to provide the animal with proper shelter as prescribed in this section. In the case of farm animals, nothing in this section shall be construed as imposing shelter requirements or standards more stringent than normally accepted husbandry practices.
(a) Indoor Standards. Minimum indoor standards of shelter shall include:
(1) Ambient temperatures shall be compatible with the health of the animal.
(2) Ventilation for indoor housing facilities shall be adequately ventilated by natural or mechanical means to provide for the health of the animals at all times.
(b) Outdoor Standards. Minimum outdoor standards of shelter shall include:
(1) Shelter from Sunlight. When sunlight is likely to cause heat exhaustion of an animal tied or caged outside, sufficient shade by natural or artificial means shall be provided to protect the animal from direct sunlight. As used in this subdivision, "caged" does not include farm fencing used to confine farm animals.
(2) Shelter from Inclement Weather.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 14
i. Animals generally. Natural or artificial shelter appropriate to the local climatic conditions for the species concerned shall be provided as necessary for the health of the animal
ii. Dogs. If a dog is tied or confined unattended outdoors, a moisture proof and windproof shelter of suitable size to accommodate the dog shall be provided.
(c) Space Standards. Minimum space requirements for both indoor and outdoor enclosures shall include:
(1) Structural Strength. The housing facilities shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect the animals from injury and to contain the animals.
(2) Space Requirements. Enclosures shall be constructed and maintained so as to provide sufficient space to allow each animal adequate freedom of movement. Inadequate space may be indicated by evidence of debility, stress or abnormal behavior patterns.
(d) Sanitation Standards. Minimum standards of sanitation for both indoor and outdoor enclosures shall include daily cleaning to remove excreta and other waste materials, dirt and trash so as to minimize health hazards and odors.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.119. Abandonment of domestic animals.
(a) No person shall transport any domestic animal into the village for the purpose of abandoning the animal, and no person shall abandon any domestic animal within the corporate limits of the village.
(b) Any humane officer or police officer may remove, shelter, and care for any animal found to be cruelly exposed to weather, starved, or denied adequate water, neglected, abandoned or otherwise treated in a cruel manner and may deliver such animal to another person to be sheltered, cared for, and given medical attention if necessary. In all cases the owner if known, shall be immediately notified, and such officer or other person having possession of the animal shall have a lien thereon for its care, keeping, and medical attention and the expense of notice. This section shall not preclude any common-law right the keeper may have to recover the cost of distrainment from the owner.
(c) If the owner or custodian is unknown and cannot with reasonable effort be ascertained or does not within five (5) days after notice redeem the animal by paying the expense incurred, it may be treated as a stray and dealt with as such.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 15
(d) This section shall not be interpreted as lengthening the holding time required of any animal control agency, such as described in Sec. 10.135 of this chapter.
(Code 1982, §6.11, Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-033, 9/21/2017]
Sec. 10.120. Vaccination (Rabies control).
(a) “Vaccination against rabies” means the inoculation of a dog or cat (hereinafter “pet”) with a rabies vaccine licensed by the U.S.D.A. Such vaccination shall be performed by a veterinarian or veterinarian technician duly licensed to practice in the state.
(b) Rabies Vaccination Required. Every dog and cat shall be vaccinated by a veterinarian within thirty days after they have reached four months of age, and shall be revaccinated within one year after the initial vaccination. Every pet obtained or brought into the village that is over four months of age, shall be vaccinated within thirty days, unless the pet is currently vaccinated, as evidenced by a current certificate of rabies vaccination from this state or another state or a veterinarian certifies that, to a reasonable medical certainty, such vaccination would be harmful to the pet. The certification shall be upon a form provided by the Village Clerk, and shall be dated within the preceding twelve months. A license may be issued for pets so certified. The owner of every vaccinated pet shall have the pet revaccinated before the immunization expiration date stated on the vaccination certificate, or within three years, if a three-year vaccine was used or no date is specified on the vaccination certificate.
(c) Duties of Veterinarian.
(1) Certificate and Tag. At the time of vaccination, each veterinarian will complete a certificate indicating the following:
i. Name and address of owner,
ii. name, sex, spayed or un-spayed, neutered or unneutered, color and breed of pet,
iii. rabies tag number issued,
iv. type of vaccine administered, its manufacturer and serial number,
v. the date the immunization expires as specified for that type of vaccine by the Center for Disease Control of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
Chapter 10 Animals Page 16
vi. name of the city, village, or town where the pet is to be licensed.
(2) The veterinarian shall keep one copy of the certificate on file until the date that the immunization expires or until the pet is revaccinated, whichever occurs first; one copy shall be given to the owner, who shall display it when purchasing a pet license. A durable tag shall be given the owner, who shall attach it to the pet's collar and a collar with a tag attached shall be kept on the pet at all times, except if the pet is securely confined indoors. The number on the collar shall match the number on the certificate. The tag shall also list the veterinarian's address and phone number and year of vaccination. Each veterinarian shall, on or before the 15th of each month, provide the Village Clerk, or his or her designated agent, with a copy of each rabies certificate issued by the veterinarian the preceding month, or a report of all such certificates issued the preceding month which contains all of the information required in this subsection. For the reporting period ending December 31, 2012, veterinarians shall provide rabies certificates or reports of all such certificates which contain the information required in this subsection for all calendar years 2012 on or before April 30, 2013.
(d) Quarantine or Sacrifice of Pet or Animal Suspected of Biting a Person or Being Infected or Exposed to Rabies.
(1) A dog or cat which is currently immunized against rabies as evidenced by a valid certificate of rabies vaccination suspected of being in contact with a rabid animal or infected with rabies or accused of biting a person shall be quarantined for ten days on the owner's property. The animal shall be examined by a veterinarian within twenty-four hours of the reported bite/exposure and on the last day of isolation and on one intervening day. An unvaccinated dog or cat shall be impounded at the Marathon County Humane Society for a period of ten days, if the owner can be located. If no owner is located, the dog or cat shall be humanely destroyed in a manner which avoids damage to the animal's head by a veterinarian or the Marathon County Humane Society and shipped to the Wisconsin State Laboratory of Hygiene for rabies testing in accordance with Wis. Stat. § 95.21(6).
(2) Any animal, domestic or wild, other than a dog or cat, that is suspected of having rabies and is believed to have bitten a person, shall be humanely destroyed in a manner which avoids damage to the animal's head by a veterinarian or the Marathon County Humane Society and shipped to the Wisconsin State Laboratory of Hygiene for rabies testing in accordance with Wis. Stat. § 95.21(6).
(3) Veterinary examination during quarantine. All dogs and cats, vaccinated or unvaccinated, and under quarantine for biting a person shall be examined by a veterinarian within twenty-four hours. Confinement shall be ten days with a reexamination on the tenth day and on one intervening day for vaccinated pets.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 17
If the veterinarian certifies that the pet has manifested no signs of rabies, the
quarantine shall end at the end of the ten-day observation period. If rabies is
suspected upon reexamination, the pet shall be humanely destroyed in a manner
which avoids damage to the animal's head by the veterinarian or the Marathon
County Humane Society and shipped for rabies testing in accordance with Wis.
Stat. § 95.21(6). The veterinarian shall notify any person, or their physician,
which the animal is suspected of biting that the animal is suspected of having
rabies.
(4) The Everest Metro Police Department and the Marathon County Health
Department shall be notified of all animal bites within twenty-four hours of
their occurrence.
(5) Duty of owner in case of dog bite. Every owner or person harboring or keeping
a dog, who knows that such dog has bitten any person, shall immediately report
such fact to the Everest Metro Police Department and the Marathon County
Health Department and shall keep such dog confined for not less than 14 days
or for such period of time as the Marathon County Health Department health
officer or Marathon County Humane Society Humane Officer shall direct. The
owner or keeper of any such dog shall surrender the dog to the health officer,
humane officer or to a village police officer upon demand for examination.
(6) Responsibility for quarantine and laboratory expenses. The owner of an
animal is responsible for any expenses incurred in connection with keeping the
animal in an isolation facility, supervision and examination of the animal by a
veterinarian, preparation of the carcass for laboratory examination and the fee
for the laboratory examination. If the owner is unknown, pursuant to Wis. Stat.
§ 95.21(8), the county is responsible for these expenses.
(7) Animals bitten or scratched by a known or suspected rabid animal:
i. Unvaccinated animals:
1. Should be destroyed immediately;
2. If the owner is unwilling to destroy their cat or dog, the pet must be
kept in isolation in an escape-proof enclosure, under veterinary
supervision, for one hundred eighty days. The owner shall have the pet
vaccinated one hundred fifty-five to one hundred sixty-five days after
exposure, with veterinary approval.
ii. Vaccinated pets:
1. Should be revaccinated as soon as possible after exposure and
leashed or confined for sixty days.
(8) Impoundment of pets without a valid rabies vaccination tag.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 18
i. Any pet found off the owner's premises and not wearing a valid rabies vaccination tag shall be impounded. All impounded pets shall be given proper care and maintenance.
ii. Notice of impoundment of all animals, including any significant marks of identification, shall be posted at the humane society as public notification of impoundment. Any unvaccinated pet may be reclaimed by its owners during the period of impoundment by payment of prescribed humane society fees and complying with rabies vaccination requirements of this chapter within seventy-two hours of release. Any vaccinated pet impounded because of lack of rabies vaccination tag may be reclaimed by its owner by furnishing proof of rabies vaccination and payment of all impoundment fees prior to release.
iii. Every dog or cat four months of age and older shall be licensed only upon proof of rabies vaccination in accordance with the provisions of this section.
iv. Notwithstanding all of the above, no pet need be vaccinated against rabies where a veterinarian certifies that, to a reasonable medical certainty, such vaccination would be fatal to the pet. The certification shall be upon a form provided by the Village Clerk, and shall be dated within the preceding twelve months. A license may be issued for pets so certified. Pets so certified shall nonetheless be subject to the provisions for quarantine and confinement of pets which have not received rabies shots.
(Ord. of 4-3-2013) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.121. Licenses required.
(a) Each owner of a dog or cat more than four months of age on January 1 of any year, or four months of age within the license year, shall annually, or on or before the date the dog or cat becomes four months of age, at the time and in the manner provided by law for the payment of property taxes, pay their dog or cat license fee and obtain a license therefore. No such license shall be issued without proof of compliance with the rabies control section of this chapter. The provisions of this section do not apply to:
(1) Dogs and/or cats whose owners are nonresidents and these animals are only temporarily visiting a residence or commercial establishment located within the village;
(2) Dogs and/or cats brought into the village for the purposes of participating in animal shows;
(3) Dogs and/or cats in temporary foster care of a licensed Animal Fancier.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 19
(4) Dogs and/or cats kept only for educational or scientific purposes.
(b) The license fees are provided for in the village fee schedule for the following:
1) Neutered/Spayed dogs
(2) Unneutered/Un-spayed dogs
(3) Neutered/Spayed cats
(4) Unneutered/Un-spayed cats
(c) A license will be one-half of the amounts set out in subsection (b) of this section if the dog or cat becomes four months of age after July 1 of the license year.
(d) Beginning April 1, 2009, a late fee of double the regular license fee in addition to the required license fee shall be collected from every owner of a dog or cat four months of age or over. If the owner failed to obtain a license prior to April 1 of each year, or within thirty days of acquiring ownership of a licensable dog or cat, or if the owner failed to obtain a license on or before the date the dog or cat reached licensable age.
(Ord. of 9-16-1985, §1(2), Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.122. Kennels.
(a) Definition. A kennel is a facility where dogs, cats or other animals are kept for 24 hours or more for boarding, training or similar purposes for compensation. This does not include animal shelters or a facility owned or operated by a veterinarian where animals are boarded only in conjunction with the provision of veterinary care.
(b) License required.
(1) It shall be unlawful to operate a kennel in the village without first obtaining a license pursuant to this chapter.
(2) Any person who keeps or operates a kennel shall apply to the village for a license for the keeping or operating of such kennel. Each kennel location operated shall be considered a separate enterprise and each enterprise shall have a license.
(3) A license will be issued and will remain valid as long as the applicant or establishment holding the license or applying for the license complies with all laws and regulations pertaining to the issuance of licenses and pays the required fees.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 20
(4) A license fee shall be paid for the license year for such kennel. Prior to issuance of such license by the village and annually thereafter, the premises shall be inspected by the humane officer to insure that the premises complies with the provisions of this chapter.
(5) A license is valid for 12 months and may be renewed in accordance to (3) and (4) of this subsection.
(6) The license shall be prominently displayed on the premises of the licensed kennel.
(7) The application for a license must contain a statement that the applicant agrees to comply with the standards set forth herein, agrees to allow inspections by humane officers or law enforcement officers of animals and the premises, and a statement whether the applicant has ever been convicted of cruelty to animals.
(8) If the kennel also sells animals for compensation on the premise a separate commercial animal establishment license is required. (See Sec. 10.124 Commercial Animal Establishment).
(9) No license to operate a kennel shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of cruelty to animals.
(10) Licenses issued on the basis of false information supplied by the applicant shall be revoked and operation of the subject kennel shall be terminated upon revocation of the license.
(c) Application and fee.
(1) Each person requiring a license under this section shall complete an application form furnished by the village and shall file the completed application with the Village Clerk.
(2) The application forms furnished by the village under this section shall require the following information and such additional information as the village may deem necessary:
i. The address, parcel square footage and zoning classification of the subject premises;
ii. A list of the types of animals to be kept on the subject premises;
iii. The purpose of obtaining the license.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 21
iv. A plot plan showing the location of any dog runs or structures used to house the dogs and parking areas for the customers.
(3) Approval by the Village of building, site and operational plans as set forth in Chapter 94 Article 4 Sec. 94.4.05(12), Chapter 94 Article 16 Secs. 94.16.04 and 94.16.06.
(4) The annual fee to be paid to the village for a kennel license under this section shall be established in the village fee schedule.
(d) Grant or denial of license.
(1) The Plan Commission shall review the application and shall make a recommendation to the Board of Trustees whether to grant or deny the license based on the material submitted in the application, the submitted operational plan and its compliance with Chapter 94 Article 4 Sec. 94.4.05(12), Chapter 94 Article 16 Secs. 94.16.04 and 94.16.06.
(2) The Village Board, after receiving a recommendation from the Plan Commission, shall vote to grant or deny the license. In addition to the operational plans of subsection (f) below, the Plan Commission, or board may impose additional conditions on the grant of any license under this section; and failure to comply with such conditions may be cause for revocation of the license.
(e) Limitations.
(1) A kennel license may be granted for property zoned as commercial and on residentially zoned property where allowed as a permitted use or by conditional grant.
(f) Operations. All kennels shall comply with the following standards:
(1) All animals shall be quartered, and the quarters in which the animals are kept shall be maintained in a clean condition and in a good state of repair.
(2) There shall be sufficient clean, dry bedding to meet the needs of each individual animal. Litter and/or bedding material shall be changed as often as necessary and there shall be adequate ventilation to prevent an odor nuisance.
(3) Feces shall be removed from pens and enclosures as often as necessary to prevent unsanitary conditions and odor nuisance.
(4) All cages and enclosures are to be of a nonporous material for easy cleaning and disinfecting and shall have secure latches in good repair. Each cage must be of
Chapter 10 Animals Page 22
sufficient size that the animal will have room to stand, turn, and stretch out to its full length.
(5) The floor and walls of any room in which animals are kept shall be covered with impervious, smooth, cleanable surface. The floors and walls shall be cleaned and disinfected as often as necessary to prevent an odor nuisance.
(6) The premises shall be kept free of insect and rodent infestations. Food supplies shall be stored in rodent-proof containers.
(7) Water: There shall be available hot water for washing cages. Fresh drinking water shall be available to all species at all times. All water containers shall be mounted so the animal cannot easily turn them over, and be removable for cleaning.
(8) Feeding: Food for all animals and birds shall be served in a clean dish so mounted that the animal cannot readily tip it over or defecate or urinate in same.
(9) All animals must be fed and watered according to the accepted procedure for that species and cages cleaned every day.
(10) Shade Required: Shade from the direct rays of the sun shall be provided for all animals.
(11) Each bird must have sufficient room to sit on a perch. Perches shall be placed horizontal to each other in the same cage. Cages must be cleaned every day and cages must be disinfected when birds have returned to their owners. Parrots and other large birds shall have separate cages from smaller birds.
(g) Term of license. Licenses issued under this subsection shall expire annually on June 30. Renewals of licenses may be granted by the Village Board after recommendation by the Plan Commission.
(h) Inspection.
(1) Humane officers shall be permitted to inspect all kennels and animals therein at any time during the business hours of the establishment or at other reasonable times established in this section.
(2) All reports of such inspections shall be made in writing and maintained by the humane officer.
(3) Humane officers are authorized to enter the structure or premises wherein kennel regulated under this chapter is maintained (or believed to be maintained) at reasonable times to inspect, subject to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 23
(4) If the owner or those in possession of a structure or premises wherein a kennel regulated under this chapter is maintained (or believed to be maintained) refuse inspection of said kennel, the humane officer may obtain an inspection warrant from Marathon County Circuit Court or the municipal court in order to determine if the kennel is maintained in accordance with village ordinances.
(5) Refusal to permit inspection shall result in immediate revocation of license to operate a kennel. The humane officer shall give the licensee notice of this action. The licensee may request a hearing before the Village Board with regards to the revocation; such request must be made in writing, to the Village Clerk, within 10 days from the refusal to inspect.
(6) In the event that the humane officers find the kennel in violation of the Animal Welfare Act and/or any section of this chapter, the kennel shall have a 30-day grace period to correct the violation.
(7) Nothing in this section shall inhibit a humane officer from requesting the search and/or seizure of any premises from a court of competent jurisdiction.
(8) Violations. Licensees will be allowed 30 days, following written notification of any violations of this subsection or any subsection of this chapter by the humane officer or their designee, to correct any violations. Failure to correct these violations shall result in immediate revocation of the license by the Village board.
(i) Appeal; Denial or Revocation of a License.
(1) Any person who is denied a license or whose license is revoked may appeal the denial or revocation to the Zoning Board of Appeals within 60 days of the date of the denial or revocation of the license.
(2) All requests for appeals must be in writing and addressed to the Clerk; whereupon, the Clerk shall set the appeal for hearing within 45 days of the receipt of the written request.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 16-050 of 12/21/2016; Ord. No 17-033 of 9/21/2017; Ord. No. 18-001 of 1/20/2018; Ord. No 19-009 of 8/21/2019]
Sec. 10.123. Animal Fanciers.
(a) An animal fancier is any person who owns or keeps, when accessory to an established residential use, four (4) to ten (10) cats and/or dogs for personal and noncommercial purposes, which includes but is not limited to hunting, tracking, exhibition in shows, obedience trials, field trials, dog sledding, animal foster rescue or to enhance or
Chapter 10 Animals Page 24
perpetuate a given breed, and other uses determined by the humane officers to be similar in nature.
(b) License required. An Animal Fancier License is issued to an animal fancier on an annual basis for the keeping of four (4) to ten (10) cats and/or dogs pursuant to the regulations of this section.
(c) Application and fee.
(1) Each person requiring a license under this section shall complete an application form furnished by the village and shall file the completed application with the Village Clerk.
(2) The application forms furnished by the village under this section shall require the following information and such additional information as the village may deem necessary:
i. premises;
ii. A list of the animals to be kept on the subject premises, including the breed and age of each dog;
iii. The purpose of obtaining the license.
iv. If applicable, documentation for any animals currently used for exhibition in shows, obedience trials or field trials.
v. If applicable, documentation that the property owner is an animal foster parent with a valid Foster Animal Rescue Program. The humane officer shall be authorized to make the determination that a Foster Animal Rescue Program is valid.
vi. A plot plan showing the location of any dog runs or structures used to house the dogs.
(3) The fee to be paid to the village for a license under this section shall be established in the village fee schedule.
(d) Grant or denial of permit; Notice.
(1) Following review and approval by the Humane Officer, Plan Commission shall review the application and shall make a recommendation to the Board of Trustees on whether to grant or deny the license.
(2) The Plan Commission may, but is not required to hold a hearing before deciding whether to recommend to the Village board to grant or deny a license under this
Chapter 10 Animals Page 25
section. If the Plan Commission chooses to hold a hearing, a copy of the notice
of the meeting at which the hearing will be held shall be mailed to the owners of
property within 300 feet of the applicant’s property and the owners of the
property immediately across the street at least 14 days prior to the hearing.
(3) If the Plan Commission does not hold a public hearing on the license
application, a copy of the meeting notice at which the application will be acted
upon shall be mailed to the owners of property within 300 feet of the applicant’s
property and the owners of property immediately across the street at least 7 days
before the meeting.
(4) The Village board, after receiving a recommendation from the Plan
Commission, shall vote to grant or deny the license. In addition to the
operational plans of subsection (f) below, the Plan Commission, or board may
impose additional conditions on the grant of any license under this section; and
failure to comply with such conditions may be cause for revocation of the
license.
(e) Limitations.
(1) There shall be no more than one animal fancier license issued to any qualified
property.
(2) No person in a multiple family dwelling or mobile home, (2F, MF, MH) shall be
granted an animal fancier license.
(f) Operation.
(1) All animals kept or maintained on a premise under an animal fancier license
issued under this section must also be duly licensed by the village, except
animals that are in temporary foster care are not required to be licensed.
(2) All animals shall be owned by the license holder or the occupant of the
residence, except animals that are in temporary foster care.
(3) All animals shall be maintained in a healthy condition or, if ill, shall be given
appropriate treatment immediately.
(4) The quarters in which animals are kept shall be maintained per Sec. 10.118 of
this chapter.
(5) Feces and odorous materials shall be removed from yards, pens, and enclosures
at least once daily and such material shall be stored in tightly covered metal
containers until final disposal.
(6) The premises and the animals shall be kept free of insect infestation.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 26
(7) All animal pens or enclosures shall be sufficiently large to permit freedom of movement to the animals.
(g) Term of license. Licenses issued under this subsection shall expire annually on December 31. Renewals of licenses may be granted by the Village Board after recommendation by the Plan Commission.
(h) Inspection. Any person accepting a license under this section thereby agrees to allow inspections by the humane office or their designee or representative of those parts of the premises where animals are kept. Such inspections shall be made following five days written notice between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. unless a written complaint has been submitted to the humane officer or the village, signed by an owner or occupant of an adjoining property alleging that violations occur between 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(i) Violations. License holders will be allowed 10 days, following written notification of any violations of this subsection or any subsection of this chapter by the humane officer or their designee, to correct any violations. Failure to correct these violations shall result in immediate revocation of the license by the Village Board.
(j) Appeal; Denial or Revocation of a License.
(1) Any person who is denied a license or whose license is revoked may appeal the denial or revocation to the Zoning Board of Appeals within 60 days of the date of the denial or revocation of the license.
(2) All requests for appeals must be in writing and addressed to the Clerk; whereupon, the Clerk shall set the appeal for hearing within 45 days of the receipt of the written request.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027 of 11/18/2015; Ord. No 16-050 of 12/21/2016; Ord. No 18-001 of 1/20/2018; Ord. No 19-009 of 8/21/2019]
Sec. 10.124. Commercial Animal Establishment.
(a) License required.
(1) Any person who keeps or operates a commercial animal establishment shall apply to the village for a license for the keeping or operating of such commercial animal establishment. Each establishment operated shall be considered a separate enterprise and each enterprise shall have a license.
(2) A license will be issued and will remain valid as long as the applicant or establishment holding the license or applying for the license complies with all
Chapter 10 Animals Page 27
laws and regulations pertaining to the issuance of licenses and pays the required fees.
(3) A license fee shall be paid for the license year for such establishment. Prior to issuance of such license by the village and annually thereafter, the premises shall be inspected by the humane officer to ensure that the premises complies with the provisions of this chapter.
(4) A license issued under this subsection shall expire annually on June 30 and may be renewed in accordance to (2) of this subsection.
(5) The license shall be prominently displayed on the premises of the licensed establishment.
(6) The application for a license must contain a statement that the applicant agrees to comply with the standards set forth herein, agrees to allow inspections by humane officers or law enforcement officers of animals and the premises, and a statement whether the applicant has ever been convicted of cruelty to animals.
(7) If the commercial animal establishment also conducts boarding of animals for compensation on the premise a separate kennel license is required. (See Sec. 10.122 Kennels).
(8) No license to operate commercial animal establishment shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of cruelty to animals.
(9) Licenses issued on the basis of false information supplied by the applicant shall be revoked and operation of the subject commercial animal establishment shall be terminated upon revocation of the license.
(b) License fees. The license fees are provided for in the village fee schedule for the following:
(1) Fees for circus’ and transient animal exhibitions:
(2) Fees for non-municipal animal shelters/sanctuaries:
(3) Fees for pet shops:
(4) Fees for any other commercial animal establishments:
(c) Exemptions.
(1) Municipal animal shelters shall be exempt from all licenses.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 28
(2) Veterinary hospitals shall be exempt from all license fees unless engaged in commercial breeding and/or boarding, excluding hospitalization.
(3) Groomers shall be exempt from license fees unless engaged in commercial boarding and/or breeding. (See Sec. 10.122. Kennels)
(4) Boarding Kennels licensed under Sec. 10.122. Kennels.
(d) Animal health. Each holder shall take reasonable care to release for sale, trade, or adoption only those animals which are free of disease, injuries, or abnormalities. The humane officer may request an examination by a veterinarian. The following shall deem an animal unfit for sale or release:
(1) Obvious signs of infectious diseases such as distemper, hepatitis, leptospirosis, rabies, or other similar disease.
(2) Obvious signs of nutritional deficiencies which may include rickets, emaciation, etc.
(3) Obvious signs of severe parasitism - extreme enough to be influencing general health.
(4) Obvious fractures or congenital abnormalities affecting general health of animal.
(e) Operational standards. All commercial animal establishments shall comply with the following standards:
(1) All animals, birds, or fish shall be displayed in a healthy condition or, if ill, removed from display and shall be given appropriate treatment immediately.
(2) All animals shall be quartered, and the quarters in which the animals are kept shall be maintained in a clean condition and in a good state of repair.
(3) There shall be sufficient clean, dry bedding to meet the needs of each individual animal. Litter and/or bedding material shall be changed as often as necessary and there shall be adequate ventilation to prevent an odor nuisance.
(4) Feces shall be removed from pens and enclosures as often as necessary to prevent unsanitary conditions and odor nuisance.
(5) All cages and enclosures are to be of a nonporous material for easy cleaning and disinfecting and shall have secure latches in good repair. Each cage must be of sufficient size that the animal will have room to stand, turn, and stretch out to its full length.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 29
(6) The floor and walls of any room in which animals are kept shall be covered with impervious, smooth, cleanable surface. The floors and walls shall be cleaned and disinfected as often as necessary to prevent an odor nuisance.
(7) The premises shall be kept free of insect and rodent infestations. Food supplies shall be stored in rodent-proof containers.
(8) Water: There shall be available hot water for washing cages. Fresh drinking water shall be available to all species at all times. All water containers shall be mounted so the animal cannot easily turn them over, and be removable for cleaning.
(9) Feeding: Food for all animals and birds shall be served in a clean dish so mounted that the animal cannot readily tip it over or defecate or urinate in same.
(10) All animals must be fed and watered according to the accepted procedure for that species and cages cleaned every day.
(11) Fish: The water temperature shall be maintained at a temperature that is healthful.
(12) Shade Required: Shade from the direct rays of the sun shall be provided for all animals.
(13) Each bird must have sufficient room to sit on a perch. Perches shall be placed horizontal to each other in the same cage. Cages must be cleaned every day and cages must be disinfected when birds are sold. Parrots and other large birds shall have separate cages from smaller birds.
(f) Inspection of animals and premises.
(1) Humane officers shall be permitted to inspect all commercial animal establishments and animals therein at any time during the business hours of the establishment or at other reasonable times established in this section.
(2) All reports of such inspections shall be made in writing and maintained by the humane officer.
(3) Humane officers are authorized to enter the structure or premises wherein an establishment regulated under this chapter is maintained (or believed to be maintained) at reasonable times to inspect, subject to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures.
(4) If the owner or those in possession of a structure or premises wherein an establishment regulated under this chapter is maintained (or believed to be maintained) refuse inspection of said establishment, the humane officer may
Chapter 10 Animals Page 30
obtain an inspection warrant from Marathon County Circuit Court or the municipal court in order to determine if the establishment is maintained in accordance with county ordinances.
(5) Refusal to permit inspection shall result in immediate revocation of license to operate a commercial animal establishment. The humane officer shall give the licensee notice of this action. The licensee may request a hearing before the Village Board with regards to the revocation; such request must be made in writing, to the Village Clerk, within 10 days from the refusal to inspect.
(6) In the event that the humane officers finds the commercial animal establishment in violation of the Animal Welfare Act and/or any section of this chapter, the commercial animal establishment shall have a 30 day grace period to correct the violation.
(7) Nothing in this section shall inhibit a humane officer from requesting the search and/or seizure of any premises from a court of competent jurisdiction.
(g) Selling/transfer of animals.
(1) It is the duty of the seller to ensure that all animals sold or otherwise transferred are healthy, parasite free, and current with regard to vaccinations at the time of sale or transfer. No animal with disease, injury, or lacking required vaccinations will be sold or transferred without full disclosure to the buyer.
(2) Dogs or cats under the age of 8 weeks shall not be sold or transferred.
(3) Records of all sales or adoptions of animals shall be maintained by the seller for a period of two (2 years). Records will include the date of the transaction, species and breed, date of birth, sex, color and description of the animal, and the name and address and telephone number of the purchaser or adopter. Records shall be available on request to any humane officer.
(4) Any violation of this section constitutes an ordinance violation and may also result in the suspension or revocation of license to operate a commercial animal establishment.
(5) The Village Board or the humane officer shall give the licensee notice of the violation and of the repercussion of that violation. The licensee request a hearing before the Village Board with regards to suspension or revocation of the license, such request must be made in writing within ten (10) days from when notice is received.
(h) Offensive odors and noises regulated. No owner or operator of any establishment for the care, treatment or boarding of any animal in the village shall allow such establishment to be conducted so as to permit any offensive odor or unusual odor to
Chapter 10 Animals Page 31
escape from the premises. Nor shall any such owner or operator own, harbor or keep any animal on the premises which habitually barks, howls, yelps or emits other noises to the annoyance of any person. Any such activities prohibited by this section are declared to be a public nuisance.
(i) Violations and penalties. Any person or corporation who fails to obtain a license under this section or fails to comply with the provisions of this section or any order of the humane officer issued in accordance with this section, upon conviction, shall be prosecuted for the violation under Sec. 10.139 Penalty. Each day the person fails to obtain the license or each day the violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(j) Appeal; Denial or Revocation of a License.
(1) Any person who is denied a license or whose license is revoked may appeal the denial or revocation to the Zoning Board of Appeals within 60 days of the date of the denial or revocation of the license.
(2) All requests for appeals must be in writing and addressed to the Clerk; whereupon, the Clerk shall set the appeal for hearing within 45 days of the receipt of the written request.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-033, 9/21/2017]
Sec. 10.125. Restrictions on keeping of dogs and cats.
No person within the village shall own, harbor or keep any:
(a) Dog that habitually pursues any vehicle upon any public street, alley or highway in the village.
(b) Dog or cat that assaults or attacks any person.
(c) Dog or cat that is at large within the limits of the village.
(d) Dog that habitually barks or howls to the annoyance of any person.
(e) Dog or cat that kills, wounds or worries any domestic animal.
(f) Dog or cat that is known by any such person to be infected with rabies or to have been bitten by any animal known to have been infected with rabies.
(Ord. of 9-16-1985, § 1(3), Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 10 Animals Page 32
Sec. 10.126. Animals not to run at large.
(a) It shall be unlawful to own, keep, or harbor a dog or cat or other animal and allow such animal to run at large within the village limits.
(b) Under the provisions of this section, a dog or cat or other animal shall be considered as running at large when it is not on the premises of its owner, unless it is on a suitable leash. A suitable leash means nylon, rope, chain or leather strap attached to the dog’s collar on one end by a sturdy and secure clip and firmly attached to the individual. Any individual using a retractable/’flexi’ leash should always have the dog under their control. It shall be considered a violation if a dog crosses the common right-of-way and enters into another’s property.
(c) Exemptions. Dogs under the command of their owner within the confines of the Village of Weston dog park are not considered to be running at large.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008; Ord. of 8-4-2011) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-028, 7/26/2017]
Sec. 10.127. Disturbance prohibited.
The following are prohibited:
(a) The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl, whether licensed or not, which by frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing or making of other noises shall greatly annoy or disturb a neighborhood or any considerable number of persons within the village which tends to cause or create a disturbance is prohibited and is a public nuisance. An animal is considered to be in violation of this section when written complaints from two or more adults living in separate residences within audible distance of the noisy animal are filed with the police department or the village within a four-week period. No prosecution shall be commenced, except upon the request of the police department or village, following a written petition signed by two or more adult persons residing at different residences. Failure to correct the disturbance within 24 hours of written notification from a police officer or other designee of the village shall constitute a violation of this section and will subject the owner or occupant of the premises to the penalties set forth in Sec. 10.139 Penalty. Each day that such act exists constitutes a separate offense.
(b) Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to licensed animal veterinary hospitals or clinics operated for the treatment of animals or to the premises used and occupied by the village or animal shelter for impounding animals.
(Code 1982, §4.156(k), Ord. of 8-8-2008; Ord. of 7-23-2010) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 10 Animals Page 33
Sec. 10.128. Required removal of animal excreta.
(a) The owner or person having immediate care, custody or control of any animal shall promptly remove and dispose of, in a sanitary manner, any excreta left or deposited by the animal upon any public or private property.
(b) No person shall permit animal excreta to accumulate on any real property or premises owned or occupied by such person.
(c) It is unlawful for any person to permit an animal to be on public property or private property whether or not owned or possessed by such person unless such person has, in his immediate possession, an appropriate means of removing animal excreta.
(Ord. of 9-17-1994, § 2, Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-033, 9/21/2017]
Sec. 10.129. Animals on owners’ property.
The accumulation of animal feces or wastes upon private property in the village is declared to be a public nuisance. The owner or occupant of property upon which there exists any accumulation of animal feces or wastes shall remove all such wastes from his premises and dispose of the wastes in a safe and sanitary manner within 24 hours of written notification from a police officer or other designee of the village to remove the wastes. Failure to do so shall be a violation of this section and will subject the owner or occupant of the premises to the penalties set forth in Sec. 10.139 Penalty. Each day that such act exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-033, 9/21/2017]
Sec. 10.130. Impounding of Animals.
The Humane Officer of the village shall have the right to impound every animal, including dogs or cats, found or known to be running at large within the village. The humane officers of the village shall have the right to pursue an animal upon the premises of the owner or elsewhere. Any person shall have the right to capture and shall deliver to the humane officers any animal found running at large or trespassing upon any grounds, public or private, within the village.
(Ord. of 11-19-1990, §1, Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-033, 9/21/2017]
Sec. 10.131. Claiming impounded Animals.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 34
Impounded animals shall be forthwith delivered to the contracted facility by the humane officer or their designee. Any person whose animal has been impounded may obtain the animal’s release from the contracted facility by making payment to the contracted facility for all of the latter's costs, charges and/or expenses that were incurred as a result of the animal’s impoundment. Every person taking an animal from the contracted facility shall sign a receipt for the animal. If the animal is a dog or cat, the animal must either be vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian or a prepaid rabies certificate from a licensed veterinarian must be presented to the contracted facility before an impounded animal will be released. If the animal is not licensed per Sec. 10.121 of this chapter, the owner must obtain a license or a prepaid license through the village prior to the release of the animal. If the owner does not pay fees, expenses, license and reclaim the animal within seven (7) days of being notified of the impoundment, the animal will be put up for adoption without further notification, at the owner’s expense. If the animal is adopted, the expenses and fees may be paid by the new owner through adoption fees.
(Ord. of 9-16-1985, §1(5), Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-033, 9/21/2017]
Sec. 10.132. Female animals in season.
Any female dog or cat in season shall be kept confined in a building or secure kennel enclosure, veterinary hospital or boarding kennel during the duration of such season.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-033, 9/21/2017]
Sec. 10.133. Requirements for horse-drawn vehicles.
No horse, pony, mule or other beast of burden shall be allowed on any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way or upon public property unless the animal is properly attired to prevent animal waste from being deposited upon such public property or the owner of the animal shall be otherwise responsible for cleanup of all animal waste deposited upon public property by the animal.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-033, 9/21/2017]
Sec. 10.134. Injured animals.
(a) No person who owns harbors or keeps any animal shall fail to provide proper medical attention to such animal when and if such animal becomes sick or injured. In the event the owner of such animal cannot be located, the village or any animal control agency with whom the village has an agreement or contract shall have the authority to take custody of such animal for the purpose of providing medical treatment. The owner thereof shall reimburse the persons or organization for the costs of such treatment.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 35
(b) The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of a dog, cat or other animal which appears to be a pet shall immediately notify law enforcement officers or an animal control agency whose jurisdiction extends into the village.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-033, 9/21/2017]
Sec. 10.135. Animal control agency.
(a) The Village Board may contract with or enter into an agreement with such person, persons, organization or corporation to provide for the operation of a village animal shelter, impoundment of stray animals, confinement of certain animals, disposition of impounded animals and for assisting in the administration of rabies vaccinations programs.
(b) The Village Board delegates to any such animal control agency the authority to act pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-033, 9/21/2017]
Sec. 10.136. Partition or line fences.
(a) Maintenance. The respective occupants of adjoining lands, used and occupied for farming or grazing purposes, and the respective owners of adjoining lands when the lands of one of such owners is used and occupied for farming or grazing purposes, shall keep and maintain partition fences between their own and next adjoining premises in equal shares so long as either party continues to so occupy the premises; and such fences shall be kept in good repair throughout the year unless the occupants of the land on both sides otherwise mutually agree.
(b) Portion of fence required to be maintained by respective owners or occupants. Unless otherwise agreed, as evidenced by agreement in writing made by the owners, signed, sealed and witnessed by two witnesses, or by the fence viewers in writing under their hands, which agreement shall be recorded in the Village Clerk’s office, the respective occupants of adjoining lands, used and occupied for farming or grazing purposes, and the respective owners of adjoining lands when the lands of one of such owners is used and occupied for farming and grazing purposes, shall keep and maintain as his portion of the partition or line fence whenever practicable that half lying and being to his right as he faces the partition or line fence when standing on his own property or premises unless otherwise determined by the fence viewers.
(c) Legal fences. Legal fences as set out in Wis. Stat. § 90.02, and none other, are deemed and declared to be the legal and sufficient fences within the meaning of this section.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 36
(d) Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, in addition to the penalties provided for in Wis. Stats. Chapter 90, be punished by a forfeiture of not to exceed $100.00, together with costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be committed to the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day that such violation shall continue to exist shall constitute a new and separate offense under this section.
(Code 1982, §13.02, Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-033, 9/21/2017]
Sec. 10.137. Certain creatures forbidden.
(a) No person shall bring into, keep, harbor or maintain in the village any bees, wasps, hornets, poisonous snakes, farm animals, wolves or any animal which is in part of the canis lupis species or any animal raised for fur-bearing purposes, unless otherwise permitted in this code or another chapter in the Village Code of Ordinances.
(b) No person shall possess in any public park or place, including any playground or school ground, any animal or creature other than a domesticated dog or cat. Any such domesticated dog or cat in a public park or place shall be subject to all other applicable restrictions and requirements of this chapter.
(c) The prohibitions in subsection (a) and (b) of this section do not apply where the animals or creatures are in the care, custody or control of a veterinarian for treatment; agricultural fairs, shows or sales of farm animals/poultry sponsored by an agricultural organization and are no longer than seven days in duration; a display for judging purposes; an itinerant or transient carnival, circus or other like show; dog or cat shows or trials; public or private educational institutions; licensed or accredited research or medical institutions; retail pet shops; a horse, pony, mule or other beast of burden in connection with a horse-drawn carriage.
(d) The person or organization having custody and control of any animal permitted by this section shall be responsible for compliance with all other provisions of this chapter while the animal remains within the village limits.
[Created via Ord. No 17-033, 9/21/2017]
Sec. 10.138. Liability.
The village and/or its animal control agency or its designated agent shall not be liable to any person for the death, destruction, injury or disease caused to any animal that has been impounded pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 10 Animals Page 37
Sec. 10.139. Penalty.
(a) General penalties. Any person or corporation who fails to obtain a license under this chapter or fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order of the humane officer issued in accordance with this chapter shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than $50 nor more than $500 and the cost of prosecution for each violation including court costs and reasonable attorney’s fees; and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned until payment, but not exceeding 30 days. Each day the person fails to obtain the license or each day the violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) Schedule of cash deposits for violations. The cash deposit for the violation of any section or subsection of this chapter shall be $75. In addition, upon conviction, any person who has been found to have acted in violation of any section shall be liable for the costs of prosecution, including court costs and reasonable attorney’s fees; and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be imprisoned until payment, but not exceeding 30 days. For a second offense of a similar nature within a 12-month period, the cash deposit shall be $150; and for a third offense of a similar nature within a 12-month period, the cash deposit shall be $300.
(Ord. of 9-16-1985, §1(1), Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.140. Habitual Animal Offender.
(a) It shall be unlawful to be a habitual animal offender. For the purposes of this section, a habitual animal offender shall mean any animal owner or harborer, who within any three- year period is convicted with three or more violations of animal care regulations of this chapter. The controlling date is the date of each animal ordinance violation, not the date of the plea entered, or the conviction resulting there from.
(b) If found to be a habitual animal offender the court may order no animal ownership for a minimum period of three years, not to exceed ten years.
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.141. Severability.
The provisions of any part of this chapter are severable. If any provision or subsection hereof or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the other provisions, subsections and application of this chapter to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. It is the intent of this chapter that the same would have been adopted had such invalid provisions, if any, not been included herein.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 38
(Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
ARTICLE II DANGEROUS ANIMALS
Sec. 10.200. Dangerous Animals Prohibitions.
(a) No person shall own, harbor, keep, or maintain within the Village limits, any “dangerous animal”, except as provided in Sec. 10.203 below.
(b) No person may bring into or keep within the Village limits, any animal that is determined to be a “prohibited dangerous animal” under this section.
(c) No person shall offer for sale, sell, give away, breed, buy, or attempt to buy any dangerous animal within the Village except as permitted under this section.
(d) No person shall own or harbor any animal for the purpose of animal fighting, or train, torment, badger, bait, or use any animal for the purpose of causing or encouraging said animal to attack human beings or domestic animals when not provoked.
(e) The issuance of a citation under this section need not be predicated on a determination that an animal is a dangerous or prohibited dangerous animal.
(Ord. of 8-28-2013) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.201. Definitions.
Dangerous animal as used in this ordinance means:
(a) Any animal which approaches or chases any human being or domestic animal in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, without provocation, on public or private property;
(b) Any animal which bites, inflicts injury, attacks, or otherwise endangers the safety of human beings or domestic animals, without provocation, on public or private property; or
(c) Any animal owned, harbored, or trained primarily or in part for the purpose of fighting.
“Prohibited dangerous animal” as used in this ordinance means:
Chapter 10 Animals Page 39
(a) Any animal that, while off the owner’s or caretaker’s property, has killed a domesticated animal without provocation;
(b) Any animal that, without provocation, inflicts bodily harm on a person on public or private property;
(c) Any animal brought from another city, village, town or county that has been declared dangerous or vicious or its equivalent by that jurisdiction;
(d) Any dangerous animal that is not in compliance with any of the provisions of Sec. 10.203;
(e) Any animal declared dangerous under this section that subsequently has a second or more reported unprovoked incidents in which the animal has bitten, inflicted injury, attacked, or otherwise unreasonably endangered with aggressive or threatening behavior, the safety of a human being or pet animal on public or private property;
(f) Any dog that is subject to being destroyed under Wis. Stat. § 174.02(3), ; or
(g) Any animal, owned, harbored or trained primarily or in part for the purpose of fighting.
(Ord. of 8-28-2013) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.202. Procedure for declaring a dangerous animal.
(a) The chief of police or the chief’s designee, upon conducting an investigation, may issue an order declaring an animal to be a dangerous animal whenever he/she finds that an animal meets the definition of a dangerous animal in Sec. 10.201. An owner or caretaker wishing to contest an order under this section shall proceed as provided in Sec. 10.205.
(b) Upon an animal being declared dangerous, the owner or caretaker shall immediately comply with the signage, leashing, muzzling and confinement requirements of Sec. 10.203(c) and Sec. 10.203(e)-(g), with all other requirements in Sec. 10.203 being satisfied within thirty (30) days of the order.
(c) Upon written request by the owner or caretaker, the chief of police or the chief’s designee may waive any requirement specified in Sec. 10.203 that he/she deems to be inappropriate for a particular dangerous animal.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 40
(Ord. of 8-28-2013) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.203. Restrictions.
The owner or caretaker of any animal determined by the chief of police or the chief’s designee to be a dangerous animal shall comply with all of the following conditions:
(a) Registration. The owner or caretaker of any dangerous animal shall register it with the Village Clerk within 30 days of the order, and thereafter before January 1 of each year, by providing a current color photograph of the animal and payment of a $75.00 registration fee. The initial registration fee shall be reduced to $37.50 if the animal is required to be registered as a dangerous animal after July 1. Upon payment of the fee and satisfactory proof of compliance with the provisions and conditions of this ordinance, the owner shall be issued a dangerous animal certificate of registration. The owner or caretaker shall post the certificate of registration on the front door of the residence where the dangerous animal is being kept.
(1) The owner or caretaker of any dangerous animal shall also provide proof of current license and rabies certificate as required under Secs. 10.120 and 10.121 respectively at the time of registration and each year thereafter.
(b) Liability Insurance. At the time of registration, the owner or caretaker of any dangerous animal shall provide proof of liability insurance in the amount of at least $250,000 for any acts of property damage or liability incurred by virtue of personal injury inflicted by such animal. Such insurance shall name the village as coinsured solely for the purpose of notice of cancellation of the policy.
(c) Display of Sign. The owner or caretaker of any dangerous animal shall display signs on his or her premises facing out from all sides of the premises warning that there is a dangerous animal on the property. This sign shall be visible and capable of being read from a public highway or thoroughfare or within 20 feet of its placement. In addition, the sign shall include a pictorial symbol warning children of the presence of a dangerous animal.
(d) Identification. The owner or caretaker of the dangerous animal shall provide written proof from a licensed veterinarian or humane society a device which can be later detected to aid in the proper identification of the animal. The device must be numbered and the number must be provided to the chief of police or the chief’s designee.
(e) Collar. A leather collar shall be worn by the animal at all times, except when being groomed.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 41
(f) Duty to keep animal under restraint while on owner's or caretaker’s property. While on the owner's or caretaker’s property, a dangerous animal must be securely and humanely confined indoors or in a secure enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and designed to prevent the animal from escaping.
(1) Indoor confinement. No dangerous animal may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure on the premises of the owner or caretaker that would allow the animal to exit the premises of its own volition. No dangerous animal may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacles preventing the animal from exiting the structure.
(2) Outdoor confinement. When constructed in a yard, the pen or kennel shall be child proof from the outside and animal proof from the inside. A strong metal double fence with adequate space between fences (at least two feet) shall be provided so that a child cannot reach into the animal enclosure. Such pen or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides. The pen or structure shall be locked with a key or combination lock when the animal is within the structure. If it has no bottom secured sides, the sides must be imbedded into the ground no less than two feet. The enclosure must also provide protection from the elements for the animal. All structures erected to house dangerous animals shall comply with all village building and zoning regulations and be adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(g) Duty to keep animal under restraint while off owner's or caretaker’s premises. No owner or caretaker may permit a dangerous animal to go outside its dwelling, kennel or pen unless the animal is muzzled and restrained by a leather collar with harness and leather lead not exceeding four feet in length and is under control of an adult, able-bodied person competent to govern the animal and physically capable of controlling and restraining the animal. The animal may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts and buildings. The animal shall be muzzled in a humane way by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent the animal from biting persons or other animals.
(h) Spay and neuter requirement. The owner or caretaker shall provide written proof from a licensed veterinarian that the animal has been spayed or neutered.
(Ord. of 8-28-2013) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 10 Animals Page 42
Sec. 10.204. Procedure for declaring a prohibited dangerous animal.
(a) The chief of police or the chief’s designee, upon conducting an investigation, may issue an order declaring an animal to be a prohibited dangerous animal whenever he/she finds that an animal meets the definition of prohibited dangerous animal in Sec. 10.201. An owner or caretaker wishing to contest an order under this section shall proceed as provided in Sec. 10.205.
(b) Upon issuance of an order declaring an animal to be a prohibited dangerous animal, the owner or caretaker shall remove the animal from the village with five (5) days after the date of the order.
(c) No owner or caretaker of a prohibited dangerous animal may sell or transfer possession of the animal to any other person within the village.
(d) Any animal declared to be a prohibited dangerous animal that is not removed from the village within five days of it being declared a prohibited dangerous animal may be seized by the village pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 173.13(1).
(e) The owner or caretaker shall provide the chief of police or the chief’s designee within five days of the animal being declared a prohibited dangerous animal, the name, address, and telephone number of the person that will be in possession of the prohibited dangerous animal or a certification from a licensed veterinarian or local humane society that the prohibited dangerous animal was humanely euthanized. The owner or caretaker shall also present evidence to the police department showing that he or she has notified the police department or other law enforcement agency of the animal’s new residence, including the name, address and telephone number of the new owner and advised that the animal is a prohibited dangerous animal.
(Ord. of 8-28-2013) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 10 Animals Page 43
Sec. 10.205. Appeal process for dangerous and prohibited dangerous animal.
(a) Whenever an owner or caretaker wishes to contest an order of the chief of police or the chief’s designee to declare an animal dangerous under subsection (c) or prohibited dangerous under Sec. 10.204, he or she shall, within seventy-two (72) hours after receipt of the order, deliver to the Village Clerk, a written objection to the order, addressed to the Village Board, stating specific reasons for contesting the order. Upon receipt of the written objection, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for the Village Board to be reviewed at the next regular meeting. The Village Board shall act as a quasi- judicial body allowing the animal’s owner or caretaker an opportunity to present evidence as to why the animal should not be declared dangerous or prohibited dangerous.
(b) After the hearing, the owner or caretaker shall be notified of the Village Board’s determination.
(c) If the owner or caretaker wishes to further contest the determination, he or she may, within five (5) days of receiving the Village Board’s decision, seek a review of the decision by the circuit court.
(Ord. of 8-28-2013) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027 of 11/18/2015; Ord, No 18-001 of 1/20/2018; Ord. No 19-009 of 8/21/2019]
Sec. 10.206. Notification.
(a) The owner or caretaker of a dangerous animal shall notify the police department immediately if a dangerous animal is at large.
(b) The owner or caretaker of a dangerous animal shall notify the police department with twenty-four (24) hours if the dangerous animal has bitten or inflicted injury upon another animal or human being, or has died.
(c) No owner or caretaker may sell or transfer possession of a dangerous animal to another person without first notifying the person to whom the dangerous animal is being sold or transferred of the fact that such animal is a dangerous animal. The owner or caretaker shall also provide the police department with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the dangerous animal. If the dangerous animal is sold or transferred to a person outside the village, the owner or caretaker shall present evidence to the police department showing that he or she has notified the police department or other law enforcement agency of the animal’s new residence, including the name, address and telephone number of the new owner and advised that the animal is a dangerous animal.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 44
(d) The owner or caretaker shall update the Village Clerk and the police department within five days upon moving the dangerous animal to another location.
(Ord. of 8-28-2013) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.207. Impoundment.
(a) Pending any investigation as to whether an animal is a dangerous or prohibited dangerous animal or pending a hearing on an appeal under Sec. 10.205 of either determination, the animal must be securely confined in a humane manner either on the premises of the owner or caretaker or with a licensed veterinarian. The owner or caretaker of any animal impounded on the premises of the owner or caretaker must comply with the restrictions set forth in Sec. 10.203(c) and (e)-(g). The chief of police or the chief’s designee may order impoundment of the animal pending his/her investigation and through any appeal hearing under Sec. 10.205, pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 173.13(1). If an animal is determined to be dangerous, it may remain impounded until the owner or caretaker has complied with all restrictions set forth in Sec. 10.203 or until such time as the chief of police or the chief’s designee determines the animal may be safely returned to its owner or caretaker and upon payment of all costs and expenses under Sec. 10.207(b). If an animal is determined to be a prohibited dangerous animal, it may remain impounded until the owner or caretaker provides the police department adequate assurances that the animal will be removed from the village as provided in Sec. 10.204(b) and upon payment of all cost and expenses under Sec. 10.207(b). Any animal that has been impounded and remains unclaimed by its owner or caretaker for more than seven (7) days after written notice by certified mail has been sent to the owner or caretaker to his/her last known address advising that a determination has been made that the animal may be returned to the owner or caretaker upon compliance with the requirements of this subsection may be humanely euthanized pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 173.23.
(b) The owner or caretaker of the animal shall be liable to the village for the costs and expenses of impounding an animal unless the chief of police or the chief’s designee fails to declare the animal dangerous or prohibited dangerous or the determination is ultimately overturned by the Village Board or a reviewing court.
(c) The owner or caretaker of an animal confined on the premises under Sec. 10.207(a) shall immediately notify the police department if the animal is loose, unconfined, has attacked or bitten or injured another animal, or has attacked, bitten or injured a human being or has died. The animal shall not be sold or given away
Chapter 10 Animals Page 45
during the confinement or impoundment period.
(d) The chief of police or the chief’s designee shall make a reasonable attempt to promptly notify the owner or caretaker in writing of any impoundment under this subsection if he or she can be identified and located with reasonable effort. Mailing written notice to the owner’s or caretakers last known address shall satisfy this requirement.
(Ord. of 8-28-2013) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027 of 11/18/2015; Ord. No 18-001 of 1/20/2018; Ord. No 19-009 of 8/21/2019]
Sec. 10.208. Destruction.
Any dog that has caused serious injury to a person or a domestic animal on two separate occasions off the owner’s premises, without reasonable cause may be destroyed as a result of a judgment rendered by a court of competent jurisdiction as specified under Wis. Stat. § 174.02(3). The Village Attorney may petition an appropriate court to obtain a court order to destroy such a dog.
(Ord. of 8-28-2013) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.209. Duration of dangerous animal status.
(a) The chief of police or the chief’s designee may remove the declaration of dangerous animal upon petition by the owner or caretaker of an animal upon a finding of all of the following:
(1) The owner or caretaker demonstrates that changes in circumstances or measures taken by the owner or caretaker have mitigated the risk to public safety;
(2) The owner or caretaker demonstrates there have been no additional reported instances of the behavior set forth in Sec. 10.201 within a 36-month period from the date of the order declaring the animal dangerous;
(3) The owner or caretaker provides documentation from an accredited dog training specialist of attending and passing either an animal socialization program offered through the Association of Pet Dog Trainers or the American Kennel Club Canine Good Citizen Program; and
(4) The chief of police or the chief’s designee concludes from all of the evidence presented the animal no longer presents a risk to public safety.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 46
(Ord. of 8-28-2013) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.210. Penalties for violations.
(a) An owner or caretaker of a dangerous animal who fails to comply with the provisions of Sec. 10.203 is subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $250.00 per day.
(b) An owner or caretaker of a dangerous animal who violates subsections Sec. 10.200(a), (c), or (d) is subject to the forfeiture provided for in Sec. 1.111 of the Municipal Code.
(c) An owner or caretaker of a prohibited dangerous animal who violates Sec. 10.200(b) is subject to a forfeiture of not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00 per day.
(d) An owner or caretaker of a dangerous or prohibited dangerous animal who violates any other provision of this section is subject to a forfeiture of not less than $25.00 or more than $250.00 per day.
Every day that a violation of this ordinance continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who violates this ordinance shall pay all expenses including shelter, food, handling, veterinary care, and expert testimony fees necessitated by enforcement of this ordinance.
(Ord. of 8-28-2013) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.211. Exemptions.
The provisions of this ordinance regarding dangerous animals shall not apply to animals owned by law enforcement agencies and used for law enforcement purposes.
(Ord. of 8-28-2013) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.212. Severability.
If any provision of this ordinance is adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of this ordinance.
(Ord. of 8-28-2013) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 10 Animals Page 47
ARTICLE III HUNTING
Sec. 10.300. Definitions.
(a) Hunt or hunting includes shooting, shooting at, pursuing, taking, capturing or killing or attempting to capture or kill any wild animal, bird or waterfowl.
(b) Zones are defined as:
(1) Archery zones includes bows, and cross bows (as permitted by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources).
(2) Non-restrictive includes: shotguns of all types; bows and cross bows (as permitted by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources); non-cartridge black powder (or substitute) firing rifles, shotguns or pistols; cartridge firing rifles, shotguns or pistols.
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1, Ord. of 3-18-2005, Ord. of 8-8-2008, Ord. of 8-23-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.301. Permitted activity zones.
(a) Map. The non-restrictive zone shall be as depicted on the most current official "Village of Weston Non-restrictive Hunting Zone Maps" created July 2015 or its successor.
Any parcel which is contained within the “Non-restrictive” zone on the most current Village of Weston Non-restrictive Hunting Zone Map is eligible for non-restrictive hunting as per the definition of Sec. 10.300(b)(2)
(b) Conformity. All hunting shall be in conformity with Wisconsin State Statute Chapter 29 "Wild Animals and Plants" and regulations as established by the Wisconsin Natural Resources Code NR 10, and United States Fish and Wildlife Agency.
All hunting shall be in conformity with the uses permitted according to Chapter 94 (Zoning) and Chapter 54 (Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions) of the Municipal Code of the Village of Weston.
(c) Bow and crossbow hunting – Restrictions. Bow and crossbow hunting are permitted throughout the village, but not on any municipality owned or leased land, and not within 100 yards of any permanent building or structure used for human occupancy on another person’s land. This distance restriction does not apply if the person who owns the land on which the building or structure is located allows the hunter to hunt
Chapter 10 Animals Page 48
within 100 yards of the building or structure. All bows and crossbows shall be
discharged toward the ground (e.g. from a tree stand).
(d) Special permits. In Archery Zones, special permits for unrestricted small game,
waterfowl, and large game hunting may be granted upon application to the Village
Board through the Village of Weston Parks and Recreation Committee. Such permits
shall be valid from July 1 to June 30 of each year and shall cover the Wisconsin small
game season, waterfowl season, and big game hunting season including "special"
seasons. Small game and waterfowl season hunting restrictions shall also apply to
these permits.
Archery zoned Special Permits shall be restricted to; rimfire rifles and handguns; air
rifles; and shotguns firing shot size and type as permitted by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources.
(1) Applications for Special Hunting Permit(s) shall be submitted to the Village of
Weston Community Life & Public Safety Committee for their review and
recommendation at the next available meeting.
The application will be reviewed by the Parks and Recreation Committee to
assess the location of the area to be hunted, the terrain, vegetation density, its
proximity to; residences, businesses, schools, commercial structures, public
parks, major roadways, and the probability of stray shots striking persons, or
structures.
The Village Board of the Village of Weston shall have the final authority to
grant or deny such permits.
An applicant may appeal the denial of a special hunting permit to the Village of
Weston, Village Board.
(2) Applicants must own, lease, or have written permission from the owner of a
parcel of land located in one of the "archery zones" as delineated in the official
"Village of Weston Designated Hunting Zones" created August 2014 or its
successor.
(3) That parcel of land must be zoned AG (Agriculture), RR-5 (Rural Residential, 5
acres) RR-2 (Rural Residential) greater than or equal to 2.75 (two and three
quarters) acres. Changes in zoning which remove the permitted parcel from any
of the above listed zones shall render the permit null and void.
(Ord. of 8-3-2015) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027 of 11/18/2015]
Sec. 10.302. Enforcement and penalties.
Chapter 10 Animals Page 49
(a) Enforcement. Enforcement of the provisions of this section shall fall under the jurisdiction of the Everest Metropolitan Police Department, Marathon County Sheriff's Department
(b) Penalties. Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than thirty dollars ($30.00), or not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. of 7-1-2002, § 1, Ord. of 3-18-2005, Ord. of 8-8-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 1
Chapter 14
BUILDING AND BUILDING REGULATIONS*
Article I. In General
Sec. 14.100. No liability.
Article II. Building and Construction Codes*
DIVISION 1. BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
Sec. 14.200. Building code and regulations.
DIVISION 2. COMMERCIAL BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
Sec. 14.201. Commercial Electrical Code and Regulations.
Sec. 14.202. Permit Required.
Sec. 14.203. Fees.
Sec. 14.204. Penalties.
__________
Cross References--Fire Prevention and Protection, Chapter 34; Sanitation, Chapter 38; Mobile Homes, Chapter 46; applicability of plumbing, electrical and building codes to mobile home parks, § 46.107; Planning Commission, Chapter 62; Solid Waste, Chapter 66; Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places, Chapter 70; building material on streets and sidewalks, § 70.105; Subdivision Regulations, Chapter 74; Utilities, Chapter 86; Zoning, Chapter 94.
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 2
Article III. Administration and Enforcement
DIVISION 1. INSPECTOR
Sec. 14.300. Appointment.
Sec. 14.301. Compensation.
Sec. 14.302. Duties.
Sec. 14.303. Access to premises.
Sec. 14.304. Records.
Sec. 14.305. Change.
Sec. 14.306. Open excavations prohibited.
DIVISION 2. PERMITS AND FEES
Sec. 14.307. Licenses and fee.
Sec. 14.308. Required.
Sec. 14.309. Applications for permits.
Sec. 14.310. Waiver of certain requirements.
Sec. 14.311. Compliance with other Village Ordinances.
Sec. 14.312. Conditions for the issuance of permit.
Sec. 14.313. Survey.
Sec. 14.314. Inspector may revoke permits.
Sec. 14.315. Furnishing of grade level.
Sec. 14.316. Plumbing; roof trusses; electrical work.
Sec. 14.317. Time limitations.
Sec. 14.318. Moving permits.
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 3
DIVISION 3. INSPECTIONS AND ORDERS
Sec. 14.319. Inspections.
Sec. 14.320. Certificate of occupancy.
Article IV. Demolition/Razing of Buildings
Sec. 14.400. Demolition/razing regulations; purpose.
Sec. 14.401. Permit required.
Sec. 14.402. Liability of independent contractor.
Sec. 14.403. Demolition/razing of building, permit fee.
Sec. 14.404. Public safety.
Sec. 14.405. Removal of rubble and rubbish and other requirements.
Article V. House and Building Numbering
Sec. 14.500. Intent.
Sec. 14.501. Jurisdiction.
Sec. 14.502. Applicability.
Sec. 14.503. Implementation and Administration.
Sec. 14.504. Guidelines of Interpretation.
Sec. 14.505. Street Naming.
Sec. 14.506. Addressing Procedures.
Sec. 14.507. Signing.
Sec. 14.508. Change of Existing Addresses.
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 4
Sec. 14.509. Corrections.
Sec. 14.510. Numbers Required.
Sec. 14.511. Enforcement/Penalties.
Sec. 14.512. Administrative Provisions.
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 5
ARTICLE I IN GENERAL
Sec. 14.100. No liability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed so as to impose any liability or the assumption of liability on the part of the village for damages to anyone injured or any property destroyed by any defect in any building or equipment or in any heating, ventilating, air conditioning, electrical, plumbing or other equipment.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.13), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
ARTICLE II BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION CODES*
DIVISION 1. BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
Sec. 14.200. Building code and regulations.
(a) Adoption of Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code. All of the following chapters of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, all of which apply to one- and two-family dwellings and alterations and additions to such dwellings. This code applies to alterations and additions to one- and two-family dwellings built prior to the UDC 1980 and accessory structures, and any subsequent revisions or amendments to any of those chapters, are made by reference a part of this Code and are hereby adopted and shall be enforced by the village, copies of which shall be kept on file in the office of the village clerk and in the office of the building inspector: SPS 320 Administration and Enforcement SPS 321 Construction Standard SPS 322 Energy Conservation SPS 364 Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning SPS 316 Electrical Standards SPS 382 Design, Construction, Installation, Supervision, Maintenance, Maintenance and Construction of Plumbing SPS 383 Private Onsite Wastewater Treatment Systems SPS 384 Plumbing Products
_____________________________________
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 6
State Law References – Enforcement of building codes generally, Wis. Stat. § 62.17 SPS 385 Soil and Site Evaluations
(b) Adoption of additional Administrative Code provisions. All of the provisions of the following Wisconsin Administrative Code chapters insofar as they apply to villages, together with any subsequent revisions or amendments to such chapters, are made by reference a part of this Code and are adopted and shall be enforced by the village: SPS 305 Licenses, Certifications, and Regulations
(c) Original Codes. These codes can be viewed by accessing the State of Wisconsin Administrative Code at http://docs.legis.wisconsin.gov/code/admin_code/sps/safety_and_buildings_and_environment
(d) Zoning. No provision of this section shall be construed to repeal, modify or constitute an alternative to any of the zoning regulations.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.01), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018; Ord. No. 19-006, 4/17/2019]
DIVISION 2. COMMERCIAL BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
Sec. 14.201. Commercial Building Code and Regulations.
(a) Adoption of Wisconsin Administrative Building Code and Standards. All of the provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters SPS 361 to 366 entitled “Commercial Building Code,” together with any subsequent revisions or amendments thereof are made by reference a part of this code and are hereby adopted and shall be enforced by the Village, copies of which shall be kept on file in the offices of the Village Clerk and Building Inspector.
(b) Adoption of Wisconsin Administrative Plumbing Code and Standards. All of the provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters SPS380-387 entitled “Plumbing Code” together with any subsequent revisions or amendments thereof are made by reference a part of this code and are hereby adopted and shall be enforced by the Village, copies of which shall be kept on file in the offices of the Village Clerk and Building Inspector.
(c) Adoption of Wisconsin Administrative Electrical Code. All of the provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter SPS 316 entitled “Electrical Code” together with any subsequent revisions or amendments thereof are made by reference a part of this code and are hereby adopted and shall be enforced by the
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 7
Village, copies of which shall be kept on file in the offices of the Village Clerk and Building Inspector.
(Ord. of 11-19-04, Ord. of 7-26-05, Ord. of 9-22-05, Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018]
Sec. 14.202. Permit Required.
No alteration or changes shall be made to any building, or building systems, without first securing from the Village of Weston a permit. Nor shall any change be made to any building or building systems after the inspection without notifying the Village of Weston and securing a permit therefore for additional work. The permit may be obtained by the owner or contractor or by the party by whom the work is to be performed. Any or all of the foregoing may be prosecuted for a failure to obtain the permit. The fees payable to the Village of Weston for permits are set forth in the village fee schedule and are paid prior to any work being performed.
(Ord. of 11-19-04, Ord. of 7-26-05, Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018]
Sec. 14.203. Fees.
Permit fees for the following shall be as provided in the village fee schedule.
A fee of triple the permit fees may be charged by the building inspector if work is started before a permit is applied for and issued. Such triple fee shall not release the applicant from full compliance with this chapter nor from prosecution for violation of this chapter.
(Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018]
Sec. 14.204. Penalties.
In addition to the failure to obtain a permit, revocation of a permit or the withholding of a building permit and injunctive relief, any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to Sec. 1.111. In any such action, the fact that a permit was issued shall not constitute a defense, nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of the building inspector constitute a defense. These remedies and penalties shall be in addition to those the state may impose for the same violation. The imposition of a forfeiture does not prevent revocation or suspension of a permit.
(Ord. of 11-19-2004, Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018]
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 8
ARTICLE III. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT*
DIVISION 1. INSPECTOR
Sec. 14.300. Appointment.
(a) Uniform Dwelling Code (UDC) Building Inspector. The UDC building inspector shall also be the inspector of plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, electrical and energy installations; and shall be the manufactured home inspector. The building inspector shall be appointed by the board.
(b) Commercial Electrical Inspector. There is hereby established the position of Electrical Inspector who shall be either appointed by the Village Board as a Village employee or contracted by the Board at the Board’s discretion to perform electrical inspection services.
(Code 1982, § 1.02(2)(a), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018]
Sec. 14.301. Compensation.
The building inspector shall receive such compensation as the board shall prescribe.
(Code 1982, § 1.02(2)(c), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 14.302. Duties.
The building inspector shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter and shall perform the duties specified in the Village of Weston Municipal Code Sec. 94.16.15, together with such other duties as are prescribed by ordinance and the laws of the state.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.02(1)(a)), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
_______________
*Cross References -- Administration Chapter 2
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 9
Sec. 14.303. Access to premises.
The building inspector or authorized agent shall have the power and authority, at all reasonable hours, for any proper purpose, to enter upon any public or private premises and to make inspection and to require the production of the permit and plans for any building, plumbing, electrical or heating and ventilating work being done or the required license. No person shall interfere with or refuse to permit access to any such premises by the building inspector while in performance of their duties.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.02(1)(b)), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018]
Sec. 14.304. Records.
There shall be kept in the office of the building inspector a record of all applications for building permits, the book for such purpose, with each permit regularly numbered in the order of its issue. In addition, there shall be kept in the office of the building inspector a record showing the number, description and size of all buildings erected, indicating the number of materials used and the cost of each building and the aggregate cost of all buildings in the various classes. Records of all inspections made, including the razing, removal and condemnation of buildings and fees collected for such work, shall likewise be maintained by the building inspector and shall be available for public inspection at reasonable times and intervals.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.02(1)(c)), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 14.305. Change.
It shall be unlawful to change the use of any building, structure or premises without first obtaining from the building inspector an approval of such change in the occupancy or use and a certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.05(3)), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 14.306. Open excavations prohibited.
(a) No excavation for building or any other purpose in the village, whether or not completed, shall be left open for more than six months without proceeding with the erection of a building. If any such excavation remains open for more than six months, the building inspector shall order the erection of a building on the excavation to begin forthwith or in the alternative, that the excavation be filled to grade.
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 10
(b) Such order shall be served upon the owner of record or agent or an agent in charge of the premises and upon the holder of an encumbrance of record in the manner provided for service of a summons in the circuit court. If the owner or the holder of an encumbrance of record cannot be found, the order may be served by posting it on the premises and by publishing it at least three places in the village for at least ten days before the time limited in the order commences to run.
(c) If the owner of the land fails to comply with the order within 15 days after service thereof upon him, the building inspector shall cause the excavation to be filled to grade and the cost shall be charged against the real estate and entered in the next succeeding tax roll as special tax and shall bear interest at the rate of one percent above the village borrowing rate per annum from the date of the report by the building inspector of the cost.
(d) The term "excavation" shall include depressions caused by filling two or more sides of a plot of land and shall include excavations for any purpose, including stripping of land, basements, part basements or other excavations left as residue of a burned or razed building; and such basements and excavations shall after six months be subject to the same provisions as excavations made for the purpose of erecting new structures. This section shall not apply to excavations in streets.
(Code 1982, § 4.156(2), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
DIVISION 2. PERMITS AND FEES
Sec. 14.307. Licenses and fee.
No person shall conduct or begin construction for any project requiring a permit for such actions by the schedule of licenses and fees established by the board without first applying for a permit and payment of such permit fees.
(Ord. of 11-18-2010) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 14.308. Required.
A permit signed by the building inspector or authorized agent shall be obtained before any work shall be commenced on the construction, alteration, remodeling, wrecking or razing of any building or structure within the village. The permit may be obtained by the owner or contractor or by the party for whom the work is to be performed. If construction begins before a permit is issued, a surcharge set by the board will be added to the permit fee. If the proposed building or structure is not on municipal sewer, a building permit cannot be issued until an approved sanitary permit is produced. Permits shall be required as follows:
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 11
(1) Buildings, structures and additions.
(2) Alterations to an existing building or structure that involve either the structural members of the floor or roofs, beams, girders, columns, bearing or other walls, room heating and air conditioning systems, arrangement, light and ventilation, changes in location of exit stairways or exits shall require a permit.
(3) Wrecking, demolition or razing of buildings and structures.
(4) Heating, electrical and plumbing.
(5) Moving of buildings.
(6) Occupancy.
(7) Swimming pools.
(8) Other permits as required by other governing municipalities and as otherwise specified elsewhere in this Code.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.02(2)(a)); Ord. of 8-25-1992, § 1, Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 14.309. Applications for permits.
Applications for any of the permits required in this division shall be made upon forms to be furnished by the building inspector and shall include such information as the building inspector shall require.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.02(2)(b)), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018]
Sec. 14.310. Waiver of certain requirements.
At the option of the building inspector, plans, data, specifications and plot plan need not be submitted with an application for a permit for minor alterations to any building, structure or equipment providing the proposed construction is sufficiently described in the application for such permit.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.02(2)(c)), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 12
Sec. 14.311. Compliance with other Village Ordinances.
No permit for residential or commercial construction shall be issued unless the property on which the building is proposed to be built abuts a street that has been dedicated and improved for street purposes or abuts a Village approved private street. The lot upon which the structures are to be located must comply with all ordinances, including zoning ordinances.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.02(2)(d)), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018]
Sec. 14.312. Conditions for the issuance of permit.
(a) If the building inspector finds that the proposed building will comply in every respect with the provisions of this chapter and other municipal ordinances and all laws of the state and lawful orders issued pursuant to such legislation, the building inspector shall issue a building permit. After being approved, there shall be no material alterations or changes in the plans or specifications which would in any way impact upon these ordinances or other ordinances or laws without the written consent of the building inspector.
(b) In no event shall work commence on any building or alteration of a building prior to a building permit's being issued. The building inspector, in the building inspector's discretion, may issue a permit for the construction of part of a building or structure prior to receiving the plans and specifications for the entire building or structure. However, the issuance of a permit shall not be construed to prevent the building inspector from thereafter requiring correction of errors in any plan or specification or from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of any ordinances of the village or the laws of the state or lawful orders issued pursuant to such ordinances or laws.
(c) For the construction of buildings requiring approval of the state department of safety and professional services, no permit shall be issued until such approved plans are received by the building inspector.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.02(2)(e)), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018]
Sec. 14.313. Survey.
The building inspector shall require the builder to survey the lot upon which the structure is being built if corner markers are not identified and lot lines cannot be accurately established without a survey.
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 13
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.02(2)(f)), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 14.314. Inspector may revoke permits.
(a) The building inspector may revoke any permit, certificate of occupancy or approval issued under this division and may stop construction or the use of any materials, equipment, methods of construction, devices or appliances for any of the following reasons:
(1) Whenever there is a violation of any provision of this chapter, the laws of the state or any lawful orders relating to this chapter.
(2) Whenever the continuance of any construction becomes dangerous to life or property.
(3) Whenever there is any violation of any condition or provision of the application for a permit or of the permit.
(4) Whenever in the opinion of the building inspector there is inadequate supervision provided on the job site.
(5) Upon discovery of any false statement or misrepresentation having been made in the application for a permit or plans, drawings, data, specifications or certified lot or plot plan on which the issuance of the permit or approval was based.
(6) In the event of violation of any condition of any approval or occupancy given by the building inspector for the use of any materials, equipment, methods of construction, devices or appliances.
(b) The building inspector shall cause to be served personally upon the applicant for the permit, the owner of the premises and his agent, if any, and on the person having charge of construction, a notice that the permit is revoked and construction shall cease forthwith. In addition, such notice shall be posted upon the building, structure, equipment or premises. After such notice is given, it shall be unlawful for any person to proceed thereafter with construction on the premises; and the permit shall become null and void. No additional construction shall take place upon the premises until a new permit is issued pursuant to the requirements of this chapter after the payment of the required fees. All construction thereafter pursuant to the new permit must be in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other ordinances of the village and the laws of the state.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.02(2)(g)), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 14
Sec. 14.315. Furnishing of grade level.
(a) Paved surfaces. Where a road has been provided with a finished, paved surface, the grade level shall be as follows:
(1) On substantially level ground, the grade level of the main floor shall be 18 inches above the crown of the road. The finished garage floor slab shall be a minimum of 12 inches above the crown of the road. In cases of conflict, the most restrictive dimension shall apply.
(2) On sloping ground, the building inspector shall be contacted so that he or his designee can meet and discuss an appropriate grade level with the applicant.
(b) Nonpaved surfaces. Except in those instances where a road has been provided with a finished, paved surface, and except where the board has approved a profile for the road, the furnishing of a grade level shall be required in all subdivisions of the village and may be required in other instances by the building inspector in their discretion in order to carry out the terms and provisions of the building code for the village. The fee for furnishing of the grade in all cases shall be set by board resolution, and such fee shall be as published in the fee schedule.
(c) Foundation. If water is encountered in a building excavation, the minimum of four inches of pea gravel or crushed rock must be installed under the floor slab; and perforated drain tile must be placed inside and outside of footings with bleeders every eight feet. A poly-vapor barrier must be provided under the floor slab. The floor must be poured before backfilling.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.03); Ord. of 8-25-1992, § 3; Ord. of 1-25-1993, § 1; Ord. of 3-22-1993(1), § 1, Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 14.316. Plumbing; roof trusses; electrical work.
(a) Plumbing. All plumbing must be done by a plumber licensed by the State of Wisconsin.
(b) Roof trusses. All trusses must be state approved for 40-pound snow load.
(c) Electrical. All electrical work must be done by an electrician licensed by the State of Wisconsin unless excepted by Wis. Stat. §101.862(4)(a) through (q).
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 15
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.03); Ord. of 8-25-1992, § 3; Ord. of 1-25-1993, § 1; Ord. of 3-22-1993(1), § 1, Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No. 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018; Ord. No. 19-009, 8/21/2019]
Sec. 14.317. Time limitations.
(a) Six months. The building permit shall become void unless visible on-site construction is commenced within six months from the date of issuance of the permit or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended at any time after work is commenced for a period of 60 days. The period of time may be extended by the building inspector if the delay was due to conditions beyond the control of the applicant. All WUBPA (Wisconsin Uniform Building Permit Application) and commercial permits granted under the terms of this division shall be valid for only 24 months, unless otherwise so regulated by the Wisconsin Administrative Code. All other permits issued by the village are valid for 12 months.
(b) New permit. Before any on-site work or construction is commenced after the permit has lapsed, a new permit shall be issued and a new fee paid. In all cases, all construction shall be completed within 24 months from the date of issuance of the permit.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.07), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018]
Sec. 14.318. Moving permits.
(a) Fee for permit.
(1) Approval necessary. No person shall move any building from one place or location to another within, through or into the village without first obtaining approval from the planning commission and obtaining a moving permit. Any building moved out of the village does not require planning commission approval. The fee for the moving permit shall be as stated in the village fee schedule.
(2) Review of moving permit. No moving permit for the moving of buildings shall be issued by the planning commission until it has reviewed the opinion of the building inspector, police chief and director of public works on such move.
(3) Building permit for moved buildings. Any person moving a building within, through or into the village shall obtain a building permit only after the moving permit has been approved.
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 16
(b) Application; denial; appeal. A written application for a moving permit is required, and the applicant (firm moving the building) shall file full and complete information and a plan signed by the applicant and by the owner or either, specifying the type of building, present location, place to which it was intended to move the building and streets to be crossed or traversed in moving the building. The planning commission may refuse to grant such permits under any conditions if, in the judgment of the commission, damage to the streets, shrubbery, trees, boulevards, wires, pipes or utilities or other facilities may result. Any such denial of the planning commission may be appealed to the board, which shall give ten days' notice of a hearing. However, the planning commission may approve the permits providing the applicant agrees to pay all expenses for damages under such conditions as may be set forth by the planning commission.
(c) Bond required.
(1) Bond amount. The planning commission shall require a bond to be filed by the applicant or owner as prescribed in this section. The planning commission may require an additional bond or an additional amount to be included for a moving permit under such special conditions as the planning commission may prescribe. This bond shall be executed by a corporate surety or two personal sureties to be approved by the board conditioned upon, among other things, the indemnification to the village for any costs or expenses incurred by it in connection with payment of any judgment, together with the costs and expenses incurred by the village in connection therewith, arising out of the removal of the building for which the permit is issued.
(2) Barriers for excavations required. The bond required by subsection (c)(1) of this section shall be further conditioned upon the applicant's or the owner's erecting adequate barriers to guard any exposed excavation caused by the removal of a building or structure from being a safety hazard unless the planning commission upon investigation shall determine otherwise. The bond shall be further conditioned upon the owner's or applicant's filling in such excavation within 48 hours after it is exposed or adopting and employing such other means, devices or methods approved by the planning commission that would be reasonably calculated to prevent injury or damage to person or property as a result of the exposed excavation.
(d) Contents of permit. Such moving permit shall specify the present location of the building, the location to which it is permitted to be moved, and the streets to be traversed, and may specify any other conditions imposed by the planning commission, including the right to stop the moving operations if it becomes apparent that damage, with reasonable probability, will ensue if the operations are continued.
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 17
(e) General conditions.
(1) Continuous movement. The movement of any building or structure pursuant to a lawfully issued moving permit shall be continuous and uninterrupted until the move is fully completed. The moving shall be performed with the least possible obstruction to thoroughfares. No building shall be allowed to remain overnight upon any public thoroughfare or public property, nor shall any such building be allowed to obstruct access to any fire hydrant or any other public facility. Lighted warning flashers shall be kept in conspicuous places at each end of the building or structure during hours of darkness.
(2) Street repair. Every person receiving a permit to move a building shall, within 24 hours after any building or structure for which a permit has been issued reaches its destination, report to the director of public works that the move has been completed. The director of public works shall thereupon inspect the streets and highways over which the building had been moved. If in the opinion of the director of public works the transportation of the building over any public street or public property has caused any damage to any street or property, the person to whom the permit was issued shall forthwith restore the streets and/or public property to in as good repair and condition as they were in prior to the time the permit was granted. On the failure of the permittee to do so within ten days thereafter to the satisfaction of the director of public works, the village shall repair the damage; and the person to whom the permit was issued and his sureties shall be responsible for payment for the repairs.
(3) Conformance with building code. No permit shall be issued to move a building within, through or into the village and to establish it upon a location within the village until the building inspector has made an investigation of such building at the location from which it is to be moved and is satisfied from such investigation that the building is in a sound and stable condition and of such construction that it will meet the requirements of the building code in all respects. Should any repairs, improvements or remodeling be contemplated or required with respect to the building, such repairs, improvements or remodeling shall be made insofar as possible before the building is taken from the premises from which it is to be moved. A complete plan of all further repairs, improvements and remodeling with reference to such building shall be submitted to the building inspector; and he shall make a finding of fact to the effect that such repairs, improvements and remodeling are in conformity with the requirements of the building code, and that when same are completed, the building as such will so comply with the building code. The building inspector shall report these facts to the planning commission prior to issuance of a moving permit. If a building is to be moved from the village to some point outside the village, the provisions with respect to the furnishing of plans and specifications for proposed alterations to such building may be disregarded.
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 18
(f) Planning commission approval required.
(1) Architectural compatibility. No moving permit shall be issued by the building inspector unless the planning commission shall first determine by a majority vote of its members after an inspection of the property and the application for a permit that the exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of the building to be moved or to be moved and altered will not be so at variance with either the exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of the buildings already constructed or in the course of construction in the immediate neighborhood, or the character of the applicable district established by the zoning ordinances, or any ordinance amendatory of or supplementary to the zoning ordinances, as to cause a substantial depreciation in the property values of the neighborhood with the applicable district. In making this determination, the planning commission shall consider exterior elevations of the building, the photographs of all sides and views of the building, and, in case it is proposed to alter the exterior of the building, the plans and specifications of such proposed alterations as well as a view of the building proposed to be moved and of the site to which it is to be located and such other information as the planning commission in its discretion deems appropriate. If the owner proposes to alter the exterior of the building after moving the building, he shall submit with his application papers, complete plans and specifications for the proposed alterations. Before a permit shall be issued for a building to be moved and altered, the owner shall provide a bond to the village clerk/treasurer, which shall not be less than $1,000.00, conditioned upon the fact that he will within a time to be set by the planning commission complete the proposed exterior alterations to the building in the manner set forth in his plans and specifications. The bond shall be in addition to any other bond or surety that may be required by other applicable ordinances. No occupancy permit shall be issued for the building until the exterior alterations shall have been fully completed.
(2) Public hearing. Upon application being made for a moving permit, the planning commission shall schedule a public hearing and shall publish a class 1 notice in accordance with Wis. Stats. Chapter 985. The fee for publication shall be per the village fee schedule. Such hearing may be adjourned for a reasonable length of time, and within 48 hours after the close of the hearing; the planning commission shall make the findings required by this section.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.08), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 19
DIVISION 3. INSPECTIONS AND ORDERS
Sec. 14.319. Inspections.
(a) Required at certain stages of progress during construction. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant for the building permit to request inspections of the building inspector or his deputy at certain stages of progress during construction. The building inspector shall perform the requested inspection within two business days after the day of notification except the final inspection. Construction shall not proceed beyond the point of inspection until the inspection has been completed. The following sequence of inspections shall be performed for the purpose of determining if the work complies with the requirements of the state Uniform Dwelling Code and village ordinances:
(1) Footings. The excavation shall be inspected after the placement of forms, shoring and reinforcement and prior to placement of footing materials.
(2) Foundation. Where below grade drain tiles, waterproofing or exterior insulation is required, the foundation shall be inspected prior to backfilling.
(3) Under Floor. In-floor rough in plumbing and electrical.
(4) Electrical service. Temporary and/or permanent.
(5) General construction and rough plumbing. When the structure is framed and the plumbing is roughed in.
(6) Heating, ventilating, air conditioning and electrical. When the rough heating, ventilating, air conditioning and electrical is completed.
(7) Insulation. After the insulating and vapor barrier are installed and after all other rough inspections have been made.
(8) Final inspection. The dwelling may not be occupied until a final inspection has been made which finds that no violations of the Uniform Dwelling Code or ordinance have occurred.
(c) Required electrical inspections.
(a) Under ground/under floor installations inspection.
(b) Electrical services temporary and permanent inspection.
(c) In-wall rough in inspection.
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 20
(d) Above ceiling inspection.
(e) Final inspection.
(c) Stop work order. If the building inspector determines that any work or construction is not proceeding in accordance with the requirements of the approved plans, a stop work order shall be served upon the owner or his representative, and a copy shall be posted at the site of the construction. Such stop work order shall not be removed except by written notice from the building inspector and upon the building inspector's being satisfied that any violation has been corrected.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.05), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018]
Sec. 14.320. Certificate of occupancy.
(a) Inspections.
(1) Occupancy permit and final inspection. A building or structure cannot be occupied until a final inspection is completed and a certificate of occupancy is issued. In addition to other requirements for the issuance of an occupancy permit, such permit cannot be issued if there are any safety and health violations; i.e. handrails missing, improper stairs, landings or exits incomplete, electrical, smoke detectors missing, improper egress windows, etc. A $1,000.00 occupancy surcharge will be added to each building permit fee. If the building is unoccupied at the time of final inspection and a certificate of occupancy is issued by the building inspector after a finding of no violations, the surcharge will be refunded. If no violations of this division or other ordinances can be found, the building inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy under this section and under the Village of Weston Municipal Code Sec. 94.16.10 which shall state the purpose for which the building or structure is to be used.
(2) Use must be consistent with certificate of occupancy. No building, no part of a building, shall be occupied until such certificate has been issued, nor shall any building be occupied in any manner which conflicts with any conditions set forth in the certificate of occupancy.
(3) Notification of use or occupancy change.
a. Whenever there is a change in occupancy or the agent(s) (manager, shift supervisor, after hour’s emergency contact, etc.) of the occupancy, the owner or their duly authorized agent shall submit the changes in writing to the Village Zoning Administrator within five working days on forms furnished by the Zoning Administrator. The information shall consist of at least the following:
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 21
1. Name and address of occupancy
2. Owners name, address, and phone number(s)
3. Agents name, address, and phone number(s)
4. Other information as required by the Village.
b. No change shall be made in the use or occupancy of any building or structure, or any space within a building, structure, or space of a building or structure either in a different division of the same occupancy group or in a different occupancy group, unless the building or structure complies with this code’s requirements for the new division of occupancies, as these requirements exist.
Exception: This subsection does not apply to an approved temporary use.
c. Whenever a change in the service company for an alarm, detection or suppression system takes place within the occupancy, the owner or authorized agent shall submit the changes in writing to the Fire Department within twenty working days. The information shall consist of the following:
1. All information required in (3)(a) above.
2. Type(s) of fire protection systems
3. Service company name, address, and phone number(s)
d. An inspection by the Fire Department shall be required for any new or change of occupancy.
(b) Use discontinued.
(1) Use contrary to occupancy permit. Whenever any building or portion of a building is being used or occupied contrary to the provisions of this article, the building inspector shall order such use or occupancy discontinued and the building, or portion of a building, vacated by notice served on any person using or causing such use or occupancy to be continued; and such person shall vacate such building or portion of a building within ten days after receipt of the notice or make the building or portion of a building comply with the requirements of this chapter.
(2) Occupancy of vacated or damaged premises. Any building, structure or premises, or any part of a building, structure or premises vacated or damaged by
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 22
any cause whatsoever so as to jeopardize public safety or health, shall not thereafter be occupied or used under any existing certificate of occupancy or without the certificate until an application has been filed and a new certificate of occupancy issued.
(c) Hardship. The building inspector shall have the authority and power to permit the occupancy of any building or structure in the village, prior to issuance of an occupancy certificate, in all such cases of hardship, as in his judgment and discretion, warrant occupancy before final stage of completion as set forth in this chapter. Before granting such permission, the building inspector shall first examine the premises and determine if it is safe and sanitary. The building inspector shall determine the time within which such building or structure can be completed. Such time should not exceed 120 days.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.06); Ord. of 8-25-1992, § 2; Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
ARTICLE IV. DEMOLITION/RAZING OF BUILDINGS
Sec. 14.400. Demolition/razing regulations; purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the village. This article is designed to provide for the safe, orderly and supervised wrecking, razing or demolition of buildings or structures.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.09(1)), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 14.401. Permit required.
(a) Demolition/razing of building permit. No person shall hereafter raze any building in the Village without first securing a permit from the Building Inspector and instructions for the sealing of the sewer and water laterals from the Utilities Supervisor.
(b) Conditions of permit. The building inspector shall issue a demolition/razing of building permit after the applicant has submitted written evidence to him that:
(1) The owner of the building or structure or his authorized agent has notified all utilities, including but not limited to such utilities as water, electricity, gas and sewer, having service connections with such building or structure, of the work to be done.
(2) All connections such as meters and regulators have been removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner.
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 23
(3) No permit shall be granted unless the applicant files a certificate of insurance with the Village Clerk giving evidence of liability insurance of $1,000,000 personal injury each occurrence, $1,000,000 aggregate, and $500,000 property damage each occurrence, $500,000 aggregate. The applicant shall agree to indemnify and hold the Village harmless from all liability arising out of the job. Such insurance shall not be cancelled or reduced without 30 days prior written notice thereof to the Village Clerk. Such notice shall suspend the permit, and no work shall be done under such permit until a new insurance certificate complying with this subsection has been filed with the Village Clerk. A certificate of insurance shall not be required of a person seeking a demolition/razing of building permit if:
a. The building is located in a residential zoning district and set back at least 10 feet from all property lines.
b. The building is located in any zoning district, is an accessory building, is no greater than one story and is set back at least 10 feet from all property lines or is constructed and situated upon the property so that the same may be razed with no damage resulting to the person or property of others as determined by the Building Inspector. Anyone aggrieved by the determination of such Inspector may appeal that decision in accordance with Wis. Stats. Chapter 68.
(4) The applicant has filed the proper form for notification of Demolition and/or Renovation and Application for Permit Exemption with the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.09(2)), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 14.402. Liability of independent contractor.
Any independent contractor who contracts with the owner of any building or structure for its wrecking, razing or demolition shall be liable for all permits, fees and regulations the same as if he were the owner of such building or structure.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.09(3)), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 24
Sec. 14.403. Demolition/razing of building permit fee.
The fee for a demolition/razing of building permit shall be in accordance with the village fee schedule.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.09(4)), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 14.404. Public safety.
A snow fence and/or lighted barricades or such other safeguards as the building inspector shall direct must be erected at the work site to promote public safety.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.09(5)), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 14.405. Removal of rubble and rubbish and other requirements.
All rubble, rubbish and other debris shall be removed from any work or construction site promptly so as to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public. All rubble and/or rubbish shall be hauled to a site that is either a licensed solid waste disposal facility or will otherwise allow the deposit of such materials under all state and municipal laws, ordinances and regulations. The holder of a permit to raze a building shall comply with the following requirements:
(a) Property to be protected. Streets, alleys, and private property shall be properly protected by erecting proper fences and scaffolds. If scaffolds are to be built on streets or alleys, they shall be properly protected with a top cover of planks, guard rails, and toe-boards to prevent the falling of debris on sidewalks or streets. The top of the scaffold shall be at least 8' above the sidewalk or alley.
(b) Basement floor slab is to be broken up to allow free vertical drainage.
(c) All basement walls, if not completely removed, shall be excavated to a point four feet below finish grade.
(d) Dust Control. If demolition operation causes excessive dust due to the building materials being disturbed, the building and site shall be sufficiently dampened at intervals necessary to prevent as much as possible, airborne debris and dust.
(e) Cranes and Backhoes. Cranes and Backhoes may be used in wrecking or demolishing buildings provided the above requirements are complied with.
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 25
(f) Sewers. When a building is moved or demolished, its sewer shall be located at a point outside the foundation lines and sealed off. The plug or seal shall not be covered until approval has been given by the Utilities Supervisor. Private Wells must be abandoned per Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources regulations prior to any demolition.
(g) Obstruction of Streets. When razing requires the obstruction of a public street, or alley, permission must be obtained from the Village Board as provided in the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 70, Section 70.105, before starting work on razing of the structure.
(h) The razing of the primary structure in any zoning district shall mandate the razing of all accessory structures on that lot. Unless the razing of the primary structure is done to accommodate a new primary structure on the same lot.
(i) Filling Basement and Excavated Areas. All loose material and debris shall be removed from the basement, crawlspaces, and other excavated areas. Upon ascertaining that all openings, pipelines, drains, etc., have been properly capped, all basements, crawlspaces, excavated areas, and other below-grade voids resulting from the removal of pavements, slabs, foundations, and the like shall be filled to within 4 inches of finished grade with granular fill material. The material shall be well graded, free from debris and organic material. All granular fill shall be placed in layers of 12 inches or less and shall be compacted to not less than 95 percent of Modified Proctor (ASTM D-1557).
(j) Completion of Project. When razing activities are completed, the disturbed area shall be graded so that no gradients in disturbed earth shall be steeper than a slope of 3 to 1 (horizontal to vertical). A layer of arable topsoil capable of supporting perennial grasses shall be spread over the disturbed area to a minimum depth of 4 inches. The area shall be seeded with a perennial grass capable of survival in this climate and maintained until the area is stabilized and developed with zoning and other applicable provisions of the Municipal Code.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.09(6)), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
__________
* Cross References--Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places, Chapter 70.
ARTICLE V. HOUSE AND BUILDING NUMBERING
Sec. 14.500. Intent.
The intent of this article is to assist the police and fire departments in quickly finding the correct residence at which to provide emergency services by requiring house and building numbers to be placed in prominently visible locations.
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 26
This Ordinance implements portions of the Village of Weston Comprehensive Plan and supplements the Village of Weston Subdivision and Zoning Codes. Its purpose is to provide the residents of the Village of Weston with a uniform and standardized system of street naming and addressing to:
(a) Minimize future street name and addressing conflicts.
(b) Provide a database for Village records and enhanced 911 services.
(c) Expedite property identification by emergency services.
(d) Comply with the addressing guidelines published in U.S. Postal Service Publication 28.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.11(1)), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018]
Sec. 14.501. Jurisdiction.
These regulations shall apply to the naming of all public and private streets and the addressing of all addressable structures and parcels within the incorporated limits of the Village of Weston.
[Created via Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018]
Sec. 14.502. Applicability.
This Ordinance shall apply to all property and to all public and private streets within the Village of Weston.
[Created via Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018]
Sec. 14.503. Implementation and Administration.
The Village of Weston Planning and Development Department shall have the authority to implement, administer, and enforce provisions of this ordinance. For the purposes of addressing, the Village of Weston Planning and Development Department will hold and maintain addressing data. The Planning and Development Department is authorized to cooperate with Marathon County and emergency service providers in administering this ordinance. Authority under this ordinance includes but is not limited to:
(a) Assigning address numbers in accordance with this ordinance.
(b) Approving new street names.
(c) Maintaining the addressing data base to include mapping.
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 27
(d) Assemble, update, and maintain an official list of all street names throughout the Village for use by all jurisdictions.
(e) Provide, in the appropriate format, assigned address information to Marathon County Geographic Information Systems (GIS), the local US Post Office, Everest Metro Police Department (EMPD), S.A.F.E.R and Marathon County Sherriff’s Department Administration/E911 Emergency Services.
(f) Provide assistance and information regarding addressing to local jurisdictions. This includes the creation and maintenance of the Village of Weston Property Address Guide in cooperation with Marathon County and emergency services providers.
[Created via Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018]
Sec. 14.504. Guidelines of Interpretation.
Words used in the present tense include the future; words used in singular number include the plural and vice-versa. The word shall is mandatory, the word should is directory, and the word may indicates the use of discretion. Unless the subject clearly requires otherwise, the words or phrases used shall have the meanings commonly appropriate to their context and the purposes of this ordinance.
[Created via Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018]
Sec. 14.505. Street Naming.
(a) General Street Naming Provisions. Streets, proposed with subdivision or through other processes, shall be named and the names approved by the Village and Marathon County GIS.
In selecting street names, the following provisions shall be employed:
(1) Duplicate street names are prohibited within the Village. As of [insert ordinance adoption date], all new street names must not be duplicated within Marathon County. Proposed street names will be checked and reserved with Marathon County prior to approval.
(2) Centerline alignment street name standards should be observed for non-continuous streets, unless there is no possibility for extension of the street to make it a continuous through street.
(3) Names of similar pronunciation and/or spelling shall be prohibited (example: Briar Lane, Brier Lane, Merry Lane, Mary Lane).
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 28
(4) Variations of the same name with a different street designation shall be prohibited within the first word of the two-word title or in the street extension (example: Pine Street, Pine Drive, White Pine Road, Lilly Road or White Lilly Lane).
(5) No street name shall consist of more than thirty (30) letters and/or spaces including the street type (Street, Lane, Court, etc.).
(6) No street name shall contain the words North, South East, or West, or any combination thereof, within the street name. Use of standard suffixes, directional suffixes, or prefixes as road names shall not be permitted.
(7) Special characters in road names such as hyphens, apostrophes or dashes shall not be permitted.
(8) All named streets that extend from incorporated areas into unincorporated areas shall retain the same name.
(9) Streets that have a definite north-south directional course shall be addressed using the north-south address grid. Streets that have a definite east-west directional course shall be addressed using the east-west address grid. Streets which do not have a definite directional course shall utilize the grid of the prominent street direction.
(10) A newly established street, which has less than a 125-foot centerline alignment offset from an existing street, shall continue the same street name. A newly established street, which has more than a 125-foot centerline offset from an existing street intersection, shall be assigned a new name.
(11) Streets, public or private, shall be named according to this regulations in this ordinance when serving or potentially serving three or more users.
(12) Street names which are not readily capable of pronunciation or which would be distasteful to a reasonable person are prohibited.
(13) For the purposes of addressing developments with multiple buildings in a complex (commercial, industrial, office, residential or a combination thereof), a street centerline may be established and named from which to assign addresses. For instance, within commercial shopping center or multi-family development, a fire lane or main drive may be established and named for addressing purposes so that addresses may be derived from the designated street centerline.
(14) The following generic classes of street suffixes are noted for providing a basic guide for name designation:
a. Primary and secondary roads which are designed to carry traffic from one sector to another within the county:
Freeway, Highway, Parkway, County Road
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 29
b. Collector roads which are designed to carry limited through traffic while also providing access from private driveways and smaller local roads:
Road, Street, Avenue, Drive, Boulevard
c. Local residential access streets:
Lane, Trail, Drive, Street, Terrace, Avenue
d. Local residential access streets which begin and end on the same collector:
Loop, Circle, Way
e. Local residential access streets which are permanent dead ends:
Court, Place, Circle, Way
f. Other suffixes not listed above may be considered or variations from the above may be allowed at the discretion of the Planning and Development Department.
(b) Naming New Streets or Naming Unnamed Streets. Any new street established within the Village of Weston, public or private, or any existing unnamed street, public or private, shall require a street name approved by the Village of Weston Planning and Development Department and Marathon County (for E911 purposes).
(1) For subdivisions, approved street names shall be provided on the final plat map. Street names shall be submitted and approved prior to final plat processing.
(2) For other new streets or naming of unnamed streets, the owner or owners and/or contract buyers of properties abutting said street, may request an official name for a street (public or private). It is the responsibility and requirement of the applicant/s to provide the Planning and Development Department with a prioritized list of names (minimum of three) that are acceptable to a majority (51%) of the property owners abutting the street in question.
The Planning and Development Department shall give consideration to any street name requests; only after all street naming requirements of this Ordinance are met. Once a name request is approved the name will be added to the Official Street Name List. The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of the sign and installation.
(c) Official Designation of Existing Street Names. With the adoption of this Ordinance, all streets properly named shall be designated as the official street names.
(d) Renaming of Streets. Property owners abutting an existing street which has an existing approved name may petition the Board of Trustees for a name change. Requests for name changes shall be approved by 100 percent of property owners abutting the street and pay the cost of street sign replacement. Changes may be authorized by the Board of Trustees
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 30
when it is found to be in the public interest and meets the naming requirements of this Ordinance.
(e) Controversial or Disputed Street Names. The Planning and Development Director shall have the discretion to refer any disputed street name, addressing issues, or controversial street name changes to the Plan Commission for resolution.
[Created via Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018; Amended via Ord. No. 19-009, 8/21/2019]]
Sec. 14.506. Addressing Procedures.
Addresses as assigned or approved by the Village shall be placed on all structures or property supporting the same as follows:
(a) Content. Numbers and letters shall be of contrasting with background colors (e.g. Black on White) and readable from the street, road, or highway. Arabic numbers shall be used; script and roman numerals cannot be used alone however they may be used as an addition to the requirements of this section.
(b) Display requirements. The assigned street number shall be conspicuously displayed for every house and building in the village. Address numbers shall be clearly readable from the street and shall contrast with background color pursuant to the International Fire Code. If a structure is more than 75 feet from the street, or is otherwise not clearly visible from the street, its address shall be posted at the intersection of its access and public or private street. The address shall be located in place on the structure as soon as reasonably possible during construction. Property owners are responsible for displaying proper address identification in accordance with this ordinance.
(1) Single family and two-family requirements. All one family and two family residential buildings shall have address numbers, not less than six inches high and placed on the exterior wall of the principal building that faces closest to the street or service drive providing access to the building. All such residential units shall also have street numbers placed on their respective mail box. Property owners who shall construct buildings located more than 75 feet from the street shall be furnished a flag/fire sign by the village at the time of issuance of the building permit. The person to whom the building permit is issued shall pay to the village the cost of the flag/fire sign at the time of the issuance of the building permit, as provided for in the village fee schedule. All property owners shall be responsible for the display and maintenance of the numbers in the manner required in this section. Numbers and letters shall be visible from the roadway at all times of the year. If the mailbox is on a different street from the residence, the street name and house number must be inscribed on the mailbox.
(2) Multifamily requirements. All multifamily buildings shall have address numbers placed on the exterior of the principal building that faces the street
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 31
service drive or parking lot and located adjacent to the individual unit entrances to the buildings. In addition, each building shall be identified by a letter or number, not less than twelve (12) inches high, located near the top of the building wall facing the street, service drive or parking lot that services that building. At the entrance of each service drive, there shall be a directory listing of the street numbers and building identifications that are accessible from the said street, service drive or parking lot. Suite numbers identifying the individual units must be placed on the primary entrance of each occupancy.
(3) Commercial and industrial requirements.
a. Buildings less than seventy-five (75) feet in height shall have street numbers, not less than six inches high, placed at the exterior wall of the principal building facing the street, service drive or parking lot providing access to that building and located adjacent to any primary entrance door.
b. If more than seventy-five (75) feet in height, shall have street numbers not less than twenty-four (24) inches in height located on the wall facing the primary street entrance.
c. Only one street address shall be assigned per building. Buildings with more than one occupancy, a suite number shall be used to identify each individual unit. Letters shall not be used to identify each individual unit.
d. All suite numbers that identify each individual unit shall be placed on the primary entrance to each business or occupancy.
e. All commercial or industrial structures which have a rear service door, shall identify the occupant (business name) and the street address, including suite number, conspicuously and on said rear door in contrasting and reflective letters and/or numbers not less than six (6) inches in height and shall continually maintain same.
f. The address number shall also be displayed on any monument sign if placed at the entrance of the addressed street.
(4) Address numbering and lettering shall be in addition to addresses placed on signs, mailboxes, paper boxes, or similar objects.
(c) New houses, buildings; incomplete. In the case of new houses or buildings, the number, together with the building permit, shall be placed on a temporary post or tree in front of the construction where it is visible from the street. When the house or building is completed, the number shall be moved to the proper permanent location.
(d) Address Number Assignments. The following are the basic standards for addressing.
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 32
(1) Even numbers shall appear on the north and west side of streets and odd numbers on the south and east sides unless the street changes directions and then the numbering will follow the grid for the majority of the direction the street runs.
(2) If a building (commercial, industrial, office, residential or combination thereof) has a number of entrances, each serving a separate occupant, then the building shall be assigned an address and the individual units shall be signed sub-unit numbers.
(3) A building (commercial, industrial, office, residential or combination thereof) with one (1) main entrance shall be assigned one (1) number with the owner of the structure responsible for providing designated individual sub-unit numbering.
(4) Apartment Buildings, Manufactured home parks and campgrounds shall be assigned one (1) number based on the addressing system coordinates. The owner shall be responsible for providing designated numbering of each individual unit/lot before an address is issued. Streets within the manufactured home park and campgrounds shall be signed according to Section 14.505 Street Naming.
(5) For multiple buildings in a development (commercial, industrial, office, residential or combination thereof), it may be appropriate to establish a private street centerline for addressing purposes. Buildings would then be addressed using the established street centerline in accordance with numbering procedures in this ordinance.
(6) Vanity site addresses that do not conform to the Village’s addressing grid shall not be permitted.
(7) All addressing plans shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning and Development Department to insure conformance to emergency services protocols and this Ordinance.
(8) Projects requiring site plan review shall be assigned addresses as part of the site plan review process. The arrangement of buildings and vehicular travel aisles and the implications to addressing should be considered when reviewing site plans.
(9) Addresses shall be assigned by the Zoning Administrator or their designee in the Planning and Development Department.
For effective and efficient emergency services and enhanced 911, it is important to provide for consistent and uniform addressing procedures throughout the county. In addition to the basic standards for addressing set forth in this ordinance, the Weston Property Addressing Guidelines,
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 33
to be adopted by resolution by the Board of Trustees, shall be followed to provide solutions to addressing situations that do not fall within the type of streets or scenarios that are provided in this ordinance.
(g) Addressing Along Streets.
(1) A diagonal or meandering street shall be assigned numbers depending upon the address baseline that it most favors.
(2) For circle streets, the numbering shall start at the intersection point of the street closest to the address origination point and shall proceed in a clockwise direction using a consecutive numerical order with the odd/even numbers based on the starting point of the circle street as if the street were straight.
(3) For loop streets, the beginning of the street is designated by the closest intersection to the origination point and be increased numerically to that point that is farthest from the origination point.
(4) Properties with structures(s), or bare land parcels that have a driveway shall be assigned an address based on a primary access point on a named street or common driveway.
(5) Properties that have multiple driveways shall have a primary access point designated by the property owner that will be used for addressing. If the property owner does not designate this primary access point, the Planning & Development Director shall make the official determination and designate a primary access point that will be used for address assignment.
(6) Parcels accessed by a common easement, serving fewer than three structures, shall be assigned a primary access point at the point where the easement intersects a public street, private street or common driveway centerline. This primary access point will be used to assign an official address for each parcel.
(7) All plats produced as a result of subdivisions, minor subdivisions, Planned Unit Developments, Condominium, or other projects that require the establishment of primary access points from public or private streets for driveways shall have pre-designated primary access points. These points shall be utilized to assign addresses to the associated lots. The primary access points shall be verified by the Village of Weston Planning and Development Department prior to final plat processing.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.11(2)); Ord. of 3-16-1992, § 1, Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018)
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 34
Sec. 14.507. Signing.
(a) Street Signs. Street signs shall be placed, constructed and installed in conformance with the Village of Weston Department of Public Works Standards.
(b) Address Numbers. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to supply, install and maintain address numbers following the provisions in this Ordinance.
(1) Address numbers shall be clearly readable from the street and shall contrast with background color pursuant to the International Fire Code.
(2) Address numbers should be no less than 6 inches in height and placed on the exterior wall of the principal building that faces closest to the street or service drive providing access to the building.
(c) Flag/Fire Signs. Flag/Fire signs shall be provided by the Village at the cost of the property owner for material and installation.
(1) The sign shall be two (2) sided flag style and reflective.
(2) The name of the Village shall be above the number with the road name below the number.
(3) The address sign will be posted by the Village and placed at the intersection of the public or private road and the access of the property.
(4) The sign shall be installed on the left side of the driveway (accessing from the road) and the numbers shall be perpendicular to the roadway.
(5) The sign shall be installed not less than 3 ½ feet nor more than 4 ½ feet from the ground level and shall not be concealed from view of the road. The sign shall be a maximum of 15 feet from the driveway and from the road right-of-way. At the discretion of the Planning and Development Department, alternate posting requirements may be necessary due to utilities, structures, and any other obstructions within the desired sign location.
(6) After installation, the property owner shall be responsible to maintain the flag/fire sign. Maintenance shall include clearing vegetation and keeping the sign in a condition so it is easily visible and legible at all times. The property owner is responsible for ordering a replacement sign if the sign is damaged or destroyed.
[Created via Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018]
Sec. 14.508. Change of Existing Addresses. Existing addresses may be changed for just cause, if:
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 35
(a) Site address is out of sequence or there is an odd/even error on the road segment.
(b) Site where addresses of one or both neighboring parcels were assigned in such a way that there is no address available for a vacant lot(s).
(c) Change of access point for the structure/parcel.
(d) Road name change.
(e) Any other reason that is consistent with the intent of this ordinance.
[Created via Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018]
Sec. 14.509. Corrections. Whenever an error in a numeric address comes to the attention of the Planning and Development Department, the Department will correct the error.
(a) Error will be documented with a date.
(b) A new numeric address will be determined using the village addressing grid.
(c) The property owner(s) will be contacted, in writing, using the Marathon County Land Records property information to identify ownership and mailing information.
(d) Notification to agencies necessary to receive the address change (e.g. SAFER, EMPD, E911, Marathon County, United States Post Office, etc.).
Sec. 14.510. Numbers required.
No permit for the construction of a house or building shall be issued until the assigned number has been obtained from the Zoning Administrator. No permit for the repair or alteration of a house or building shall be issued unless the proper number is affixed to the house or building in accordance with this article.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.11(3)), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018]
Sec. 14.511. Enforcement/Penalties.
(a) All persons, firms, corporations, associations, partnerships, bodies politic or other entities capable of being sued that own or have jurisdiction over highways, streets, roads or real property located within the village shall comply with this Ordinance.
Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations Page 36
(b) Any person, firm or corporation who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance or action taken under this Ordinance shall forfeit not less than $100.00 plus any applicable costs of prosecution, assessments, and court costs for each violation.
(c) In the event that violations of this Ordinance are not corrected within fifteen days of written notice, the Village of Weston may perform the work and bill the property owner(s).
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.12), Ord. of 11-18-2010, Ord. of 12-17-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018]
Sec. 14.512. Administrative Provisions.
(a) Administrative procedures. The Board of Trustees may, by resolution, adopt formal or informal administrative procedures; create fee schedules, etc., to facilitate implementation of the purpose and intent of this Ordinance.
(b) Appeals. Appeals concerning interpretation or administration of this Ordinance may be filed by any affected person. Such appeals shall be filed within a reasonable time of the action being appealed, not to exceed thirty (30) days, by filing with the Director of Planning and Development a Notice of Appeal specifying the grounds of the appeal. The Director shall schedule the item for review by the Plan Commission at their next available meeting to be commenced within a reasonable period of time after receipt of a completed Notice of Appeal and give due notice to any affected party. The Director shall transmit to the Plan Commission all papers that constitute the record upon which the action appealed was taken. The Plan Commission shall decide the appeal. The decision of the Plan Commission may be appealed to the Board of Trustees.
Enforcement actions may not be appealed.
[Created via Ord. No. 18-013, 4/18/2018; Amended via Ord. No. 19-009, 8/21/2019]
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 1
Chapter 18
BUSINESSES*
Article I. In General
Sec. 18.100. Licenses and fees.
Sec. 18.101. Revocation of license.
Sec. 18.102. Penalties.
Article II. Adult-Oriented Establishments
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 18.103. Purpose.
Sec. 18.104. Definitions.
Sec. 18.105. Penalty.
Sec. 18.106. Physical layout of premises.
Sec. 18.107. Prohibitions.
Division 2. License
Sec. 18.108. Required.
Sec. 18.109. Application.
Sec. 18.110. Standards for issuance.
Sec. 18.111. Fee.
Sec. 18.112. Display.
Sec. 18.113. Term.
Sec. 18.114. Revocation or suspension.
* Cross References--Alcohol Beverages, Chapter 6; Animal and Pet Establishments, Chapter 10 Section 10.124; Taxation and Special Assessments, Chapter 78; Utilities, Chapter 86; Non-Residential and Mixed Use Districts Chapter. 94 Article2 Section 94.2.02(3).; Overlay Zoning Districts, Chapter. 94 Artticle 6
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 2
Article III. Emergency Alarm Systems
Sec. 18.115. Purpose.
Sec. 18.116. Applicability.
Sec. 18.117. Definitions.
Sec. 18.118. False Alarm Fee.
Sec. 18.119. Response to emergency services alarms.
Article IV. Direct Sales
Sec. 18.120. Registration Required
Sec. 18.121. Definitions.
Sec. 18.122. Exemptions.
Sec. 18.123. Registration and Permit procedure.
Sec. 18.124. Investigation.
Sec. 18.125. Appeals.
Sec. 18.126. Prohibited practices; disclosure requirements.
Sec. 18.127. Records.
Sec. 18.128. Revocation of registration.
Sec. 18.129. Violations and penalties.
Article V. Slaughterhouses, Stockyards, Junkyards, Automobile Graveyards
Sec. 18.130. Definitions.
Sec. 18.131. Permit required; fee.
Sec. 18.132. Qualifications.
Sec. 18.133. Exceptions to article provisions.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 3
Article VI. Massage
Sec. 18.134. Definitions.
Sec. 18.135. Exceptions.
Sec. 18.136. Operation without a license a public nuisance.
Sec. 18.137. Compliance with article required.
Sec. 18.138. Massage establishment license.
Sec. 18.139. Massage technician's and manager's license.
Sec. 18.141. Regulations of operations and licenses.
Sec. 18.142. Revocation or suspension of license.
Article VII. Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Dealers
Sec. 18.143. Pawnbrokers.
Sec. 18.144. Provisions of state law adopted by reference.
Article VIII. Shows, Circuses and Carnivals
Sec. 18.145. License.
Sec. 18.146. Reserved.
Sec. 18.147. Reserved.
Article IX. Mobile Food Vendors
Sec. 18.148. Mobile Food Vendors License.
Article X. Weights and Measures
Sec. 18.149. Weights and Measures Permit.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 4
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 18.100. Licenses and fees.
No person shall engage in any business, occupation or profession for which a license is required by the village without first obtaining a license established in the village schedule of licenses and fees and payment of the required fees.
(Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.101. Revocation of license.
All licenses provided for in this chapter may be revoked by the village for good cause and satisfactory proof being shown, with all of the operations at such licensed business being terminated and closed down immediately, upon revocation of its license.
(Code 1982, § 5.06; Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.102. Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to Section 1.111, plus the license fee provided.
(Code 1982, § 5.07. Amended via Ord. 15-013, 06-17-2015; Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
ARTICLE II. ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 18.103. Purpose.
It is a lawful purpose of the board to enact regulatory ordinances protecting and promoting the general welfare, health and safety of its citizens. The board deems it necessary to require licensing and regulation of adult-oriented establishments, namely, adult bookstores, because many such establishments install booths with doors in which patrons can view adult-oriented movies or videotapes or film, or view other forms of adult entertainment. It has been found in many localities that viewing booths in such establishments are used by patrons for engaging in sexual acts, particularly between males, which results in unsafe and unsanitary conditions in the booths.
* Cross References--Use of Alcohol Beverages in Adult Entertainment Establishments, Alcohol Beverages Chapter 6 Section. 6.106.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 5
Pathogenic agents responsible for sexually transmitted diseases have all been isolated at one time or another from body fluids, which have been found to be frequently present in viewing booths in adult-oriented bookstores. It is thereby necessary for the board to regulate adult-oriented bookstores for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. of 5-17-1993, § 1(1); Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.104. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Adult entertainment means any exhibition of any motion pictures, live performance, display or dance of any type, which has as its dominant theme, or is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on, any actual or simulated specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or the removal of articles of clothing to appear totally nude or to display a nude genital area or female nude breasts.
Adult-oriented establishment means an adult bookstore having as its stock in trade, for sale, rent, lease, inspection or viewing, books, films, videocassettes, magazines or other periodicals that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specific sexual activities or specific anatomical areas, and in conjunction therewith have facilities for the presentation of adult-oriented films, movies or live performances, for observation by patrons.
Health department means the county health department, health officers, or his/her designee or authorized agent.
Operator means any person operating, conducting, maintaining or owning any adult-oriented establishment.
Specified anatomical areas means:
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, anus or the areola of a female breast; or
(2) Human male genitalia in a discernible turgid state, even if opaquely covered.
Specified sexual activities means simulated or actual:
(1) Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; or
(2) Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, necrophilia,
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 6
sadomasochist abuse, fellatio or cunnilingus; or
(3) Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, anus or female breasts.
(Ord. of 5-17-1993, § 1(2); Amended via Ord. 15-013, 06-17-2015, Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Cross References--Definitions generally, § 1.101.
Sec. 18.105. Penalty.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall upon conviction be subject to section 1.111.
(Ord. of 5-17-1993, § 1(12); Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.106. Physical layout of premises.
No adult-oriented establishment shall have available for customers, patrons or members any booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment unless the following requirements are complied with:
(1) Each booth, room or cubicle shall:
a. Be separated from adjacent booths, rooms or cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall;
b. Have at least one side totally open to a public, lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying the booth, room or cubicle;
c. Have solid, unbreakable walls without any openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet, and shall be light colored, with a nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable surface;
d. Have a light-colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable floor;
e. Have at all times when not in use a minimum lighting level of ten foot-candles as measured three feet above the floor.
(2) Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 7
(3) The operator shall ensure there is conspicuously posted inside each booth, stall, partitioned portion of a room, or individual room an un-mutilated and un-defaced sign or poster supplied by the health department, which contains information regarding sexually transmitted diseases and the telephone numbers from which additional information can be sought.
(4) The operator shall ensure that there is conspicuously displayed at a place near the main entrance of the establishment any information, brochures or pamphlets supplied by the health department pertaining to sexually transmitted diseases.
(5) The operator shall ensure there is posted regulations concerning booth occupancy on signs with lettering at least one-inch-high that are placed in conspicuous areas of the establishment and in each of the viewing enclosures.
(Ord. of 5-17-1993, § 1(10); Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.107. Prohibitions.
(a) No person while occupying a booth, room or cubicle or any public area of an establishment licensed under this article shall engage in any type of specified sexual activity, nor shall any such person cause any bodily discharge or litter while in such a booth, room or cubicle. No person shall damage or deface any portion of the booth while occupying that booth.
(b) No operator of an adult-oriented establishment shall permit more than one person to occupy a booth, room or cubicle as described in Sec. 18.106 at any time.
(c) No operator shall permit a minor to be in and/or loiter around an establishment licensed under this article or allow a minor to view adult entertainment in such an establishment.
(d) The operator shall maintain the adult-oriented establishment in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. The operator shall submit a fixed cleaning and sanitizing schedule to the health department for approval and, once approved, adhere to that schedule. All employees and operators shall be required to wear impermeable rubber gloves while engaged in the cleaning and sanitation of the booths.
(e) The operator shall maintain a current list of all employees who work on the premises. Such list shall contain the name, current address, date of birth, sex, telephone number, social security number, position of each employee, and date of employment and termination and such list shall be furnished to any police officer immediately upon request.
(f) Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such act or
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 8
omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee’s conduct; and the operator shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission.
(g) Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator for the purposes of determining whether the operator's license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed.
(h) No employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow any minor to loiter around or to frequent an adult-oriented establishment, or to allow any minor to view sexually oriented adult entertainment.
(i) The operator shall ensure compliance of the establishment and its patrons with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. of 5-17-1993, § 1(11); Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
Sec. 18.108. Required.
(a) No person shall operate, conduct, maintain or own an adult-oriented establishment without first obtaining an adult-oriented establishment license. Licenses may be issued only to adult-oriented establishments that are located at a fixed and certain place. Any person who desires to operate more than one adult-oriented establishment must have a license for each.
(b) No license issued under this article may be transferred to any person nor shall such a license be transferred to another location.
(Ord. of 5-17-1993, § 1(3); Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.109. Application.
(a) Application for a license required by this division shall be made to the village clerk/treasurer. A copy of the application shall be forwarded to the chief of police and the health department for review and recommendation, including review of arrest/conviction records and corporate ownership. The application shall be made upon a form provided by the village clerk/treasurer and shall contain the following information under oath:
(1) The applicant's full name and address;
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 9
(2) Written evidence that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;
(3) The address and description of the location of the proposed adult-oriented establishment; and
(4) If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the name and address of the registered agents of the corporation, and the name and address of all persons owning stock in the corporation, and the name, address, age and position of all officers and directors of the applicant corporation.
(b) An amended application form shall be filed by any corporate licensee upon any change of officer, director or agent. Such amended application shall be reviewed in the same manner as a new application. A fee provided in the village fee schedule shall be paid to the village upon submission of an amended application.
(Ord. of 5-17-1993, § 1(4); Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.110. Standards for issuance.
The board shall review all applications received under this division within 30 days after their filing and shall consider the review and recommendations of the chief of police and health department. In recommending action on issuance or non-issuance of such licenses, the board shall consider the probable impact of the location of the proposed business in the area proposed to be licensed, the fitness of the applicant to operate such an establishment, and the history of the operation of the establishment. In addition, the following requirements must be met:
(1) An individual applicant must be at least 18 years of age and must not have been found to have violated this article or a similar law or ordinance within five years immediately preceding the date of application.
(2) All officers, directors and stockholders of a corporate applicant must be at least 18 years of age; and no officer, director or shareholder must have been found to have violated this article or similar law or ordinance within five years preceding the date of application. An applicant which is a partnership, joint venture or other type of organization where two or more persons have a financial interest must demonstrate that no person is less than 18 years of age, and no person must have been found to have violated any provision of this article or a similar law or ordinance within five years immediately preceding the date of the application.
(3) Within 60 days of receiving an application for a license, the village clerk/treasurer shall notify the applicant in writing whether the applications have been granted or denied by the board and if denied, the reason for the denial. Judicial review of
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 10
denials of applications by the board under this section shall be as provided in Wis.
Stat. § 68.13.
(Ord. of 5-17-1993, § 1(5); Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.111. Fee.
A license fee provided in the village fee schedule shall be submitted with the application for a
license. If the application is denied, half the fee shall be retained as a processing fee and the
balance shall be returned to the applicant. No fees shall be prorated except upon such denial.
No later than three months after the close of each fiscal year, the village clerk/treasurer shall
reimburse the health department 20 percent of each permit fee charged under this section. If
an application is denied, reimbursement shall not be made to the health department.
(Ord. of 5-17-1993, § 1(6); Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.112. Display.
The licensee shall prominently display the license issued under this division in a conspicuous
public place in the licensed premises.
(Ord. of 5-17-1993, § 1(7); Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.113. Term.
All licenses issued under this division shall expire on June 30 each year unless sooner
revoked. A new application shall be made each year, and renewal applications must be filed
not later than April 30. A renewal application shall contain the same information and data,
given under oath, as is required for an application for a new license. A late processing fee set
by the board in the village fee schedule shall be paid with any renewal application made
following April 30 of any year. If the application is denied, no portion of the late processing
fee shall be refunded.
(Ord. of 5-17-1993, § 1(8); Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.114. Revocation or suspension.
(a) Hearing. The board may hold a hearing to determine whether a license granted
under this division should be suspended or revoked:
(1) If a licensee or a licensee's agent or any of a licensee's officers, directors or
shareholders is convicted of an offense which reasonably relates to the
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 11
licensed operation under this division;
(2) The discovery that false, misleading information or data was provided on any application, or material facts were omitted from any application;
(3) The licensee has failed to comply with an order issued under subsection (d) or (e) of this section;
(4) Any cost or fee required to be paid by this article is not paid; or
(5) Any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage is served or consumed on the premises of the licensed establishment.
(b) Notice. Notice of such hearing and the grounds for the hearing shall be provided to any such person, who shall be advised of the time and place of the hearing, of the right to call, examine and cross-examine witnesses, and to have the proceedings recorded at the person's own expense. Such license may be suspended for a period of 60 days or revoked if the board determines that the public interest so requires. The licensee shall be given at least ten days' written notice of the charges prior to the public hearing. The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall automatically and immediately revoke such license. Any person whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive another license for a period of one year from the date of the revocation. No location or premises for which a license has been issued shall be used as an adult-oriented establishment for 12 months from the date of the revocation of the license. Judicial review shall be as provided in Wis. Stat. § 68.13.
(c) Access. Authorized employees or agents of the chief of police or health department, upon presenting proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any adult- oriented establishment at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspection to determine compliance.
(d) Enforcement. If upon inspection of an adult-oriented establishment by an authorized employee or agent of the chief of police or health department, it is found that the establishment is not operated or maintained as required by this article, the employee or agent shall notify the operator in writing. The order shall specify the changes required to make the establishment conform to the standards established in this article, and the time period compliance shall take place.
(e) Immediate danger to health. Where there is a reasonable cause to believe that any construction, sanitary condition, operation or method of operation of the premises of an establishment or equipment used on the premises creates an immediate danger to health, an authorized employee or agent of the health department may, without advance written notice, issue an order to remove the immediate danger to health. That order shall take effect on delivery to the operator or other person in charge of the establishment. The order shall be limited to prohibiting the continued
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 12
operation, use or methods of operation, or a combination of these; except if a more limited order would not remove the immediate danger to health, the order may direct that all operations authorized by the permit cease.
(Ord. of 5-17-1993, § 1(9); Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
ARTICLE III. EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS*
Sec. 18.115. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to minimize the amount of time and effort to the Everest Metro Police Department in responding to false alarms and to provide for a more efficient operation of this service provided by the village emergency services.
(Ord. of 7-31-1989, § 1(1)., Ord. of 3-6-13; Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
* Cross References--Civil Emergencies, Chapter 22; Fire Prevention and Protection, Chapter 34; Law Enforcement, Chapter 42.
State Law References--Burglar alarm installers, Wis. Stats. §§ 111.335, 134.59.
Sec. 18.116. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to all alarm systems users within the village that come within the jurisdiction of the Everest Metro Police Department. Alarm systems that come within the jurisdiction of the Everest Metro Police Department are both alarms that terminate at the Marathon County Dispatch Center and those systems that are monitored by other agencies/companies (alarm system operators) that may require the Everest Metro Police Department to respond to the alarm.
(Ord. of 7-31-1989, § 1(2) Ord. of 3-6-13; Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.117. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Alarm system - means any device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry onto premises or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act or both, or for the detection of a fire which, when activated, produces a signal, visual or audible, or both, where the intended result of such signal being transmitted would be response by law enforcement or other public safety personnel.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 13
Alarm system operators - means any person in the business of operating a receiving device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on premises or for alerting others to the commission of an unlawful act, or both, or for the detection of a fire which, when activated, produces a signal, visible or audible, or both, which signal is caused to be transmitted to the operator of the alarm system, who in turn by telephone or other means transmits any information to the Everest Metro Police Department.
Alarm user - means any person having an alarm system, including individuals, partnerships, associations and/or corporate bodies.
False alarm - means any of the following:
(1) The intentional or unintentional activation of an alarm system by the owner or the lessee of an alarm system or an employee or agent of either under circumstances where there is no unauthorized entry or fire upon the premises or reasonable grounds for belief that such events have occurred or are occurring.
(2) The activation of an alarm system or mechanical failure or malfunction because of improper maintenance of the alarm system.
(3) The activation of an alarm because of improper installation and/or use of equipment.
Subsections (1) through (3) of this definition do not include false alarms caused by abnormal weather conditions, acts of God or by prior arrangement made for testing of an alarm system.
Self-contained alarm system - means any device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry on the premises or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act, or both, or for the detection of a fire, which, when activated, produces a signal, visible or audible, or both, which signal is caused to be transmitted to the general area surrounding the premises so as to give notice to the general public.
(Ord. of 7-31-1989, § 1(3), Ord. of 3-6-13; Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Cross References--Definitions generally, § 1.101.
Sec. 18.118. False Alarm Fee.
(a) Any Signal, message or other communication transmitted by an alarm system which causes a response by the Everest Metro Police Department and is determined to be a false alarm shall result in the alarm user or agent paying a fee in accordance with the schedule in subsection (b) of this section. Any fees payable to
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 14
the police department which are delinquent may be assessed against the property
involved as a special charge for current service, without notice, pursuant to Wis.
Stat. § 66.0627.
(b) The user of any private alarm system shall pay the Everest Metro Police
Department a fee according to the following schedule of fees for any false alarm
occurring in a moving 12-month period:
(1) For the first false alarm, there is no charge, but the user or his/her agent shall
be given a verbal warning.
(2) For the second false alarm, the user or his/her agent shall receive an
administrative warning in writing from the police department.
(3) For the third false alarm, the user or his/her agent shall be subject to a fee of
$50.00.
(4) For the fourth false alarm, the user or his/her agent shall be subject to a fee of
$100.00.
(5) For the fifth and subsequent alarms, the user or his/her agent shall be subject
to a fee of $150.00.
(Ord. of 7-31-1989, § 1(10), Ord. of 3-6-13; Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.119. Response to emergency services alarms.
The installation and/or operation of an alarm system shall not give rise to any cause of action
or claim against the village or any of the village's agents, servants or employees. The village
shall be under no duty or obligation to any person having an alarm system for any defects or
deficiencies in the system or any delays in response or transmission of the alarm for any other
reason.
(Ord. of 7-31-1989, § 1(9); Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
ARTICLE IV. DIRECT SALES/TEMPORARY EVENTS*
Sec. 18.120 Registration required.
It shall be unlawful for any direct seller, solicitor or person to engage in direct sales,
solicitations or hold temporary events within the Village of Weston without being registered
and issued a permit for that purpose as provided herein.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 15
(Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.121 Definitions.
In this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
Charitable Organization - Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation for which there is provided proof of tax exempt status pursuant to United States Internal Revenue Code Sections 501(c)(3) or (4).
Direct Seller Employee - Any individual who, for him/herself or for a partnership, association or corporation, sells goods, or takes sales orders for the later delivery of goods, at any location other than the permanent business place or residence of said individual, partnership, association or corporation and shall include but not be limited to peddlers and transient merchants. The sale of goods includes donations required by the direct seller for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer.
Direct Seller Business - Any individual, partnership, corporation or business entity of any type whatsoever, which employs direct sellers as defined above either on a full-time, part-time or commission basis and is not a permanent merchant as defined in this section.
Goods - Includes personal property of any kind and shall include goods provided incidental to services offered or sold.
Permanent Merchant - A direct seller who, for at least one year prior to the consideration of the application of this chapter to said merchant, has continuously operated an established place of business in this Village or has continuously resided in this Village and now does business from his/her residence.
Police Department - Everest Metro Police Department.
Solicitor - Any individual who, for him/herself or for any other person, organization, society, association or corporation, personally solicits money, property or financial assistance of any kind from persons other than members of such organization, society, association or corporation.
Temporary Events - carnivals, sports activities over public ways, church bazaars, charity fundraisers and revival meetings which are not detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience or general welfare provided the use or operation and any incidental temporary structures or tents are in conformance with all other ordinances and codes of the village.
(Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 16
Sec. 18.122 Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this chapter:
(a) Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods to regular customers on established routes.
(b) Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods.
(c) Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders away from the established place of business for goods regularly offered for sale by such merchant within this county and who delivers such goods in his/her regular course of business.
(d) Any person who has an established place of business where the goods being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis and in which the buyer has initiated contact with and specifically requested a home visit by said person.
(e) Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit arrangement, with the prospective customer.
(f) Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the sale or offering for sale of goods.
(g) Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law.
(h) Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who engages in direct sales or solicitation for or on behalf of said organization, provided that there is submitted to the Police Department proof that such charitable organization is registered under Wis, Stat, § 202.12. Any charitable organization not registered under Wis. Stat. § 202.12, or which is exempt from that statute's registration requirements shall be required to register under this chapter.
(i) Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant but against whom complaint has been made to the Police Department that such person is a transient merchant, provided that there is submitted to the Police Department proof that such person has leased for at least one year, or purchased, the premises from which he/she is conducting business or proof that such person has conducted such business in this Village for at least one year prior to the date complaint was made.
(j) Any resident of the Village of Weston under age 18. (Permitted exceptions include scouting organizations, sport teams, etc.)
(Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 17
Sec. 18.123 Registration and Permit procedure.
(a) Direct seller (employee) and Direct Seller (Business) must complete all registration requirements with the Village Clerk no less than thirty days prior to commencing any and all selling activities in the Village of Weston. Registration shall include the following information:
(1) Direct Seller (Business):
a. Business name, permanent address, telephone number, name of business contact person, contact person's date of birth, driver's license or identification number and issuing state;
b. Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the goods offered, and any services offered;
c. Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable;
d. Total number of employees selling during business operations covered by this license;
e. Dollar value of most expensive merchandise or service offered;
f. Dates in which selling activity shall occur;
g. Names of cities, villages and towns, not to exceed three, where business has conducted similar business just prior to making this registration;
h. Place where business contact person can be personally contacted for at least sixty days after leaving this city;
(2) Direct Seller (Employees):
a. Name, permanent address and telephone number, and temporary address, if any.
b. Date of Birth, driver’s license or identification number, issuing state, height, weight, and color of hair and eyes.
c. Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, association or corporation that the direct seller or solicitor represents or is employed by or whose merchandise is being sold.
d. Location address and telephone number from which business will be conducted, if any, and written permission from the owner of the
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 18
property for the applicant to conduct business on the property, which statement shall be submitted with the registration form.
e. Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the goods offered and any services offered, if applicable.
f. Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable.
g. Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by the applicant in the conduct of his/her business.
h. Last cities, villages, towns, not to exceed three, where the applicant conducted similar business.
i. Place where the applicant can be contacted for at least seven days after leaving this Village.
j. Statements as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime or ordinance violation related to applicant's business within the last five years, the nature of the offense and the place of conviction.
k. Dates in which selling activity will occur.
(b) Applicants shall present to the Village Clerk:
1. A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be reasonably required.
2. A state certificate of examination and approval from the Sealer of Weights and Measures where the applicant's business requires use of weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities.
3. A state health officer's certificate where the applicant's business involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be certified under state law, such certificate to state that the applicant is apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated not more than 90 days prior to the date the application for registration is made.
(c) At the time the registration is returned, a fee as set by the Village Board shall be paid to the Village Clerk to cover the cost of processing said registration.
(d) The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the Village Clerk his/her agent to accept service of process in any civil action brought against the applicant arising out of any sale or service performed by the applicant in connection with the direct sales or soliciting activities of the applicant, in the event the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be served personally.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 19
(e) Upon payment of said fee and the signing of said statement, the Village Clerk shall register the applicant as a direct seller or solicitor and date the entry. Said registration shall be valid for a period of one calendar year from the date of entry, subject to subsequent refusal as provided below.
(Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.124 Investigation.
(a) Upon receipt of each application, the Police Department shall make and complete an investigation of the statements made in such registration.
(b) The Police Chief shall refuse to register the applicant if it is determined, pursuant to the investigation above, that:
(1) The application contains any material omission or materially inaccurate statement;
(2) Complaints of a material nature have been received against the applicant by authorities in the last cities, villages and towns, not exceeding three, in which the applicant conducted similar business;
(3) In the case of application for registration as a direct seller, the applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance violation within the last five years, the nature of which is directly related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling; or
(4) The applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision under the Registration procedure above.
(c) The Zoning Administrator may refuse the application if the “direct sales” violates the zoning code in any way.
(Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.125 Appeals.
Any person denied registration may appeal the denial through the appeal procedure provided by ordinance or resolution of the Village Board or, if none has been adopted, under the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 68.07 through 68.16.
(Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.126 Prohibited practices; disclosure requirements.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 20
(a) Prohibited practices.
(1) Direct sellers and solicitors shall be prohibited from calling at any dwelling or other place between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., except by appointment; calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors" or words of similar meaning; calling at the rear door of any dwelling place; or remaining on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or other person having authority over such premises.
(2) A direct seller shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity or character of any goods offered for sale, the purpose of his/her visit, his/her identity or the identity of the organization he/she represents. A charitable organization direct seller shall specifically disclose what portion of the sale price of goods being offered will actually be used for the charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting. Said portion shall be expressed as percentage of the sale price of the goods.
(3) No direct seller shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed.
(4) No direct seller shall make any loud noises or use any sound- amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced is capable of being plainly heard outside a one-hundred-foot radius of the source.
(5) No direct seller shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around the area in which he/she is conducting business.
(b) Disclosure requirements.
(1) After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to a prospective customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose his/her name, the name of the company or organization he/she is affiliated with, if any, and the identity of goods or services he/she offers to sell.
(2) If any sale of goods is made by a direct seller, or any sales order for the later delivery of goods is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have the right to cancel said transaction if it involves the extension of credit or is a cash transaction of more than $25, in accordance with the procedure as set forth in Wis. Stat. § 423.203, . The seller shall give the buyer two copies of a typed or printed notice of that fact. Such notice shall conform to the requirements of Wis. Stats. §§ 423.203(1)(a), (b) and (c), (2) and (3). If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of goods, he/she shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a written statement containing the terms of
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 21
the agreement, the amount paid in advance, whether full, partial or no advance payment is made, the name, address and telephone number of the seller, the delivery or performance date and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms thereof.
(Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.127 Records.
The Police Department shall keep records of all convictions for violation of this chapter and note any such violation on the record of the registrant convicted.
(Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.128 Revocation of registration.
(a) Registration may be revoked by the Village Board after notice and hearing if the registrant made any material omission or materially inaccurate statement in the application for registration, made any fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation in the course of engaging in direct sales or solicitations, violated any provision of this chapter or, in the case of direct sellers, was convicted of any crime or ordinance or statutory violation which is directly related to the registrant's fitness to engage in direct selling.
(b) Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally on the registrant at least 72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing. Such notice shall contain the time and place of hearing and a statement of the acts upon which the hearing will be based.
(Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.129 Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, Penalties, of the Code of the Village of Weston. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. of 6-18-2007, Ord. of 5-20-2010; Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
* Cross References--Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places, Chapter 70, Zoning, Chapter 94.
State Law References--Authority, Wis. Stats. § 66.0423.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 22
ARTICLE V. SLAUGHTERHOUSES, STOCKYARDS, JUNKYARDS, AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS*
Sec. 18.130 Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Junkyard, automobile graveyard or automobile salvage or wrecking yard means any place where two or more motor vehicles not in running condition, or their parts, are stored in the open and are not being restored to operation, or any land, building or structure used for wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or farm machinery, or their parts, including the commercial salvaging of any other goods, articles, or merchandise. The term "junkyard" shall also be construed to mean an open or enclosed area or building where waste or scrap materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including, but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and glass.
(Code 1982, § 5.02(4); Ord. of 8-10-1992, § 1, Ord. of 5-20-2010; Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Cross References --Definitions generally, § 1.101.
* Cross References--Animals, Chapter 10; Traffic and Vehicles, Chapter 82.
State Law References--Junkyards generally, Wis. Stat. § 84.31.
Sec. 18.131. Permit required; fee.
(a) It shall be unlawful to establish or enlarge and extend the structure of any slaughterhouse, stockyard, junkyard and automobile graveyard within the limits of the village without first registering with the village clerk/treasurer and obtaining a permit, which permit shall only be issued pursuant to resolution of the board, and which permit shall be issued only in the discretion of the board.
(b) It shall be unlawful to buy, sell or deal in junk, junk automobiles or their parts without first registering with the village clerk/treasurer and obtaining a permit, which permit shall be issued only in the discretion of the board.
(c) The permit fee shall be set by board resolution, and the fee shall be listed in the schedule of licenses and permit fees.
(Code 1982, § 5.02(1)--(3) , Ord. of 5-20-2010; Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 23
Sec. 18.132. Qualifications.
Before any person shall qualify for a permit under the provisions of this article, such person shall have proven to the village that the slaughterhouse, stockyard, junkyard and/or automobile graveyard has been or will be, within a limited time to be set by the board, enclosed within a high fence enclosure screening off the contents from the public. It will then be in the discretion of the board as to whether or not a permit will be issued.
(Code 1982, § 5.02(5) , Ord. of 5-20-2010; Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.133. Exceptions to article provisions.
The covering of a maximum of three disabled and/or dismantled, non-operating automobiles or their parts, and/or items of disabled farm, road or other machinery by a canvass, canopy or other covering that completely excludes them from the view of the public, by any person shall take that person out of the purview of this article.
(Code 1982, § 5.02(6) , Ord. of 5-20-2010; Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
ARTICLE VI. MASSAGE
Sec. 18.134. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Manager means the operator or an agent licensed under this article, who shall be certified as a massage technician under Wisconsin Administrative Code SPS Chapter MTBT 1 through MTBT 7.
Massage means, where a consideration passes, any process or procedure consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading or tapping, by physical or mechanical means, upon the external parts or tissues of the body of another; and for purposes of this article shall include wrestling, dancing, body painting and/or removal of such paint from a body, and manicuring, where one or both of the participants expose one or more sexual or genital parts.
Massage establishment means a place of business wherein massage is practiced, used or made available, or where sex education, or sex counseling is carried on by any sex educators or counselors while one or more of the persons present at the counseling session is nude, or where wrestling, dancing, manicuring, or similar activities are conducted or permitted while one or more persons expose one or more sexual or genital parts.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 24
Massage room means the area where private massage, wrestling, dancing, sex education, manicuring, body painting or removal of body paint, is performed.
Massage technician means a person who, for a consideration, practices, administers or engages in wrestling, dancing, manicuring, sex counseling, sex educating or massage, whether or not such persons hold a valid certificate under Wisconsin Administrative Code SPS Chapter MTBT 1 through MTBT 7.
Operator means any person licensed by the village to operate a massage establishment.
Patron means any person who receives a massage or participates in sex counseling or education sessions, wrestles, manicures, dances, body paints or removes body paint under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that money or other consideration will pass between the patron and the manager, operator, owner or massage under Wisconsin Administrative Code SPS Chapter MTBT 1 through MTBT 7.
Sexual or genital parts shall include the genitals, pubic areas, buttocks, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
Waiting area means an area adjacent to the main entrance that is separate from any area where massages are given.
(Code 1982, § 5.10(2), Ord. of 5-20-2010; Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Cross References--Definitions generally, § 1.101.
Sec. 18.135. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to the following classes of individuals while engaged in the duties of their respective professions:
(1) Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, masseurs or physical therapists licensed or registered to practice their respective professions under the laws of the state, or nurses registered under the laws of the state, acting under their direction and control.
(2) Barbershops and beauty parlors, barbers and beauticians licensed under the laws of the state, provided that such massage as is practiced is limited to the head and scalp.
(3) Accredited high schools and colleges and coaches and trainers in such schools while acting within the scope of their employment.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 25
(4) Employees of those organizations that are exempt from real estate taxation pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 70.11, who administer massages upon such exempt premises as a duty assigned such employee by the employer.
(Code 1982, § 5.10(8), Ord. of 5-20-2010; Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.136. Operation without a license a public nuisance.
The operation of a massage establishment without a license or the activity of an individual as a massage technician without a certificate under Wisconsin Administrative Code SPS Chapter MTBT 1 through MTBT 7 is deemed a public nuisance and may be enjoined by the village.
(Code 1982, § 5.10(9) , Ord. of 5-20-2010; Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.137. Compliance with article required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer, cause or permit the operation of a massage establishment, or for a person to operate as a massage technician, agent, manager or employee, except in strict compliance with this article.
(Code 1982, § 5.10(1), Ord. of 5-20-2010; Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.138. Massage establishment license.
(a) No person shall suffer, cause or permit the conduct of a massage establishment without having first obtained a license from the board. A separate license shall be acquired for each such establishment.
(b) No license shall be granted for any establishment the main entrance to which is within 75 feet of the main entrance to a residence or of the common entry hall to residences, nor for any room in any hotel or motel.
(c) Applications shall be made in writing on forms supplied by the village clerk/treasurer. If application is made for a location not previously licensed, the village clerk/treasurer shall by regular mail notify all property owners and registered electors within 250 feet of the proposed location at least ten days before the hearing on the granting of such license.
(d) All applications shall include:
(1) A nonrefundable fee as set by board resolution, which shall be listed in the schedule of licenses and permit fees.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 26
(2) The location and mailing address of the proposed establishment.
(3) For an individual or for each person of a partnership or joint venture or agent of a corporation:
a. Name and present address.
b. The two immediately previous addresses and dates of residence at each.
c. Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, social security number, written proof of age, full set of fingerprints and two photographs not more than 30 days old, and at least two inches by two inches.
d. The business or occupation for the two years immediately preceding the date of application.
e. Whether a similar license had been revoked or suspended and, if so, the reason and the location.
f. Whether convicted of any crime or ordinance violation other than traffic offenses within the past three years and, if so, a listing of the violations and their locations.
(4) If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of each officer and director and of the stockholders of such corporation, together with the extent of the ownership of each, and a statement whether such officer, director or stockholder holds office or stock in any other corporation conducting a similar business in the state. Such application shall be made by an agent registered as such who shall have been a resident of the village for at least 90 days.
(5) All phone numbers of the proposed establishment.
(6) The names, addresses and phone numbers of all persons employed by the applicant at the time of application.
(7) Certification of compliance of the proposed premises with the building code and fire code, or in the alternative, the applicant shall file a bond assuring that any work required to be done to bring the premises into compliance with such codes shall be accomplished prior to the opening of business. Compliance with such codes and standards for health and sanitary operation and the acquisition of a health permit shall be conditions precedent to the opening of business.
(8) The application shall contain a statement signed by the applicant and each
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 27
individual of all partnerships, corporations, LLP's, LLC's or joint ventures that all information contained in the application is true and correct.
(e) The issuance of this license shall allow for the licensing of up to three additional managers for each establishment.
(Code 1982, § 5.10(3), Ord. of 5-20-2010; Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.139. Massage technician's certificate and manager's certificate.
(a) No person shall act or operate for a consideration as a massage technician or manager without having first obtained a State of Wisconsin certificate as a massage technician under Wisconsin Administrative Code SPS Chapter MTBT 1 through MTBT 7.
Sec. 18.141. Regulations of operations and licenses.
(a) Each establishment shall at all times maintain and comply with the following regulations:
(1) The establishment shall comply with all village codes.
(2) Only one non-flashing business sign clearly identifying the establishment as a massage establishment shall be posted at the main entrance. No description of services, written or pictorial, shall be permitted on such sign, the square footage of which shall not exceed that permitted in the zoning district in which the establishment is located, or 18 feet, whichever is less.
(3) No establishment shall be open for business between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(4) Only massage technicians certified under Wisconsin Administrative Code SPS Chapter MTBT 1 through MTBT 7 pursuant to this article shall be employed as massage technicians by the establishment.
(5) The practice of all massage technicians certified by the State of Wisconsin under SPS Chapter MTBT 1 through 7 employed by the establishment shall be limited to the licensed premises.
(6) No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted on the premises.
(7) No intoxicating beverages or substance included in Wis. Stats. Chapter 961 shall be permitted in the licensed establishment. Food shall be permitted only when there is no charge and when a food preparation area, including sink with hot and cold running water, is a part of the establishment.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 28
(8) The establishment shall provide a waiting area for patrons separate from any area where massages are given. There shall be direct access to this area from the main entrance or from the hallway connected only to the main entrance.
(9) The operator or a licensed manager shall be present on the premises at all times during hours of operation and shall be responsible for the operation of the establishment.
(10) The establishment shall permit inspections of the premises at any time during business hours by building inspectors, fire inspectors, health inspectors or personnel of any law enforcement agency.
(11) The establishment shall keep current records of the names and addresses of its massage technicians certified by the State of Wisconsin under SPS Chapter MTBT 1 through 7, agents, managers and employees and the date of employment and termination of each. Such records shall be open to inspection by any of the personnel listed in subsection (a)(10) of this section.
(12) The establishment shall report any change of fact required on the application form and all personnel changes to the village clerk/treasurer within ten days after such change.
(13) The establishment shall maintain a system of giving paper receipts to all patrons. The receipt shall bear on its face the name, address and telephone number of the patron, and the time and date of issuance. The name of the massage technician who administers to the patron shall appear on the original of the receipt in the technician's own handwriting. Not less than once each month the county health officer shall inspect the original receipts. The information contained on the receipt shall be confidential. If the health officer believes one or more patrons should be advised of any fact arising out of the patron's patronage of the massage parlor, the contact shall be in a discreet and private manner in order to protect the privacy of the patron. No other public official shall have access to or be provided with any information on the patron receipt without a specific authorization by resolution adopted by the board, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
(14) The establishment shall be equipped with security deposit facilities capable of being locked by the patron. Sufficient safety deposit facilities shall be furnished so that each patron will have a separate compartment available for storage of clothing and valuables.
(15) Every massage establishment shall have a minimum of one shower, one toilet and one washbasin.
(16) If male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously, such massage
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 29
rooms, dressing facilities, toilet facilities, steam rooms, and sauna rooms as are provided shall be separated for male and female patrons; and each such separate facility or room shall be clearly marked as such.
(17) Rooms in which massage is to be practiced or administered shall have at least 50 square feet of clear floor area, and shall maintain a light level of no less than 40 foot-candles as measured at three feet above the floor. Lighting in colors other than white shall be prohibited. Such rooms shall be equipped with cabinets for the storage of clean linen and chemicals and approved receptacles for the storage of soiled linen. Such rooms shall contain a door incapable of being locked from the exterior or interior. Such door shall contain a transparent window pane no less than 12 inches wide and 12 inches long, such that an unobstructed view of the room is provided from a hallway or other common access area immediately adjacent to the room.
(18) No stuffed or upholstered furniture or beds and mattresses shall be permitted in rooms in which massage is to be practiced or administered. Such rooms shall be equipped with massage tables having a hard surface impervious to liquids with a width of no more than three feet and a length of no more than eight feet. The surface of such tables shall be positioned at least two feet from the surface of the floor so as to allow for free access to the floor beneath. Such tables may be equipped with either non-disposable pads or coverings or disposable coverings not more than 2 1/2 inches thick. Non-disposable pads or coverings shall be removable, impervious and cleanable.
(19) Massage establishments and massage technicians certified by the State of Wisconsin under SPS Chapter MTBT 1 through MTBT 7 in such establishments shall prominently and publicly display on the premises their licenses and permits during all hours of operation.
(20) Massage establishments shall at all times be equipped with an adequate supply of clean, sanitary towels, coverings and linens. Clean towels, coverings and linens shall be stored in cabinets. Towels and linens shall not be used on more than one patron unless they have first been laundered and disinfected. Disposable coverings and towels shall not be used on more than one patron. Soiled linens and paper towels shall be deposited in approved receptacles.
(21) Instruments utilized in performing massage shall not be used on more than one patron unless they have first been sterilized, using disinfecting agents or sterilizing equipment approved by the health officer. Massage table pads and reusable table coverings shall be disinfected between each massage with approved chemicals. Chemicals used during massage shall be stored separately in containers clearly labeled as to contents. All chemical containers shall be stored in cabinets reserved solely for such purpose.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 30
(b) Each technician certified by the State of Wisconsin under SPS Chapter MTBT 1 through MTBT 7 shall at all times comply with the following regulations:
(1) The technician certified by the State of Wisconsin under SPS Chapter MTBT 1 through MTBT 7 shall practice only on the premises of a licensed massage establishment.
(2) The technician certified by the State of Wisconsin under SPS Chapter MTBT 1 through MTBT 7 shall massage only patrons over the age of 18 years.
(3) No technician certified by the State of Wisconsin under SPS Chapter MTBT 1 through MTBT 7 shall administer a massage if he/she believes, knows or should know that he/she is not free of any contagious or communicable disease or infection.
(4) The technician certified by the State of Wisconsin under SPS Chapter MTBT 1 through MTBT 7 shall report any change of fact required in the application form to the village clerk/treasurer within ten days after such change.
(5)
a. It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage parlor to place his/her hand or hands upon, to touch with any part of his/her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital part of any other person, or to offer to do any of the acts described in this subsection.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage parlor to expose his/her sexual or genital parts to any other person. It shall also be unlawful for any person in a massage parlor to expose the sexual or genital parts of any other person, or to offer to do any of the acts described in this subsection.
c. It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the presence of any other person in a massage parlor, to fail to conceal with a fully opaque covering the sexual or genital parts of his/her body, or to offer to do any of the acts described in this subsection.
d. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a massage parlor knowingly to cause, allow or permit in or about such massage parlor any agent, employee or any other person under his/her control or supervision to perform such acts prohibited in subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this section, or to offer to hire or permit any person to do any of the acts described in this subsection.
(c) In the event of denial, the applicant shall receive written notification of denial setting forth the reasons for the denial within ten days after such denial.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 31
(d) Licenses granted by the board shall expire on June 30 of each year. Reapplication shall be not less than 60 days prior to such expiration date and shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant.
(e.) No license shall be transferred between locations or persons, and no massage establishment license shall be sold or be subject to transfer of corporate assets or change of corporate officers or directors.
(f) The massage technician certified by the State of Wisconsin under SPS Chapter MTBT 1 through MTBT 7 does not entitle the holder to operate or manage a massage establishment.
(Code 1982, § 5.10(6), Ord. of 5-20-2010; Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.142. Revocation or suspension of license.
(a) Grounds. The license granted in this article may be revoked or suspended for up to six months by the board:
(1) If the applicant has made or recorded any statement required by this article knowing it to be false or fraudulent or intentionally deceptive.
(2) For the violation of any provision of this article, except for establishment license matters involving violations of village codes, in which case the license shall be revoked after the second conviction in any license year.
(3) If a technician's or manager's State of Wisconsin certificate, after one conviction of any offense under Wis. Stats. Chapter 944, or of any offense involving substances included in Wis. Stats. Chapter 961, or of an offense against the person or property of a patron, whether such occurred on or off the premises of the establishment.
(4) If a technician’s or manager’s State of Wisconsin certificate has been suspended, revoked, or denied under Wisconsin Administrative Code SPS Chapter MTBT 1 through MTBT 7.
(5) If an establishment license, after one conviction of any establishment personnel of an offense under Wis. Stats. Chapter 944, or of an offense against the person or property of a patron or of an offense involving substances in Wis. Stats. Chapter 961, where there is shown the participation or knowledge of any other establishment personnel or of any individual within the business structure of the applicant.
(b) Notice and hearing. No license shall be revoked or suspended by the board except upon due notice and a hearing to determine whether grounds for such action exists.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 32
The notice shall be in writing and shall state the grounds of the complaint against the licensee. The notice shall be served upon the licensee at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing and shall state the time and place of the hearing. The licensee shall be entitled to be heard, to be represented, to cross-examine opposing witnesses, and to present witnesses in his/her own behalf under the subpoena of the board, if such is required. The hearing shall be steno graphically recorded, and a copy of the transcript shall be available to the licensee at the expense of the licensee. The board shall decide the matter and shall prepare a written decision, which shall be filed with the village clerk/treasurer and a copy mailed to the licensee within 20 days after the hearing.
(Code 1982, § 5.10(7), Ord. of 5-20-2010; Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 33
ARTICLE VII. PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS*
Sec. 18.143 Pawnbrokers.
(a) Purpose.
(1) The Village Board finds that the services offered by pawnshops provide an opportunity for individuals to readily transfer stolen property to those businesses. The Board also finds that consumer protection regulation is warranted in transactions involving these businesses. The Board further finds that pawnshops have outgrown the Village’s current ability to effectively or efficiently identify criminal activity related to them. The purpose of this chapter is to prevent pawnshops from being used to facilitate the commission of crimes and to assure that they comply with basic consumer protection standards, thereby protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens, and pursuant to the authority granted by Wis. Stat. § 134.71.
(2) This Ordinance implements and establishes the required use of a Pawn Tracking System of the Police Department’s choosing to help the police department better regulate current and future pawnshops to decrease and stabilize costs associated with the regulation of pawnshops, and to increase identification of criminal activities in pawnshops through the timely collection and sharing of transaction information.
(b) Definitions. In this section:
(1) Article means any item of value.
(2) Billable transaction means every reportable transaction except renewals, redemptions, voids, or extensions of existing pawns or purchases previously reported and continuously in the pawnbroker’s possession.
(3) Charitable organization means a corporation, trust, or community chest, fund, or foundation organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
(4) Customer means a person with whom a pawnbroker, or an agent thereof, engages in a transaction of purchase, sale, receipt, or exchange of any secondhand article.
(5) Pawnbroker means any person who engages in the business of lending money on the deposit or pledge of any article or purchasing any article
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 34
with an expressed or implied agreement or understanding to sell it back at a subsequent time at a stipulated price. To the extent that a pawnbroker’s business includes buying personal property previously used, rented, leased, or selling it on consignment, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable. A person is not acting as a pawnbroker when engaging in any of the following:
a. Any transaction at an occasional garage or yard sale, an estate sale, a gun, knife, gem, or antique show, or a convention.
b. Any transaction entered into by a person engaged in the business of junk collector, junk dealer, or scrap processor, as described in Wis. Stat. § 70.995(2)(x).
c. Any transaction while operating as a charitable organization or conducting a sale, the proceeds of which are donated to a charitable organization.
d. Any transaction between a buyer of a new article and the person who sold the article when new that involves any of the following:
1. The return of the article.
2. The exchange of the article for a different, new article.
e. Any transaction as a purchaser of a secondhand article from a charitable organization if the secondhand article was a gift to the charitable organization.
f. Any transaction as a seller of a secondhand article that the person bought from a charitable organization if the secondhand article was a gift to the charitable organization.
(6) Reportable transaction means every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker in which an article or articles are received through a pawn, purchase, consignment, or trade, or in which a pawn is renewed, extended, voided, or redeemed, or for which a unique transaction number or identifier is generated by their point-of-sale software, and is reportable except:
a. The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used articles from a merchant manufacturer, or wholesaler having an established permanent place of business, and the retail sale of said articles, provided the pawnbroker must maintain a record of such purchase or consignment that describes each item, and must mark each item in a manner that relates it to that transaction record.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 35
b. Retail and wholesale sales of articles originally received by pawn or purchase, and for which all applicable hold and/or redemption periods have expires.
(7) Secondhand means owned by any person, except a wholesaler, retailer, or licensed secondhand article dealer, immediately before the transaction at hand.
(c) Inspection of Items. At all times during the term of the license, the pawnbroker must allow the police department to enter the premises where the licensed business is located, including all off-site storage facilities, during normal business hours, except in an emergency, for the purpose of inspecting such premises and inspecting the items, wares, merchandise, and records therein to verify compliance with this chapter or other applicable laws.
(d) (Reserved.)
(e) License. No person may operate as a pawnbroker in the Village unless the person first obtains a pawnbroker license under this chapter.
(f) Display of license. Each license issued under this chapter shall be displayed in a conspicuous place visible to anyone entering a licensed premise.
(g) License application. A person wishing to operate as a pawnbroker shall apply for a license to the Village Clerk. The clerk shall furnish application forms approved by the police department that shall require all of the following:
(1) The applicant’s name, place and date of birth, residence address, and residence addresses for the 10-year period prior to the date of the application.
(2) The name and address of the business and of the owner of the business premises.
(3) Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, limited liability company, or partnership; and
1. If the applicant is a corporation, the state where incorporated and the names and addresses of all officers and directors.
2. If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners.
3. If the applicant is a limited liability company, the names and addresses of all members.
4. The name of the manager or proprietor of the business.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 36
5. Any other information that the clerk may reasonably require.
(4) A statement as to whether the applicant, including an individual, agent, officer, director, member, partner, manager, or proprietor, has been convicted of any crime, statutory violation punishable by forfeiture, or county or municipal ordinance violation. If so, the applicant must furnish information as to the time, place, and offense of all such convictions.
(5) Whether the applicant or any other person listed in subsection (4) above has ever used or been known by a name other than the applicant’s name, and if so, the name or names used and information concerning dates and places used.
(6) Whether the applicant or any other person listed in subsection (4) above has previously been denied or had revoked or suspended a pawnbroker license from any other governmental unit. If so, the applicant must furnish information as to the date, location, and reason for the action.
(h) Investigation of license applicant. The police department shall investigate each applicant and any other person listed in subsection (3) above for a pawnbroker license. The department shall furnish the information derived from that investigation in writing to the Village clerk. The investigation shall include each agent, officer, member, partner, manager, or proprietor.
(i) License issuance.
(1) The Village Board shall grant the license if all of the following apply:
a. The applicant, including an individual, a partner, a member of a limited liability company, a manager, a proprietor, or an officer, director, or agent of any corporate applicant, does not have an arrest or conviction record subject to Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335.
b. The applicant provides to the Village clerk a bond of $2,500 with not less than 2 sureties for the observation of all municipal ordinances or state or federal laws relating to pawnbrokers. The bond must be in full force and effect at all times during the term of the license.
(2) No license issued under this subsection may be transferred.
(3) Each license is valid from July 1 until the following June 30.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 37
(j) Requirements.
(1) Identification. No pawnbroker may engage in a transaction of purchase, receipt, or exchange of any secondhand article from a customer without first securing adequate identification from the customer. At the time of the transaction, the pawnbroker shall require the customer to present one of the following types of identification:
a. Current, valid Wisconsin driver’s license;
b. Current, valid Wisconsin identification card;
c. Current, valid photo identification card or photo driver’s license issued by another state or province of Canada.
(2) Transactions with minors.
a. Except as provided in subsection (2)b., no pawnbroker may engage in a transaction of purchase, receipt, or exchange of any secondhand article from any minor, defined as a person under the age of 18 years.
b. A pawnbroker may engage in a transaction described under subsection (2)a. if the minor is accompanied by his/her parent or guardian at the time of the transaction and the parent or guardian signs the transaction form and provides identification as required by this section.
(3) Records required. At the time of any reportable transaction other than renewals, extensions, or redemptions, every pawnbroker must immediately record in English the following information by using ink or other indelible medium on forms or in a computerized record approved by the police department:
a. A complete and accurate description of each item, including, but not limited to any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item.
b. The purchase price, amount of money loaned or pledged therefore.
c. The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due, including monthly and annual interest rates and all pawn fees and charges.
d. Date, time, and place the item of property was received by the pawnbroker, and the unique alpha and/or numeric transaction identifier that distinguishes it from all other transactions in the pawnbroker’s records.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 38
e. Full name, current residence address, current residence telephone number, date of birth, and accurate description of the person from whom the item of property was received, including sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes, and color of hair.
f. The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of identification of the seller:
1. Current, valid Wisconsin driver’s license;
2. Current, valid Wisconsin identification card;
3. Current, valid photo identification card or photo driver’s license issued by another state or province of Canada.
g. The signature of the person identified in the transaction.
h. Renewals, extensions, and redemptions. The pawnbroker shall provide the original transaction identifier, the date of the current transaction, and the type of transaction for renewals, extensions, and redemptions.
i. Record retention. Data entries shall be retained for at least 1 year from the date of transaction.
j. For every secondhand article purchased, received, or exchanged by a pawnbroker from a customer off the pawnbroker’s premises, or consigned to the pawnbroker for sale on their premises, the pawnbroker shall keep a written inventory. In this inventory the pawnbroker shall record the name and address of each customer, the date, time, and place of the transaction, and a detailed description of the article that is the subject of the transaction. The customer shall sign his/her name on a declaration of ownership of the secondhand article identified in the inventory and shall state that he/she owns the secondhand article. The pawnbroker shall retain an original and a duplicate of each entry and declaration of ownership relating to the purchase, receipt, or exchange of any secondhand article for not less than one year after the date of the transaction, except as provided in subsection (6)., and shall make duplicates of the inventory and declarations of ownership available to any law enforcement officer for inspection at any reasonable time.
(4) Holding period.
a. Except as provided in subsection (4)c., any secondhand article purchased or received by a pawnbroker shall be kept on the premises or other place for safekeeping for not less than 30 days after the
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 39
date of purchase or receipt, unless the person known by the pawnbroker to be the lawful owner of the secondhand article redeems it.
b. During the period set forth in subsection (4)a., the secondhand article shall be held separate from saleable inventory and may not be altered in any manner. The pawnbroker shall permit any law enforcement officer to inspect the secondhand article during this period. Within 24 hours after a request of a law enforcement officer during this period, a pawnbroker shall make available for inspection any secondhand article which is kept off the premises for safekeeping.
c. Subsections (4)a. and b. do not apply to a secondhand article consigned to a pawnbroker.
(5) Redemption period. Any person pledging, pawning or depositing any item for security must have a minimum of 60 days from the date of that transaction to redeem the item before it may be forfeited and sold. During the 60-day holding period, items may not be removed from the licensed location. Pawnbrokers are prohibited from redeeming any item to anyone other than the person to whom the receipt was issued, to any person identified in a written and notarized authorization to redeem the property identified in the receipt, or to a person identified in writing by the pledger at the time of the initial transaction and signed by the pledger, or with the approval of the pledger at the time of the initial transaction and signed by the pledger, or with the approval of the police department. Written authorization for release of property to persons other than the original pledger must be maintained along with the original transaction record in accordance with the subsection (3)i.
(6) Police order to hold property.
a. Investigative hold. Whenever a law enforcement officer from any agency notifies a pawnbroker not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the premises. The investigative hold shall be confirmed in writing by the originating agency within 72 hours and will remain in effect for 15 days from the date of initial notification, or until the investigative order is canceled, or until an order to confiscate is issued, pursuant to subsection b., whichever comes first.
b. Order to confiscate.
1. If an item is identified or stolen or evidence in a criminal case, the police department may physically confiscate and remove it from the shop, pursuant to a written order from the police department.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 40
2. When an item is confiscated, the person doing so shall provide identification upon request of the pawnbroker, and shall provide the pawnbroker with the name and phone number of the confiscating officer and the case number related to the confiscation.
3. When an order to confiscate is no longer necessary, the police department shall so notify the pawnbroker.
(7) Daily reports to police.
a. Pawnbrokers must submit every reportable transaction to the police department daily in the following manner. Pawnbrokers must provide to the police department all information required in subsection (3) and other required information, by transferring it from their computer to the Police Department’s designated Pawn Tracking System. All required records must be transmitted completely and accurately after the close of business each day in accordance with standards and procedures established by the police department using procedures that address security concerns of the pawnbroker and the police department. The pawnbroker must display a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises which informs all patrons that all transactions are reported daily to the department and the designated Pawn Tracking System.
b. Billable transaction fees. Pawnbrokers will be charged for each billable transaction reported to the police department. These fees are intended to pay for the cost of participation in the Pawn Tracking System.
c. If a pawnbroker is unable to successfully transfer the required reports by modem, the pawnbroker must provide the police department with printed copies of all reportable transactions by 12:00 noon the next business day.
d. If the problem is determined to be in the pawnbroker’s system and is not corrected by the close of the first business day following the failure, the pawnbroker must provide the required reports as detailed in subsection (3), and shall be charged a daily reporting failure fee of $10.00 until the error is corrected, or, if the problem is determined to be outside the pawnbroker’s system, the pawnbroker must provide the required reports in subsection c. and resubmit all such transactions via modem when the error is corrected.
e. Regardless of the cause or origin of the technical problems that prevented the pawnbroker from uploading the reportable transactions,
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 41
upon correction of the problem, the pawnbroker shall upload every reportable transaction from every business day the problem has existed.
f. The provisions of this section notwithstanding, the police department may, upon presentation of extenuating circumstances delay the implementation of the daily reporting penalty.
g. Subsection (7). shall not apply to businesses that did not have 200 reportable transactions in the past calendar year. However, any such pawnbroker must follow daily reporting procedure for each reportable transaction by submitting a written transaction form approved by the police department to the department on the business day following the date of the reportable transaction.
(8) Exception for customer return or exchange. Nothing in this section applies to the return or exchange from a customer to a pawnbroker of any secondhand article purchase from the pawnbroker.
(k) Receipt required. Every pawnbroker must provide a receipt to the party identified in every reportable transaction and must maintain a duplicate of that receipt for 3 years. The receipt must include at least the following information:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the licensed business.
(2) The date and time the item was received by the pawnbroker.
(3) Whether the item was pawned or sold, or the nature of the transaction.
(4) An accurate description of each item received, including, but not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item.
(5) The signature or unique identifier of the pawnbroker or employee that conducted the transaction.
(6) The amount advanced or paid.
(7) The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees and charges.
(8) The last regular day of business by which the item must be redeemed by the pledger without risk that the item will be sold, and the amount necessary to redeem the pawned item on that date.
(9) The full name, residence address, residence telephone number, and date of birth of the pledger or seller.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 42
(10) The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of identification of the seller:
a. Current, valid Wisconsin driver’s license.
b. Current, valid Wisconsin identification card.
c. Current, valid photo driver’s license or identification card issued by another state or province of Canada.
(11) Description of the pledger or seller, including approximate sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes, and color of hair.
(12) The signature of the pledger or seller.
(l) Label required. Pawnbrokers must attach a label to every item at the time it is pawned, purchased, or received in inventory from any reportable transaction. Permanently recorded on this label must be the number or name that identifies the transaction in the shop’s records, the transaction date, the name of the item and the description or the model and serial number of the items as reported to the police department, whichever is applicable, and the date the item is out of pawn or can be sold, if applicable. Labels shall not be reused.
(m) Prohibited acts.
(1) No person under the age of 18 years may pawn or sell or attempt to pawn or sell goods with any pawnbroker, nor may any pawnbroker receive any goods from a person under the age of 18 years, except as permitted by section (j) (2) b.
(2) No pawnbroker may receive any goods from a person of unsound mind or an intoxicated person.
(3) No pawnbroker may receive any goods unless the seller presents identification in the form of a valid driver’s license, a valid state of Wisconsin identification card, or current, valid photo driver’s license or identification card issued by the state of residency of the person from whom the item was received.
(4) No pawnbroker may receive any item of property that possesses an altered or obliterated serial number or other identification number, or any item of property that has had its serial number removed.
(5) No person may pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any article of property not their own, nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, consign,
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 43
leave, or deposit the property of another, whether with permission or without, nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any article of property in which another has a security interest with any pawnbroker.
(6) No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any article of property with any pawnbroker shall give a false or fictitious name, nor give a false date of birth, nor give a false or out-of-date address of residence or telephone number, nor present a false or altered identification or the identification of another to any pawnbroker.
(n) License denial, suspension, or revocation.
(1) The Village Board may deny, suspend, or revoke any license issued by it under this section for fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for a license, or for any violation of this chapter or Wis. Stats. §§ 134.71, 943.34, 948.62 or 948.63, or for any other violation of local, state, or federal law substantially related to the businesses licensed under this chapter.
(2) The Village Board may deny, suspend, or revoke any license issued by it under this section if the applicant is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien, or upon whom it is impractical or impossible to conduct a background or financial investigation due to the unavailability of information.
(o) Fees.
(1) The license fee under this chapter shall be as contained in the Village of Weston Fees and Licenses Schedule.
(2) A billable transaction fee as contained in the Village of Weston Fees and Licenses Schedule shall be charged for each billable transaction, and such fees shall be billed to each pawnbroker monthly and are due and payable within 30 days of the billing date. Failure to pay within that time period is a violation of this chapter.
(p) Penalty. Any person who is convicted of violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall forfeit not less than $5 nor more than $2,000, plus the costs of prosecution, and in default of such payment, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(q) Severability. If any section of this Ordinance is found to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining sections shall not be affected.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 44
(Ord. of 11-14-2008 and 5-11-2009, Ord. of 5-20-2010, Ord. of 3-6-13; Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.144 Provisions of state law adopted by reference.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, all provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 134.71 and 138.10, as amended, relating to pawnbrokers and secondhand article and jewelry dealers, describing and defining regulations with respect to pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers and providing for licensing regulations, including penalties to be imposed for the violation of such sections, are adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth in this section. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any provision of the statutes incorporated by reference is required or prohibited by this section. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated in this section are intended to be made a part of this section in order to secure uniform state regulation of pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers.
(Ord. of 7-30-1990, Ord. of 11-14-2008, § 1(1) , Ord. of 5-20-2010; Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
* State Law References--Pawnbrokers generally, Wis. Stat. § 138.10; secondhand goods, dealers generally, Wis. Stat. § 134.71.
ARTICLE VIII. SHOWS, CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS
Sec. 18.145. License.
(a) Required. No person shall exhibit to public view for gain within the limits of the village any circus, carnival, theatrical performance, sleight-of-hand performance or other show of any kind where admission is gained by the payment of money or other valuable thing (except lectures on scientific, moral or literary subjects or concerts of music), without first having been licensed as provided in this section.
(b) Fee. The sum to be paid for a carnival or circus license shall be set by board resolution, and such fee shall be listed in the schedule of licenses and permit fees.
(c) Issuance, contents, transferability. All licenses granted under this article shall be issued and signed by the village clerk/treasurer upon presentation of the receipt for the amount of such license fee. Such license, when granted, shall particularly specify where such show or exhibition is to be held and its duration, and shall not be transferable or inure to the benefit of any person except the one to whom the license shall be issued.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 45
(Code 1982, § 5.05, Ord. of 5-20-2010; Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.146. Reserved.
(Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016)
Sec. 18.147. Reserved.
(Ord. of 6-3-2002, Ord. of 5-20-2010; Amended via Ord. 16-023, 04-20-2016) (Amended via Ord. 18-004, 03-27-2018)
ARTICLE IX. MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
Sec. 18.148. Mobile Food Vendors License.
(a) Purpose. It is a lawful purpose of the board to enact regulatory ordinances protecting and promoting the general welfare, health and safety of its citizens. The board deems it necessary to require licensing and regulation of Mobile Food Vendor units.
(b) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Article:
(1) “Charitable Organization” means any patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic or fraternal, person, partnership, association or corporation that is validly registered under Wis. Stat. § 440.42.
(2) “Farmers’ Market” means the days the Village of Weston provides a time and space for vendors to peddle, vend, sell, serve, display, offer to sell or give away a good, product or food.
(3) “Licensee” means an applicant who has obtained a license to conduct a mobile food vending operation pursuant to this Article.
(4) “Mobile Food Vending Unit” means any motorized or non-motorized vehicle, trailer, kiosk, pushcart, pedal cart, stand, display, carried container, blanket, ground covering or other device designed to be portable and not permanently attached to the ground from which food and/or beverages are being peddled, vended, sold, served, displayed, or offered for sale or given away. This definition does not include a mobile wholesale delivery unit, a vehicle which is used solely to transport or
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 46
deliver food, or a common carrier regulated by the state or federal government.
(5) “Mobile Food Vendor” means a person who peddles, vends, sells, serves, displays, offers to sell or give away food or beverages from a mobile food vending unit.
(6) “Public Streets” used in this Article means any highway, street, or alley located within the corporate limits of the Village of Weston.
(7) “School Property” means all property owned or operated by a public school as defined in Wis. Stat. § 115.01(1) or owned or operated by a private school as defined in Wis. Stat. § 118.165, grades kindergarten through twelve (12).
(8) “Sidewalks” includes paved walkways and boulevards within the right-of-way within the corporate limits of the Village of Weston.
(9) “Vending” means peddle, vend, sell, serve, display, offer to sell or give away food or beverages.
(c) License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to operate a mobile food vendor unit, except as provided within this Article, and without first having obtained a license from the Village Clerk.
(d) Exemptions. The following mobile food vendors may vend without a license, but are subject to the regulations set forth under Section 94.4.10(13) of the zoning code:
(1) A person(s), on behalf of a charitable organization, selling individually wrapped, sealed food or beverage items that are prepared and packaged by a licensed food processor.
(2) A person(s), under the age of 18, operating a “lemonade stand” or the equivalent thereof on privately owned, residential use property.
(3) A person(s), during the Village’s designated Farmers’ Market days, selling food or beverages made by said person(s).
(e) Application. All applicants shall submit a sworn application on a form provided by the Clerk, which shall require, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) Name, address, telephone number, date of birth, email address and Wisconsin Drivers’ License number of the applicant and all operators.
(2) Name, address, telephone number and Wisconsin Drivers’ License number
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 47
of the person(s), firm, association or corporation that the applicant and operators represent or is employed by.
(3) A statement of whether the applicant has been arrested or convicted of any crime or ordinance violation together with the nature of the offense and the place of conviction.
(4) Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used or in association with the use by the applicant or operators of the conduct of the business.
(5) A photograph of the unit and a drawing, including the dimensions, of the mobile food vending unit, along with identification and depiction of all supporting features including, but not limited to, umbrella, awning and waste receptacle.
(6) A copy of the current Marathon County Health Department Certificate.
(7) A copy of the current State of Wisconsin Seller’s Permit.
(f) Vehicles. Any vehicle or other street unit used for vending food in any public right-of-way must be designed and constructed specifically for the purpose of vending such food products. A mobile vendor vending from a mobile food vending unit from a vehicle or other on-street unit must obtain all necessary approvals from the SAFER fire district. All documentation of approval must be submitted with the application.
(1) Any motorized vehicle used in the vending on public street shall have the appropriate and valid vehicle registration as required under Wis. Stat. § 341 and its operator shall have and maintain a valid Wisconsin Driver’s License at all times.
(2) A mobile vendor and any vehicle or other on-street vending unit in any public street shall comply with all state and municipal traffic and parking laws at all times.
(g) Agent. A licensee may be a corporation, cooperative or partnership; however, the application and license shall designate a primary individual, the agent, who is regularly involved in all phases of the operation of the mobile food vendor unit and who is responsible for the mobile food vendor unit. Such corporation, cooperative or partnership shall be liable for the acts or omissions of its supplemental vendors, but such liability shall not relieve any individual supplemental vendor from liability from his/her own acts or omissions.
(h) Age. All applicants must be of at least 18 years of age at the time of the submittal of the application.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 48
(i) Insurance. An applicant must have in force adequate liability insurance and must agree to indemnify, defend and hold the Village, it’s employees and agents harmless against all claims, liability, loss, damage or expense incurred by the Village as a result of any injury to or death of any person or damage or property caused by or resulting from the activities for which a license may be granted. As evidence of liability insurance, the applicant shall furnish a Certificate of Insurance, on a for acceptable by the Village, evidencing the existence of commercial general liability insurance naming the Village of Weston, its employees and agents as additional insured with minimum limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in the aggregate. Whenever such a policy is cancelled, not renewed, or materially changed, the insurer and the licensee shall notify the Village by certified mail.
(1) All motorized vehicles used in the operation of the mobile food vendor, vending from in any public street, shall have in effect motor vehicle liability insurance, as required under Wis. Stat. § 344.62 and in a minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). Proof of such insurance shall be provided at the time of application. Whenever such policy is cancelled, not renewed, or materially changed, the insurer and the licensee shall notify the Village by certified mail.
(j) Fees. The applicant shall pay a fee as set forth within the Village Fee Schedule. The license shall be paid at the time the application is filed with the Village Clerk. Fees will not be reimbursed for applications that have been denied or that have been withdrawn after the required background check has been completed.
(1) Any applicant conducting business on behalf of a not-for-profit or representing a not-for-profit shall be exempt from any fees, but are subject to the regulations set forth in this Article. Proof of 501(c)(3) federal tax-exempt status must be filed with the application at the time of submittal.
(k) Term. Licenses shall be issued on an annual basis beginning on July 1 and expiring on June 30. There shall not be prorated fees or other reductions for applications.
(l) Number. No more than twenty (20) licenses shall be issued each year by the Village. Licenses shall be issued on a “first-come/first-serve” basis, provided that the applicant meets the requirements of this Article. No person may hold more than one license per licensing period.
(m) Investigation. Upon receipt of an application and fee, the Village Clerk shall refer the application to the Chief of Police or the appointed designee, as hereby referenced to in this section as the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall make an investigation of the accuracy of the statements made in the application and determine whether the applicant has been convicted of felony,
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 49
misdemeanor, statutory violation punishable by forfeiture, or county or municipal ordinance violation in which the circumstances of the felony, misdemeanor, or other offense substantially relate to the circumstance of the permitted activity, and, if so, the nature and the date of the offense and the penalty assessed.
(n) Approval. Upon the completion of an investigation, the Chief of Police shall submit a report regarding the fitness of the applicant to conduct the proposed business based on the accuracy or omission of the statements made in the application. The Chief of Police shall return the application to the Village Clerk. The Clerk shall either issue the license to the applicant in accordance with this chapter, or notify the applicant by mail, or email, and in writing that the application was denied, along with the reasons therefore, based on the approval or denial, respectively.
(o) License. Upon the approval of the license by the Village Clerk, compliance with this Article and any other applicable ordinances, a license will be issued to the mobile food vendor. The possession of a license by a mobile food vendor does not, in and of itself, entitle a vendor to the use of any specific vending site on a specific day or entitle a vendor to a minimum number of vending days during the licensing period.
(1) Licenses shall include information deemed necessary by the Village Clerk and shall contain at a minimum, the name, address, telephone number and the principal operator of the mobile food vending unit, date of issuance, and expiration date.
(2) Every mobile food vendor shall prominently display the license at all times in a conspicuous place, that is unblocked from public view on the mobile food vending unit. Licenses issued under this Article are non-transferable to another mobile food vendor. A mobile food vendor may transfer its license to another mobile food vendor unit, provided the applicant updates the license application and the mobile food vending unit meets the requirements set forth in the Article and under Section 94.4.10(13) of the zoning code. A mobile food vendor may not operate more than one mobile food vendor unit within the Village at any one time.
(p) Appeals of Denial. The applicant may appeal the denial of the license through the appeal procedure provided by ordinance or resolution of the Village Board, or if none has been adopted, then under the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 68.07 through 68.16.
.
(q) Suspension, Revocation or Non-Renewal.
(1) The Village Board may suspend or revoke a license issued under this Article. The Clerk may non-renew a license under this Article. Cause for
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 50
suspending or revoking or non-renewal of a license shall include one of the following reasons:
i. Violation by licensee, its manager or an employee of a provision of this Article, Chapter 94 or any other municipal ordinance applicable to the business of the licensee.
ii. Violation of the Marathon County Health Department, the State food and health regulations, or any other regulations relating to the handling and serving of food to the general public.
iii. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the license application submitted under this article or made in carrying on the business of the licensee.
iv. Conviction of the licensee, its manager, or an employee of a felony or misdemeanor substantially related to the mobile food vending operation.
v. Conducting mobile food vending operations in such a manner as to constitute a menace to the health, safety and welfare of the general public.
(2) Appeal of the decision of the Village Board. Appeal the denial of the license through the appeal procedure provided by ordinance or resolution of the Village Board, or if none has been adopted, then under the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 68.07 through 68.16.
(3) No applicant who has had a license denied, or licensee who has had their license suspended or revoked or non-renewed may make any further application for a license under this Chapter for a one-year period.
(r) Penalties. Any person violating this Article shall:
(1) Upon conviction for a first offense, forfeit $100.00, together with the cost of prosecution. Each and every day during which any such violation continues shall constitute a separate violation;
(2) Upon conviction for a second offense or subsequent offence, forfeit $200.00, together with the cost of prosecution. Each and every day during which any such violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
(s) Severability. If any provision or portion of this Article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 51
(Ord. 16-023 of 04-20-2016), (Ord. 18-001 of 01-20-2018), (Amended via Ord. 18-005, 03-27-2018; Ord. No. 19-009 of 8-21-2019)
ARTICLE X. WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Sec. 18.149. Weights and Measures permit.
(a) Purpose. This section adopts the State of Wisconsin Weights and Measures Regulations and establishes a Weights and Measures Program wherein any person or entity subject to said regulations must obtain a license in order for the Village to comply with and recoup the costs of enforcing said regulations. This section is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stat. Chapter 98.
(b) Application of State Codes. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, the provisions of Wis. Stat. Chapter. 98, Weights and Measures, and Wis. Admin. Code Chapters ATCP 90, 91 and 92 are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute or code incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this section. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes and codes incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this section.
(c) State Contract, Appointment of Inspectors, Compliance Required.
(1) State Contract. In order to assure compliance with the requirements of the State of Wisconsin related to the inspection and certification of weights and measures, the Village shall contract with the State of Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection, pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 98.04(2), in lieu of the establishment of a department of weights and measures.
(2) Appointment of Inspectors. The provisions of the contract set forth in subsection (c)(1) shall provide for the enforcement of the statutes and regulations set forth herein, and the Village hereby grants the authority and duties of sealers and inspectors required by this section to the State of Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection.
(3) Compliance Required. All persons and entities required to be licensed hereunder shall comply with the enforcement of the statutes and regulations set forth herein, shall comply with the orders and inspections of the inspectors appointed herein, and shall comply with the licensing requirements set forth herein.
(d) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 52
Weights and Measures. Weights and measures of every kind, instruments and devices for weighing and measuring, and any appliances and accessories used with any or all such instruments and devices, except meters for the measurement of electric, gas (natural and manufactured) or water when the same are operated in a public utility system. Weights and measures shall include devices used or employed in establishing the size, quantity, extent, area or measurement of quantities, things, produce or articles for sale, hire or award, or in computing any basic charge or payment for services rendered on the basis of weight or measure and shall include, but not be limited to, commodities, liquid measuring devices, scales, weighing, measuring and price verification systems, timing devices and linear measuring devices.
Weights and Measures Program. The program that includes administration and enforcement of this section, Wis. Stats. Chapter 98, applicable Wisconsin Administrative Code provisions, and any related actions.
(e) Weights and Measures License Required.
(1) License Requirements. Except as provided in subsection (e)(2), no person or entity shall use, operate or maintain any commercial weights and measures as defined in this section unless the person or entity is licensed by a weights and measures license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section.
(2) Exemptions. Sales by a person registered as a direct seller or by a holder of a farmer's market, vendor vehicle or special event permit are exempt from licensing under this section, but if any person exempted herein is required by the state to hold a state certificate of examination by the sealer of weights and measures, a copy of said certificate shall be provided to the Village with his or her application for direct seller registration or a farmer's market, vendor vehicle or special events permit.
(f) Application for License. An application for a weights and measures license shall be made in writing on a form provided by the Village Clerk and shall be signed by the owner of the commercial business or by its authorized agent. Such application shall state the type of the business, the type and number of weighing, measuring and scanning devices used by the business, the location of the devices, the number of check-out lanes present on the premises, the applicant's full name, post office address and telephone, and whether such applicant is an individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other entity. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall state the names and addresses of each partner. If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, the application shall state the names and addresses of all members, officers and agents of the applicant, including the registered agent thereof.
(g) Issuance of License. Upon compliance with this section, the Village Clerk shall
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 53
issue a license to the applicant upon payment of the annual license fee set by the Village Board. Each store or other business shall require a separate license.
(h) License Term. A license issued under this section shall expire on June 30 of each year.
(i) Enforcement for Nonrenewal. It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to notify appropriate village officials and to order the immediate enforcement of the provisions of this section in cases involving a failure to renew a weights and measures license. A licensee shall be prohibited from engaging in any business involved in weights and measures until such time as a valid license has been obtained under the provisions of this section.
(j) Fees Assessment.
(1) Annual Assessment. The Village Board shall annually assess fees to each licensee based on the number and type of weights and measures devices it operates as of the date of licensure or the date of renewal. The total of the fees assessed and collected under this subsection shall not exceed the actual costs of the weights and measures contract between the Village and the State.
(2) Clerk to Prepare Assessment Schedule. The Village Clerk shall at least annually prepare a proposed schedule of assessments which shall be based upon the state contract charges and the number of weights and measures devices being operated, which schedule shall be submitted to the Village Board. A copy of the proposed schedule, together with notice of the date and time at which the Village Board will consider the assessments, shall be mailed to each licensee.
(3) Village Board to Determine Assessment. Not less than ten days after the mailing set forth in subsection (j)(2), the Village Board shall consider the Clerk's proposed schedule of assessments and determine the schedule of assessments on a reasonable basis. The Village Clerk shall mail to each licensee an invoice for the amount of the fee assessment to the licensee as determined by the Village Board, and each licensee shall pay the fee assessed within 30 days after the date the notice is mailed.
(4) Failure to Pay Assessment. If the assessed fee is not paid within 30 days of the date of the mailing of the invoice, an additional administrative collection charge of ten percent of the total assessment shall be added to the amount due, plus interest shall accrue on the assessment at the rate of 1.5 percent per month or fraction thereof until paid. To the extent permitted by law, if the licensee is the owner of the real estate where the licensed business is located, any delinquent assessment shall be extended upon the current or the next tax bill as a special charge against the real estate premises for current services.
Chapter 18 Businesses Page 54
No license shall be issued or renewed under this section if the licensee is delinquent in the payment of a fee assessed under this section.
(5) Mailing of Notices. Schedules, notices and invoices shall be considered mailed to a licensee when mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the licensee's address as shown on the application form.
(6) Change of Ownership. If the ownership of a commercial business licensed under this section is transferred during a license year, the owner of the business as of July 1 of the license year shall be liable and responsible for the payment of the fees assessed under this section.
(k) Violations. In addition to any other remedy, any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as set forth in Sec. 1.111 of this Code. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 15-028 of 1-23-2016; Amended via Ord. 16-023 of 04-20-2016)
Chapter 22 Civil Emergencies Page 1
Chapter 22
CIVIL EMERGENCIES*
Sec. 22.100. County/municipal emergency legislation.
Sec. 22.101. County ordinance adopted.
Sec. 22.102. Emergency service coordinator.
_________
* Cross References--Administration, Chapter 2; Emergencyaalarm Systems, Chapter 18 Section18.115 et. seq.;Court, Chapter 26; Fire Prevention and Protection, Chapter 34; Law Enforcement, Chapter 42.
Chapter 22 Civil Emergencies Page 2
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Sec. 22.100. County/municipal emergency legislation.
This chapter is derived from joint action emergency government legislation between the county and the village, providing for a civil defense organization and for protection and promotion of public safety, health and welfare in the county during civil defense emergencies resulting from enemy action and with emergencies resulting from natural or manmade disasters.
(Ord. of 4-19-1993, § 1(title)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 22.101. County ordinance adopted.
Joint Action Emergency Government Chapter 6 of the county board of supervisors, providing for a county/municipal joint action civil defense plan of organization as adopted by the county board on December 17, 2002, is made a part of this chapter by reference and is ratified and accepted by the village as provided by Sec. 6.06(2) of the joint action ordinance.
(Ord. of 4-19-1993, § 1(1)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 22.102. Emergency services coordinator.
The county/municipal emergency services coordinator , appointed and employed by the county board as provided in County Ordinance Chapter 6 is designated and appointed emergency services coordinator for the village subject to the conditions and provisions of statute and County Ordinance Chapter 6.
(Ord. of 4-19-1993, § 1(2)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 26 Court Page 1
Court 26
COURT*
Sec. 26.100. Schofield and Weston Joint Municipal Court.
________
* Cross References: Administration, Chapter 2; Civil Emergencies, Chapter 22.
Chapter 26 Court Page 2
COURT
Sec. 26.100. Schofield and Weston Joint Municipal Court.
(a) Establishment and purpose. The City of Schofield, the Town of Weston and the Village of Weston have created a joint police department whose duties include enforcement of municipal ordinance violations, and Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0301 and 755.01(4) permits two or more municipalities to jointly exercise their powers to create and establish a Municipal Court; therefore, the City of Schofield, the Town of Weston, and the Village of Weston jointly enact this chapter to create The Joint Municipal Court. This chapter will promote public safety and welfare through local enforcement and administration of justice.
(b) Creation. There is created for the Village of Weston, Town of Weston, and City of Schofield a Municipal Court consisting of a single branch presided over by a Municipal Judge, who shall be admitted to practice law in the State of Wisconsin, elected at large by the electors of the Village of Weston, Town of Weston, and City of Schofield, and qualified as required byWis. Stat. § 755.03. *Effective the first Tuesday of April 2005.
(c) Municipal Judge
1. Qualifications. The Municipal Court shall be under the jurisdiction of and presided over by one Municipal Judge who shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in Wisconsin, and who resides in one of the municipalities that is a party to the agreement forming this joint court. (hereinafter “Everest Metro Public Safety Agreement” .
2. Oath and Bond. The Municipal Judge shall, after election or appointment to fill a vacancy, take and file the official oath as prescribed in Wis. Stat. § 757.02(1), and at the same time execute and file an official bond in the amount to be set by the Everest Metro Municipal Court Joint Finance Committee. The Municipal Judge shall not act until the oath and bond have been filed with the Municipal Clerk of each municipality that is a party to the Everest Metro Public Safety Agreement and a certified copy of the oath has been filed with the office of director of state courts.
3. Election. The Municipal Judge shall be elected at large in the spring election for a term of 4 years commencing on May 1. All candidates for the position of Municipal Judge shall be nominated by nomination papers as provided in Wis. Stat. § 8.10 and selected at a primary election if such is held as provided in Wis. Stat. § 8.11. The Elections Division of the Government Accountability Board shall serve as filing officer for the candidates. Electors in all municipalities that are parties to the Everest Metro Public Safety Agreement
Chapter 26 Court Page 3
shall vote for Municipal Judge.
4. Salary. The salary of the Municipal Judge shall be fixed by the municipalities that are parties to the Everest Metro Public Safety Agreement. No salary shall be paid for any time during which the Municipal Judge has not executed the official bond or official oath as required byWis. Stat. § 755.03. The Municipal Judge’s salary may be increased before the start of the second or a subsequent year of service of the term of the judge, but may not be decreased during a term.
(d) Jurisdiction. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction as provided in Article VII, Section 14 of the Wisconsin Constitution, Wis. Stats. §§ 755.045 and 755.05, and as otherwise provided by State Law. In addition, it shall have exclusive jurisdiction over actions to impose forfeitures for violations of municipal ordinances, resolutions and by-laws of the municipalities that are parties to the Everest Metro Public Safety Agreement. The Municipal Judge may issue civil warrants to enforce matters under the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 755.045(2) and 66.0119. The Municipal Court has jurisdiction over juvenile offenders when a municipality that is party to the Everest Metro Public Safety Agreement enacts an ordinance under the authority of Wis. Stat. § 938.17(2)(cm).
(e) Municipal Court.
1. Location. The Municipal Court shall be located at the Weston Public Safety Building, 5209 Mesker Street, Weston, Wisconsin.
2. Hours. The Municipal Court shall be open at such times as determined by the governing bodies of the municipalities that are parties to the Everest Metro Public Safety Agreement and the Municipal Judge.
3. Employees. The Municipal Judge shall, in writing, appoint one clerk. Hiring, termination, hours of employment and work responsibilities of the clerk, when working during hours assigned to the court, shall be under the Municipal Judge’s authority. Salaries of all court personnel shall be fixed by the municipalities that are parties to the Everest Metro Public Safety Agreement.
4. Decorum. The Municipal Judge shall wear a black robe while presiding in the Municipal Court except when exceptional circumstances exist. The clerk of the Municipal Court shall be attired in appropriate clothing and may not, while performing Municipal Court functions, wear anything that implies or indicates that he or she is a law enforcement officer. The Municipal Court shall be located in an area separate from the police department by design or signage. The Municipal Court shall have a separate telephone number from any other governmental department.
Chapter 26 Court Page 4
5. Records. The Municipal Judge shall file and keep together all records in an action separate from all other records. The Municipal Judge shall store all records in the office of the court clerk. Access to the records shall be restricted to court personnel except as authorized by the judge or by law.
(f) Collection of Forfeitures and Costs. The Municipal Judge may impose punishment and sentences as provided byWis. Stats. §§ 800 and 938, and as provided in the ordinances of the municipalities that are party to the Everest Metro Public Safety Agreement. The Municipal Court shall pay all forfeitures, fees, assessments, surcharges and costs collected by the Municipal Court to the fiscal agent within 30 days of receipt of the money. The Municipal Court shall include with each payment a report identifying the title of the action, the originating municipality, the nature of the offenses, and total amount collected for each action. The fiscal agent shall disburse payments to the treasurer of the originating municipality within fifteen 15 days of receipt of payment from the Municipal Court.
(g) Contempt of Court. The Municipal Judge may impose sanctions authorized under Wis. Stat. § 800.12 for contempt of court.
1. Misconduct. Any person who interferes with the court proceeding or with the administration of justice, or that impairs the respect due the court may be found in contempt of court by the Municipal Judge for misconduct in the presence of the court. After affording an opportunity to be heard in defense, the Municipal Judge may impose imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 7 days and a forfeiture not to exceed $200. Contempt of court sanctions, if any, must be imposed immediately after the contempt of court has occurred.
2. Refusal to Appear. A witness who refuses to appear without reasonable excuse may be found in contempt of court. The Municipal Judge may impose a forfeiture in an amount not to exceed $200, order the witness to pay all costs of the witness’ apprehension, and issue a warrant to bring the witness before the court for the contempt and to testify.
(Ord. of 10-4-1993, 5-17-2004, 3-6-2014 and 7-26-2014§ 1) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 30 Elections Page 1
Chapter 30
ELECTIONS*
Sec. 30.100. Penalty.
Sec. 30.101. Statutes adopted.
Sec. 30.102. Election procedures.
Sec. 30.103. Voter registration.
Sec. 30.104. Campaign signs removal.
Sec. 30.105. Election Poll Hours.
__________
* Cross References--Any ordinance regarding the establishment of wards, ward boundaries and election districts saved from repeal, § 1.110; Administration, Chapter 2; Village Board, Chapter 2 Section 2.200.
Chapter 30 Elections Page 2
ELECTIONS
Sec. 30.100. Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction be subject to Sec. 1.111.
(Ord. of 6-10-1985(2), § 1(2)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 30.101. Statutes adopted.
The provisions of Wis. Stats. Chapter 6, as amended, in regard to voter registration are incorporated and made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this section at length.
(Code 1982, § 13.03(3)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 30.102. Election procedures.
Municipal elections shall be held pursuant to Wis. Stats. Chapter 5, Chapter 6, Chapter 7, Chapter 8, Chapter 9, Chapter 10, Chapter 11, Chapter 12 , as amended (Wis. Stat. § 5.01 et seq.).
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 30.103. Voter registration.
(a) Authorization. Before any adult resident of the village shall be permitted to vote at any election held within the limits of the village, they shall register as a qualified elector.
(b) Registration. The village clerk/treasurer shall receive applications for registration at their office during regular office hours throughout the year and at such other places and at such times as they deem advisable, except that pre-registration for any election or primary shall be closed at 5:00 p.m. on the second Wednesday next preceding the election or primary. Registration at other times and places is permissible in accordance with Wis. Stats. Chapter 6.
(Code 1982, § 13.03(1), (4)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 30.104. Campaign signs removal.
Chapter 30 Elections Page 3
All signs erected to advertise the candidacy of a person running for political office or to advertise a political point of view on an issue to be voted upon in any election to be held within the village shall be taken down within 48 hours after the close of the polling places. This section shall not apply to political advertisements on permanent outdoor display signs and billboards erected pursuant to the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 94 Sec. 94.13.08(8).
(Ord. of 6-10-1985(2), § 1(1)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 30.105. Election Poll Hours.
The voting poll hours for all elections in the Village of Weston shall open at 7:00 a.m. and shall close at 8:00 p.m.
(Ord. of 2-24-2006) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 30.106. Municipal Board of Absentee Ballot Canvassers.
(a) Appointment of Inspectors. The Village of Weston hereby establishes the Municipal Board of Absentee Ballot Canvassers as designated under Wis. Stat. § 7.53 (2m). The Board of Absentee Ballot Canvassers shall be composed of the Village Clerk or a qualified elector of the municipality designated by the clerk, and 2 other qualified electors of the municipality appointed by the clerk. The first term for the members of the Board of Absentee Canvassers will expire on December 31, 2016. For subsequent terms, the members of the Board of Absentee Ballot Canvassers shall serve for two-year terms commencing on January 1 of each odd-numbered year, except that any member who is appointed to fill a permanent vacancy shall serve for the unexpired term of the original appointee.
(b) The Village of Weston hereby declares in lieu of canvassing absentee ballots at polling places under Wis. Stats. § 6.88, the Municipal Board of Absentee Ballot Canvassers shall canvass all absentee ballots at all elections held in the municipality pursuant to procedures established by the State division governing elections.
(c) The Village Clerk shall give at least 48-hour notice of any meeting under this subsection.
(d) The Village Clerk, no later than the closing hour of the polls, shall post at his or her office and on the Internet at a site announced by the Village Clerk before the poll opens, and shall make available to any person upon request, a statement of the numberof absentee ballots that the Clerk has mailed or transmitted to electors and that have been returned by the closing hour on election day.
Chapter 30 Elections Page 4
(Ord.#16-041 of 8-31-2016)
Chapter 34 Page 1
Chapter 34
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION*
Article I. Fire Commission Article II. Fire Prevention
Sec. 34.200. Purpose.
Sec. 34.201. Scope.
Sec. 34.202. Exceptions.
Sec. 34.203. Adoption of Wisconsin Administrative Code.
Sec. 34.204. Inspection fees designated.
Sec. 34.205. Permits required.
Sec. 34.206. Definitions.
Sec. 34.207. Fire Chief.
Sec. 34.208. Permits.
Sec. 34.209. Burning, heating and lighting.
Sec. 34.210. Combustible Materials.
Sec. 34.211. Fire hazards.
Sec. 34.212. Enforcement.
Sec. 34.213. Places of assembly.
Sec. 34.214. General fire safety requirements.
Sec. 34.215. Possession of ignition devices prohibited.
Article III. False Fire Alarms
Sec. 34.300. Purpose.
Sec. 34.301. Definitions.
Chapter 34 Page 2
Sec. 34.302. Registration of Fire Alarm Systems
Sec. 34.303. Display of Fire Alarm Registration.
Sec. 34.304. Responsibility for Compliance; Requirement of Alarm User to Respond to Scene.
Sec. 34.305. False Fire Alarms.
Sec. 34.306. Service Fees.
Sec. 34.307. Conflict with other Village Ordinances.
Sec. 34.308. Penalties.
Sec. 34.309. Frequency of Inspections
* Cross References--Buildings and Building Regulations, Chapter. 14; Emergency Alarm Systems, § 18.115 et seq.; Civil
Emergencies, Chapter. 22.
State Law References--Authority and obligations regarding fire protection generally, Wis. Stat. § 61.65(2).
Chapter 34 Page 3
ARTICLE I FIRE COMMISSION
Note: The Village of Weston is a partner in the S.A.F.E.R Fire District which functions with its’ own Board of Fire Commissioners.
(Ord. of 3-19-15) [Amended via Ord. 15-025, 11/7/2015]
ARTICLE II FIRE PREVENTION
Sec. 34.200. Purpose.
It is the intent of this code to prescribe regulations consistent with recognized standard practice for the safeguarding to a responsible degree of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life and property in the use or occupancy of buildings or premises.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.10(1)); Ord. of 3-24-2011) [Amended via Ord. 15-025, 11/7/2015]
Sec. 34.201. Scope.
The provisions of this code shall apply equally to new and existing conditions except that the existing conditions not in strict compliance with the terms of this code shall be permitted to continue where the exceptions do not constitute a distinct hazard to life or adjoining property
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.10(2)); Ord. of 3-24-2011) [Amended via Ord. 15-025, 11/7/2015]
Sec. 34.202. Exceptions.
Nothing contained in this code shall be construed as applying to the transportation of any article or thing shipped in conformity with the regulations prescribed by the Interstate Commerce Commission, nor as applying to the military forces of the United States
(Ord. of 3-24-2011) [Amended via Ord. 15-025, 11/7/2015]
Sec. 34.203. Adoption of Wisconsin Administrative Code
(a) Codes adopted. The following codes as adopted by the State of Wisconsin are by reference made a part of the Village Fire Prevention Code along with any subsequent amendments and/or revisions thereto adopted by the State of Wisconsin:
(b) Safety, Buildings, and Environment Appendix – General Part I
Chapter 34 Page 4
(1) SPS 305 Licenses, Certificates and Registration
(2) SPS 307 Explosives and Fireworks
(3) SPS 310 Flammable and Combustible Liquids
(4) SPS 314 Fire Prevention
(5) SPS 316 Electrical
(6) SPS 318 Elevators, Escalators and Lift Devices
General Part II
(7) SPS 326 Manufactured Home Communities
(8) SPS 328 Smoke Detectors and Carbon Monoxide Detectors
(9) SPS 340 Gas Systems
Commercial Building Code
(10) SPS 361 Administration and Enforcement
(11) SPS 362 Buildings and Structures
(12) SPS 363 Energy Conservation
(13) SPS 364 Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning
(14) SPS 365 Fuel Gas Appliances
(15) SPS 366 Existing Buildings
(16) SPS 361 – 366 Appendix A
(17) SPS 361 – 366 Appendix B
Buildings Constructed Prior to 1914
(18) SPS 375 Definitions and General Requirements
Chapter 34 Page 5
(19) SPS 376 Factories, Office and Mercantile Buildings
(20) SPS 377 Theaters, and Assembly Halls
(21) SPS 378 Schools and other places of instruction
(22) SPS 379 Apartment Houses, Hotels, and Places of Detention
(23) NFPA 1 – Fire Prevention Code;
(24) NFPA 54 – National Fuel Gas Code;
(25) NFPA 58 – Liquified Petroleum Gas Code;
(26) NFPA 101 – Life Safety Code
Also adopted prospectively are any and all amendments that shall from time to time be made to any of the foregoing provisions of the administrative code, and these amendments shall be made a part of this Code as if each and every one of these amendments were separately incorporated in this section by reference.
(c) Interpretation of conflict. Whenever the provisions of the codes mentioned in section 34.203(a) conflict, the stricter interpretation shall apply.
(d) Original Codes These codes can be viewed by accessing the State of Wisconsin Administrative Code at http://docs.legis.wisconsin.gov/code/admin_code.
(Ord. of 1-28-1991, § 1(2.10(3)); Ord. of 3-24-2011; Ord. of 3-19-15) [Amended via Ord. 15-025, 11/7/2015]
Sec. 34.204. Inspection fees designated.
Fees shall apply as follows:
(a) Department of Commerce Petition for Variance.
(1) Variance requires no position statement, chief’s signature $20.00
(2) Variance requires position statement, no site visit $60.00
(3) Variance requires position statement, one site visit $90.00
(4) Multiple variances file concurrently for same site
a. First petition $60.00
b. Each additional petition $25.00
Chapter 34 Page 6
c. Per site visit $35.00
(b) Temporary or permanent L.P. installations of 250 gallon to 2,000 gallon W.C. – commercial and/or industrial site (one and two family residential and agricultural installations are not excluded) - $50.00.
(c) Fees for re-inspection. Any person who shall fail to comply with any lawful order of the S.A.F.E.R. Fire Chief, S.A.F.E.R. Deputy Fire Chief, S.A.F.E.R. Fire Marshall or his/her designee issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter may be assessed a re-inspection fee as defined by the schedule of fees for compliance inspections in excess of two. Re-inspection fees that are not paid timely shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against said lot or parcel of land pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stat. § 66.0627 for collection and settlement under Wis. Stats. Chapter 74.
(Ord. of 3-24-2011) [Amended via Ord. 15-025, 11/7/2015, Ord. 18-020 7/19/2018]
Sec. 34.205. Permits required.
Fees for the following permits are as provided in the village fee schedule:
(a) Controlled burning
(b) Fireworks/Pyrotechnics.
(c) Tents – for tents over 240 square feet in area when erected, maintained, operated, or used in or on a commercial zoned property. Tents utilized for residential purposes do not require permits.
(d) Wood-fired apparatus.
(Ord. of 3-24-2011) [Amended via Ord. 15-025, 11/7/2015]
Sec. 34.206. Definitions.
(a) Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meanings indicated in this chapter.
(1) Access Box. A steel key vault, mounted on the exterior of a building that contains keys, floor plans, maps or other items as required by the AHJ, for access to all portions of the building.
(2) Adult Day Care. Any place, that receives at any time for compensation four or more adults, for care and supervision, for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day.
(3) Adult Family Home. Similar to a CBRF except that they are licensed for five or less tenants.
Chapter 34 Page 7
(4) Approved. Acceptable to the AHJ.
(5) Approved Agency. An agency accepted or acceptable to the Bureau of Fire Prevention, such as Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., the National Institute of Standards and Technology, the American Gas Association laboratories or other nationally recognized testing authorities.
(6) Assembly Group A. Group A occupancies includes, among other, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for the gathering together of persons for purposes such as civic, social or religious functions, recreation, food or drink consumption or awaiting transportation. A room or space used for assembly purposes by less than fifty (50) persons and accessory to another occupant shall be included as a part of that occupancy. Assembly occupancies shall include the following:
a. A-1 - Assembly uses, usually with fixed seating, intended for the production and viewing of performing arts or motion pictures.
b. A-2 - Assembly uses intended for food and/or drink consumption.
c. A-3 - Assembly uses intended for worship, recreation or amusement and other assembly uses not classified elsewhere in Group A.
d. A-4 - Assembly uses intended for viewing of indoor sporting events and activities with spectator seating.
e. A-5 - Assembly uses intended for participation in or viewing outdoor activities.
(7) Automatic Fire Detector. A device designed to detect specific products of fire – smoke, heat or both.
(8) Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ). Shall be the Fire Chief, or designee of the Fire Chief, to enforce this Code, the laws of the State of Wisconsin, as designated in Wisconsin Administrative Code SPS 314 http://docs.legis.wisconsin.gov/code/admin_code/sps/safety_and_buildings_and
_environment/301_319/314, pertaining to the prevention of fires and public safety, and approving equipment installation, or procedures as outlined in NFPA Standards, Codes and/or Recommended Practices.
(9) Automatic Closing Device. Means one which functions without human intervention and is actuated as a result of predetermined temperature rise, rate of rise of temperature, combustion products or smoke density.
Chapter 34 Page 8
(10) Automatic Fire Alarm System. A system which automatically detects fire condition and actuates Notification Appliances throughout the protected premises.
(11) Automatic Fire-Extinguishing System. An approved system of devices and equipment which automatically detects a fire and discharges an approved fire extinguishing agent onto or in the area of fire.
(12) Automatic Fire Sprinkler System. An integrated system of underground and/or overhead piping designed in accordance with fire protection standards. The system includes a suitable water supply. The portion of the system above ground is a network of specially sized or hydraulically designed piping installed in a structure or area, generally overhead, and to which automatic sprinklers are connected in a systematic pattern. The system is usually activated by heat from a fire and discharges water over the fire area.
(13) Basement. That portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade plane. A basement shall be considered as a story.
(14) Bureau of Fire Prevention. The Bureau of Fire Prevention is made up of the following personnel: The Fire Chief, The Fire Marshal and/or Fire Inspectors, or any other Designee of the Chief.
(15) Boarding House. A building arranged or used as lodging for compensation, with or without meals, not occupied as a single-family unit.
(16) Business Group B. Group B occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for office, professional or service- type transactions, including storage of records and accounts.
(17) Ceiling. The upper surface of a space, regardless of height. Areas with a suspended ceiling would have two ceilings, one visible from the floor, and one above the suspended ceiling.
(18) Code. A standard that is an extensive compilation of provisions covering a broad subject matter or that is suitable for adoption into law independently of other codes and standards.
(19) Combustible Material. All material not classified as “Noncombustible” are considered combustible. This property of a material does not relate to its ability to structurally perform under fire exposure. The degree of combustibility is not defined by standard fire test procedures.
(20) Common Area. Common area refers to any area in a building that can be accessed by more than one person from different families at one time.
Chapter 34 Page 9
(21) Community Based Residential Facility (CBRF). A community facility where five or more adults who are not related to the operator or administrator and who do not require care above intermediate level nursing care reside and receive care, treatment or services that are above the level of room and board, but that include no more than three hours of nursing care per week per resident.
(22) Conditional Approval. An approval of plans and/or specifications by the AHJ based upon information provided to the AHJ, including but not limited to, any changes required by the AHJ to the above mentioned plans and/or specifications.
(23) Consultant(s). A company, individual or agency hired by the Bureau of Fire Prevention to provide advice to the Bureau of Fire Prevention on fire related issues. Consultants may provide services, which could include plan reviews of fire suppression systems, fire alarm systems, witness tests and/or conduct inspections.
(24) Day Care Center. Any place which receives at any one time for compensation four or more children under the age of seven years, for care and supervision, for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day or more than ten days a month, without the attendance of a parent, relative or legal guardian.
(25) Dwelling or Dwelling Unit. A single unit providing living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. For the purpose of this code, dwelling unit includes apartments and condominiums but does not include hotel and motel rooms, guest suites, dormitories, boarding rooms, or sleeping rooms in nursing homes.
a. Single Family Dwelling. A detached building containing only one dwelling unit and designed for one family.
b. Two Family Dwelling. A detached building containing not more than two individual dwelling units which are entirely separated by vertical walls or horizontal floors, unpierced except for access to the outside or common basement.
(26) Educational Group E. Group E occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, by six or more persons at any one time for educational purposes through the 12th grade.
(27) Factory Industrial Group F. Group F occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for assembly, disassembly, fabricating, finishing, manufacturing, packaging, repair or processing operations that are not classified as Group H occupancy.
a. F-1 Moderate-Hazard occupancy.
Chapter 34 Page 10
b. F-2 Low-Hazard occupancy.
(28) False Alarm. The willful and knowing initiation or transmission of a signal, message or other notification of an event of fire when no such danger exists.
a. Malicious Alarm. A false alarm of fire deliberately sounded by someone in order to inconvenience the Fire Department.
b. Accidental Alarm. An alarm set off and transmitted through accidental operation of an automatic or manual fire alarm device.
c. Good Intent False Alarm. An alarm that turns out to be false but was reported in good faith.
(29) Family Unit. Two or more individuals who are related to each other by blood, marriage, adoption or legal guardianship. For purposes of this code a group of not more than 4 persons not necessarily related by blood or marriage, living together in a single living unit will be considered equivalent to a single family.
(30) Fire Alarm Annunciation Device. A device connected to a fire alarm to signal either a fire or trouble condition. Fire Alarm Annunciation Devices could include visual devices, horn/strobes, horns, bells, and/or annunciator panels.
(31) Fire Alarm Initiating Device. A device connected to a Fire Alarm System that causes a trouble, supervisory and/or alarm signal to be initiated. Fire Alarm Initiating Devices could include: smoke, heat, flame, ionization, or photoelectric detectors, water flow, low air, low temperature, low water, or supervisory switches.
(32) Fire Alarm System. A system or portion of a combination system that consists of components and circuits arranged to monitor and annunciate the status of the fire alarm or supervisory signal-initiating devices to activate notification appliances throughout the protected premises and to initiate the appropriate response to those signals.
(33) Fire Control System. A system designed and constructed with the intent of controlling or limiting a fire. Fire Control Systems may be automatic or non- automatic. Fire Control Systems could include Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems, standpipe systems, chemical agent systems, fire hydrants and/or any other system acceptable to the AHJ.
(34) Fire Department Connection (FDC). A part of a sprinkler, standpipe, deluge and/or combination system to be used by the Fire Department to pump additional water into the system(s) it is connected to.
Chapter 34 Page 11
(35) Fire Door Assembly. Any combination of a fire door, frame, hardware, and other accessories that together provide a certain degree of fire protection to the opening.
(36) Fire Resistive. That property of materials or their assemblies that prevents or retards the passage of excessive heat, hot gases or flame under conditions of use. Materials are tested as prescribed in Section 703 of the Wisconsin Enrolled Building Code. https://dsps.wi.gov/Documents/Programs/CommercialBuildings/CodeArchives/PartBChapters7to9.pdf
(37) Firewall. A fire-resistance-rated wall having protected openings, which restricts the spread of fire and extends continuously from the foundation to or through the roof, with sufficient structural stability under fire conditions to allow collapse of construction on either side without collapse of the wall.
(38) Floor Area or Square Footage of a Building. Refers to the total square footage of the sums of all basement, floor levels, balconies and mezzanines.
a. The area for basements and floor levels shall be measured from the outside perimeter of the outside walls.
b. The area for mezzanines shall be determined from the product of the length of the mezzanine multiplied by the width of the mezzanine.
c. For the purpose of determining square footage, fire division walls will not be accepted as outside walls or area dividers.
d. Buildings that are in close proximity to each other will have their building square footage added together to arrive at the total square footage.
e. For the purpose of determining close proximity the following will hold true:
1. Single story buildings – Thirty (30) feet apart or less.
2. Two story buildings – Sixty (60) feet apart or less.
3. Three story buildings – Sixty (60) feet apart or less.
4. All other multiple story buildings – Sixty (60) feet apart.
5. Buildings of variable height next to each other – Thirty (30) feet apart or less.
f. For the purpose of determining square footage a Fire Wall which has a fire resistance rating of not less than four hours and which subdivides or separates a building to restrict the spread of fire, including a three foot parapet wall is an approved area divider.
Chapter 34 Page 12
(39) Floor, Ground. That level of a building on a sloping or multilevel site which has a floor line at or not more than three feet above exit discharge grade for at least
½ of the required exit discharges.
(40) Frequenter. Means every person, other than an employee, who may go in or be in a place of employment or public building under circumstances which render such person other than a trespasser. Such term includes a pupil or student when enrolled in or receiving instruction at an educational institution.
(41) Grade Plane. A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building exterior walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than six feet from the building, between the building and a point six feet from the building.
(42) Height, Building. The vertical distance from the Grade Plane to the average height of the highest roof surface.
(43) Hazardous Group H. Group H occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, that involves the manufacturing, processing, generation or storage of materials that constitute a physical or health hazard in quantities in excess of those found in Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2) of the International Building Code.
a. H-1 Buildings and structures which contain materials that poses a detonation hazard.
b. H-2 Buildings and structures which contain materials that pose a deflagration hazard or a hazard from accelerated burning.
c. H-3 Buildings and structures which contain materials that readily support combustion or pose a physical hazard.
d. H-4 Buildings and structures which contain materials that are health hazards.
e. H-5 Semiconductor fabrication facilities and comparable research and development areas in which hazardous production materials are used and the aggregate quantity of materials is in excess of those listed in Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2) of the International Building Code.
(44) Institutional Group I. Group I occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, in which people having physical limitations because of health or age are harbored for medical treatment or other
Chapter 34 Page 13
care or treatment, or in which people are detained for penal or correctional purposes or in which the liberty of the occupants is restricted. Institutional occupancies are classified as I-1, I-2, I-3 or I-4, as described in the International Building Code.
(45) Listed. Means included in a list published by a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency, or other organization concerned with product evaluation, that maintains periodic inspection of production of listed equipment or materials and whose listing states either that the equipment or materials meet nationally recognized standards or has been tested and found suitable for use in a specified manner.
(46) Manual Fire Alarm System. A system or portion of a combination system that consists of components and circuits arranged to initiate the Notification Appliances and appropriate response to those signals only after a person manually activates the fire alarm system.
(47) Mercantile Group M. Group M occupancy includes, among others, building and structures or a portion thereof, for the display and sale of merchandise, and involves stock of goods, wares or merchandise incidental to such purposes and accessible to the public.
(48) Mezzanine or Mezzanine Floor. An intermediate level or levels between floor and ceiling of any story with an aggregate floor area of not more than one-third of the area of the room or space in which the level or levels are located.
(49) Miscellaneous Group U. Buildings and structures of an accessory character and miscellaneous structures not classified in any specific occupancy shall be constructed, equipped and maintained to conform to the requirements of this code commensurate with the fire and life hazard incidental to their occupancy.
(50) Multifamily Dwelling. A building or portion thereof containing three or more dwelling units, such as tenements, apartments, or rooming houses. Row houses with fire walls extending from the basement to the underside of the roof separating each living unit are not considered multifamily for the purpose of this chapter.
(51) NFPA. The National Fire Protection Association.
(52) Noncombustible Materials. A noncombustible material is one which, in the form in which it is used, meets one of the requirements listed below. Materials used adjacent to or in contact with heat producing appliances, warm air ducts, plenums and chimneys shall be classified as noncombustible only on the basis of requirement a. below. Noncombustible does not apply to the flame-spread characteristics of interior finish or trim materials. No material shall be classified as noncombustible building construction material, which is subject to increase
Chapter 34 Page 14
in combustibility or Flame-Spread Classification (FSC) beyond the limits herein established through the effects of age, moisture or other atmospheric conditions. (See flame spread rating in Wisconsin Administrative Code.)
a. Materials which pass the test procedure of ASTM E-136 for non- combustibility of elementary materials when exposed to a furnace temperature of 1,382° F for a minimum period of five minutes and do not cause a temperature rise of the surface or interior thermocouple in excess of 54° F above the furnace air temperature at the beginning of the test and which do not flame after exposure of thirty (30) seconds.
b. Materials having structural base of noncombustible material as defined in
a. above, with a surfacing not more than 1/8” thick which has a Flame- Spread Classification (FSC) not greater than fifty (50) when tested in accordance with the method of test for surface burning characteristics of building materials (ASTM E-84)
(53) Notification Appliance. A fire alarm system component such as a bell, horn, speaker, light, or text display that provides audible, tactile, visible outputs, or any combination thereof.
(54) Occupant(s). The person or persons, who physically reside, work or are present in a facility.
(55) Other Terms. Other terms not defined herein used in this section shall be as defined in the International Fire Code Section 202 and are adopted herein by reference.
(56) Owner. Includes his duly sworn agent or attorney, a purchaser, devisee, fiduciary or person having a vested or contingent interest in the property in question.
(57) Places of Employment. Includes every place, whether indoors or out or underground and the premises appurtenant thereto where either temporarily or permanently any industry, trade or business is carried on, or where any process or operation, directly or indirectly related to any industry, employed by another for direct or indirect gain or profit, but does not include any place where persons are employed in private domestic service which does not involve the use of mechanical power or in farming.
(58) Protected Premises. The physical location protected by a Fire Alarm System.
(59) Remodel. To remodel, alter or both, means to change any building or structure which affects the structural strength, fire hazard, internal circulation, or exits of the existing building or structure. This definition does not apply to maintenance, re-roofing, or alterations to the heating and ventilating or electrical system.
Chapter 34 Page 15
(60) Residential Group R. Group R occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or portion thereof, for sleeping accommodations when not classed as an Institutional Group I.
a. R-1 Residential occupancies where the occupants are primarily transient in nature.
b. R-2 Residential occupancies containing more than two dwelling units where occupants are primarily permanent in nature.
c. R-3 Residential occupancies where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature and not classified R-1, R-2 or I, and where buildings do not contain more than two dwelling units or adult and child care facilities, that provide accommodations for five or fewer persons of any age for less than twenty-four (24) hours.
d. R-4 Residential occupancies shall include buildings arranged for occupancy as Residential Care/Assisted Living Facilities including five but not more than 16 occupants, excluding staff.
(61) Roof Spaces. Buildings with combustible roofs shall have all roof spaces subdivided every 3000 square feet by one-hour rated partitions unless protected by an approved automatic fire sprinkler system. All openings must have a minimum of a one-hour rated self-closing door.
(62) Rooming House. Means any building, which has a room or rooms for sleeping, without permanent provisions for cooking. Rooming House rooms do not include any room in a one or two-family dwelling.
(63) Rough Inspection. Visual observation from the floor and/or ground level of any system and/or component thereof required by this code prior to being concealed in any way by any means.
(64) Row House. A place of abode arranged to accommodate three or more attached side-by- side or back-to-back living units.
(65) Shall. Indicates a mandatory requirement.
(66) Should. Indicates a recommendation or that which is advised but not required.
(67) Spacing. A horizontally measured dimension relating to the allowable coverage limits of fire detectors, automatic sprinkler systems, and fire alarm visual notification devices.
Chapter 34 Page 16
(68) Standard. A document, the main text of which contains only mandatory requirements using the word “shall” to indicate mandatory requirements and which is in a form generally suitable for reference by another standard or code for adoption into law.
(69) Storage Group S. Group S occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or portion thereof, for storage that is not classed as Hazardous Group H.
a. S-1(Moderate-Hazard Storage) Buildings occupied for storage uses which are not classified as S-2.
b. S-2 (Low-Hazard Storage) Building used for storage of noncombustible material such as products on wood pallets or in paper cartons with or without single thickness divisions or in paper wrappings. Such products may have negligible amount of plastic trim such as knobs, handles, or film wrapping.
(70) Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above. To determine the number of stories in a building, all floors will be counted whether they are above grade or below grade, including basements, sub-basements, and ground floors, but not including penthouses or mezzanines less than one-third (1/3) of a story.
(71) Temporary. Less than one hundred-eighty (180) days.
(72) Throughout. For the purpose of this code, throughout shall mean the following:
a. Throughout for automatic fire sprinkler systems means providing fire sprinkler protection in all areas of a structure as required by NFPA 13.
b. Throughout for automatic fire alarm systems means installing detection, audible and visual notification devices in all areas of the protected premises installed in accordance with NFPA 72.
c. Throughout for manual fire alarm systems means installing audible and visual notification devices in all areas of the protected premises installed in accordance with NFPA 72.
(73) Water Flow Test. A test of an available water supply that indicates the quantity of water flowing out of a specific orifice, at a specific pressure, at a specific point in time.
(74) Welfare. Includes comfort, decency and moral well-being.
(Ord. of 3-24-2011) [Amended via Ord. 15-025, 11/7/2015]
Chapter 34 Page 17
Sec. 34.207. Fire Chief.
(a) Authority to enter premises. The Fire Chief, or any subordinate designated by him/her, may, at all reasonable hours, enter any building or premises within his/her jurisdiction for the purpose of making inspection, or investigation which, under the provisions of this code, he/she or they may deem necessary to be made. Private dwellings shall not be entered without the consent or permission of an adult occupant.
(b) Inspections of buildings and premises.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to inspect, or cause to be inspected by the fire department officers or members, all buildings and premises, except the interiors of private dwellings. As often as necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire or any violations of the provisions or intent of this code and of any other ordinance affecting the fire hazard, and to insure compliance in all places of assemble with all laws, regulations and orders dealing with overcrowding, use of decorative materials, maintenance of exit ways, and maintenance of fire alarm and fire detecting systems, and fire extinguishing systems and appliances.
(2) The Fire Chief or an inspector thereof, upon complaint of any person or whenever he/she or they deem it necessary, shall inspect any building and premises within their jurisdiction.
(3) Frequency of Inspections. Pursuant to Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter SPS 314.01(13)(b)(3) “Scheduling of Inspections.” Fire inspections shall be conducted at least one in each non-overlapping 6-month period per calendar year, or more often if ordered by the fire chief, in all territory served by the fire department, except at provided in subds 4 to 7.
(c) Investigation of fires.
(1) The Fire Chief shall investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring in the municipality which is of suspicious nature or which involves loss of life or injury to persons by which property has been destroyed or substantially damaged. Such investigations shall begin immediately upon occurrence of such fire by the fire officer in whose district the fire occurs. If it appears that such fire is of suspicious origin, the Fire Chief shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence, shall notify the proper authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such matters, and shall further cooperate with the authorities in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution of the case.
(2) The municipal attorney and the police department, upon request of the Fire Chief, shall assist in the investigation of any fire which, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, is of suspicious origin.
Chapter 34 Page 18
(d) Fire records. The Fire Chief shall keep a record of all fires and of all facts concerning the same, including statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby, and whether such losses were covered by insurance, and if so, in what amount. Such record shall be made daily from the reports made by the fire department officers and inspectors. All such records shall be public.
(e) Annual report. A report of the fire department shall be made annually and transmitted to the village president and village board. It shall contain all proceedings under this code, with such statistics as the Fire Chief may wish to include therein. The Fire Chief shall also recommend any amendments to the code, which, in his/her judgment shall be desirable.
(f) Modifications. The Fire Chief shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his/her duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.
(g) Appeals. Whenever the Fire Chief shall disapprove or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the Fire Chief to the village board within ten days from the date of the decision of the chief. In the event of such appeal, the village board shall set a time and place for hearing thereof and give to the appellant at least ten days notice thereof by mail or personally.
(h) New materials, processes, or occupancies which may require permit. The board president, the Fire Chief, and the municipal engineer shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in this code. The Fire Chief shall post such a list in a conspicuous place in his/her office and in the office of the clerk, and may distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
(i) Fire equipment on private property. The fire department, through its authorized representatives must approve all fire hydrants, stand pipes, and sprinkler systems for commercial, industrial, or institutional buildings or properties. A permit must be issued before such equipment may be installed.
(1) Private Fire Hydrants. All private fire hydrants shall fully comply with the latest revisions of AWWA C502 and with the water utility’s current fire hydrant specification in order to provide uniformity and consistency of operation with
Chapter 34 Page 19
public fire hydrants. The following specifications will apply to fire hydrants designed to provide fire protection:
a. Hydrants shall be as manufactured by Waterous (Pacer model WB67-250), or approved equal.
b. Private hydrants shall be painted red.
c. Hydrants shall be of the traffic model design consisting of a safety flange and a safety sleeve coupling. The design shall permit rotation of the upper barrel to position the nozzle in any direction. The nozzle placement shall not be restricted by bolt hole placement.
d. Hydrant bury depths shall be compatible with the bury depth of the private main(s) to which they are connected, but shall not be less than 7 feet.
e. Private fire hydrants shall be designed with a 16 inch break off height.
f. Private hydrants nozzles shall extend a minimum of 24 inches and a maximum of 28 inches above the proposed finished grade. The bottom of the break off section shall be a minimum of 2 inches and a maximum of 6 inches above finished grade.
g. Hydrants shall be designed for 150 pounds working pressure and tested to 300 pounds hydrostatic pressure test.
h. All private fire hydrants shall be of compression type main valve, closing with line pressure.
i. Hydrants shall be self-draining and furnished with a positive acting drain. All working parts shall be bronze.
j. The private fire hydrant inlet connection shall be a 6-inch mechanical joint.
k. Private fire hydrants shall have two - 2 1/2 inch hose nozzles and one - 4 1/2 inch pumper nozzle, each with National Standard threads.
l. The operating nut shall be 1-1/2 inch pentagon shaped and shall open left (counter clockwise). The hose nozzle caps shall be 1-1/2 inch pentagon shaped with chains.
m. The main valve and seating shall be removable through the upper barrel from above ground without disassembling at the ground flanges. The main valve opening shall be 5-1/2 inch in size.
Chapter 34 Page 20
n. The stem threads shall be lubricated by removal of a screw located in the operation nut.
o. The stuffing box shall have o-rings for seals.
(2) All private hydrant installations shall include an isolation valve on the hydrant leads that permits water supply to be shut off to the fire hydrant without requiring water to be turned off on the utility distribution system or interruption of metered water supply to the private hydrant owner’s facility.
(3) Private Flushing Hydrants. Private flushing hydrants are necessary in areas such as mobile home parks or multi-family housing complexes to maintain water quality and perform system maintenance. These hydrants are not capable of supply fire flows. The specific design of these hydrants will vary depend on the size of the connection to the main from which it is supplied. All installations of private flushing hydrants are to be submitted to and approved by the water utility and the S.A.F.E.R. Fire Department. The following requirements apply to flushing hydrants:
a. Flushing hydrants shall be clearly identified.
b. A traffic style with break off is preferred.
c. Hydrants shall be self-draining and furnished with a positive acting drain valve.
(4) All private hydrant installations shall include an isolation valve on the hydrant lead that permits water supply to be shut off to the fire hydrant without requiring water to be turned off on the utility distribution system or interruption of metered water supply to the private hydrant owner’s facility.
(Ord. of 3/24/2011; Ord. of 3/19/2015; Amended via Ord. 15-025 11/7/2015; Amended via Ord. 18-020 7/19/2018.
Sec. 34.208. Permits.
(a) Permission granted - Limitations. A permit shall constitute permission to conduct activity authorized by the Fire Chief or his/her designee. Such permit does not take the place of any license required by law.
(b) Approval before issuance. Before a permit may be issued, the Fire Chief, or his/her assistants, shall inspect and approve receptacles, vehicles, and building or storage places to be used. In cases where laws or regulations enforceable by departments other than the fire department are applicable, joint approval shall be obtained from all departments concerned.
(c) Applications. All applications for a permit required by this code shall be made to the Fire Chief in such form and detail as it shall prescribe.
Chapter 34 Page 21
(d) To be kept on premises. Permits shall at all times be kept on the premises designated therein, and shall at all times be subject to inspection by any officer of the fire or police departments.
(Ord. of 3/24/2011; Amended via Ord. 15-025 11/17/15
Sec. 34.209. Burning, heating and lighting.
(a) General prohibition on outdoor burning and refuse burning. Open burning, refuse burning, burn barrels, and some outdoor wood boilers are prohibited, except for:
(1) Cooking with gas or charcoal on portable or permanent grills. For multi-family dwellings of three or more separate occupancies, the use of an open or closed outdoor cooking fire, charcoal, or propane cooking device or any open-flame device is prohibited within fifteen feet of the structure or above the ground floor. Smoke from cooking grills shall not create a nuisance for neighboring property owners.
(2) Recreational burning in outdoor fireplaces which are fueled by propane or natural gas and are manufactured for this purpose are allowed when they are properly installed to prevent heat or flame from the device igniting nearby structures, grass, leaves, or vegetation. In no event shall any outside fireplace be allowed which utilizes fuel other than natural or LP gas. Additional fuels such as logs, charcoal, coal, wood, paper, vegetation, leaves, or cardboard shall not be added to outdoor fireplaces. Installation of all flame producing devices shall follow manufacturer’s specifications and shall comply with any applicable permits required by other sections of the municipal ordinances or state statutes.
(3) Approved training for fire-protection purposes.
(4) Even when open burning is one of the allowed exceptions or allowed by permit, the Fire Chief shall be authorized to cease all burning and revoke all permits for burning when climatic conditions would make open flames and fires a danger to adjoining properties or when there would be noxious products of combustion affecting neighboring properties. When it is necessary to issue such burning bans, the Fire Chief shall issue such notice through publication of the ban in the official newspaper of the municipality and through public service announcements on the television and radio stations serving the municipality or by direct notice to the property owner.
(b) Open fire and burning allowed by permit. The Fire Chief shall be authorized to issue permits for open fires and burning for the following specific purposes:
(1) Controlled burning of agricultural materials, forestry debris or prairie areas on parks, farms, wildlife sanctuaries, and cemeteries; provided such burns are issued a current permit by the fire department, the smoke and products of
Chapter 34 Page 22
combustion do not create a hazard to nearby streets or a noxious atmosphere for neighbors, the burns are attended by personnel who have readily available firefighting equipment, and the Fire Chief has not declared a no burn period due to dry conditions or other unfavorable weather. Such burns shall be restricted to properties of at least five acres under single ownership, and this permit process shall not be construed to allow property owners to burn leaves, grass, trees, or landscape debris from their individual properties.
(2) Recreational fires and permits.
a. Intent. It is the intent that citizens shall have the opportunity to have recreational fires at single-family and two-family dwellings provided that such fires are in strict compliance with restrictions relating to recreational fires. It is further the intent that the police and fire departments shall strictly enforce these restrictions so as to insure that such fires do not compromise safety or annoy neighbors. Such enforcement shall require an investigation into any complaint and an independent determination by either the police department or the fire department as to whether a particular recreational fire is in compliance with these regulations.
b. Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases when used in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
1. Fire pit include both a below-ground and a portable device intended to control outdoor wood fires.
2. A recreational fire is a small outdoor fire intended for recreation or cooking.
c. No recreational fire may be started or allowed to continue burning unless such recreational fire is contained in a fire pit.
d. All recreational fires shall not have a diameter larger than three feet nor may the fire extend more than two feet above the fire pit. All below- ground fire pits shall be at least four inches in depth and shall be surrounded on the outside, above ground, by a noncombustible material such as concrete block, rock, or metal. A portable device shall be placed upon a noncombustible surface and secured.
e. Portable fire pits such as devices commercially designed and intended to control and contain outdoor wood fires, may be used in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications, and these regulations, and must be based upon a noncombustible surface at ground level.
Chapter 34 Page 23
f. Only clean, dry wood, untreated and unpainted lumber is permitted to fuel a recreational fire. If anything else is used, the fire department may respond and extinguish the fire and a citation may be issued.
g. No recreational fire shall be closer than twenty-five feet from any building, structure, shed, garage, combustible fence or any combustible material, or ten feet from any lot line.
h. No recreational fire shall be started or allowed to continue burning when the wind directions or wind speed causes smoke, embers, or other burning materials to be carried by the wind toward any building or other combustible materials, nor any time when the wind speed exceeds seven miles per hour. Smoke from any recreational fire shall not create a nuisance for neighboring property owners. The fire shall be completely extinguished immediately upon complaint of any smoke nuisance. The police and fire department shall strictly enforce this section so as to comply with the intent of subsection (2) a.
i. Adequate fire suppression equipment shall be immediately available to control or extinguish the recreational fire.
j. All recreational fires shall be attended at all times by at least one responsible person of age eighteen or older from the ignition of the fire until the fire is completely extinguished.
k. The property owner and/or person who have started the recreational fire shall hold the municipality harmless from any and all damages caused by a recreational fire.
l. A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire shall be responsible for all suppression costs and any other liability resulting from damage caused by the fire.
m. No recreational fire may be started or allowed to continue between 12 a.m. and 12 p.m. Any such fire is presumed unreasonable and must be extinguished upon demand.
(3) Use of wood-fired apparatus by businesses, commercial establishments, and organizations or if used in conjunction with community events.
(4) The Fire Chief or any authorized officer, agent, employee or representative of the municipality who presents credentials may inspect any property for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. Note: If this owner or occupant of the premises denies access to the property for this purpose, a special inspection warrant may be obtained in accordance with Wis. Stat. § 66.0119 .
Chapter 34 Page 24
(5) Any person who violates, disobeys, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in Section 1.111 of this Code.
(c) Authority to extinguish fires. The Fire Chief or designee shall have the authority to order open burning and fires extinguished when such fires are deemed to present a hazard to life, property, or health. The fire department shall have the authority to extinguish fires or open flames to protect the lives, property, and health of the municipality and its citizens.
(d) Open flame. No person shall take an open flame or light into any building, barn, vessel, boat, or any other place where highly flammable, combustible, or explosive material is kept, unless such light or flames shall be well secured in a glass globe, wire mesh cage, or similar approved device.
(e) Apparatus capable of igniting flammable material prohibited. No heating or lighting apparatus or equipment capable of igniting flammable materials of the type stored or handled shall be used in the storage area of any warehouse storing rags, excelsior, hair, or any other highly flammable or combustible material; nor in the work area of any shop or factory used for the manufacture, repair, or renovating of mattresses or bedding, nor in the work areas of any establishment used for the upholstering of furniture.
(f) Chimneys and heating appliances. All chimneys, smokestacks, or similar devices for conveying smoke or hot gasses to the outer air and the stoves, furnaces, fire boxes, or boilers to which they are connected shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner as not to create a fire hazard.
(g) Use of torches or flame producing devices. Any person using a torch or other flame or heat-producing device for removing paint from any building or structure shall provide one approved fire extinguisher or water hose connected to the water supply on the premises where such burning is done. In all cases, the person doing the burning shall remain on the premises one hour after the torch or flame producing device has been used.
Ord. of 3/24/2011; Amended via Ord. 15-025 11/7/2015; Amended via Ord. No. 18-020 7/19/2018
Sec. 34.210. Combustible Materials.
(a) Hot ashes and other dangerous materials. No person shall deposit hot ashes, cinders, smoldering coals, or greasy or oily substances liable to spontaneous ignition into any wooden receptacle or place the same within ten feet of any combustible materials, except in metal or other non-combustible receptacles. Such receptacles, unless resting on a non-combustible floor or on the ground outside the building, shall be placed on non-combustible stands, and in every case must be kept at least two feet away from any combustible wall or partition.
Chapter 34 Page 25
(b) Accumulation of waste materials. Accumulation of waste- paper, hay, grass, straw, weeds, litter, combustible, or flammable waste or rubbish of any kind shall not be permitted to remain upon any roof or in any court, yard, vacant lot, or open space. All weeds, grass, vines or other growth, when same endangers property, or is liable to be fired, shall be cut down and removed by the owner or occupant the property it is on.
(c) Handling readily combustible materials. No person making, using, storing or having in charge, or under his/her control any shavings, excelsior, rubbish, sacks, bags, litter, hay, straw or combustible waste materials shall fail or neglect at the close of each day to cause all such materials which are not compact baled and stacked in an orderly manner to be removed from the building or stored in suitable vaults or in metal lined, covered, receptacles or bins.
(d) Storage of readily combustible materials. Storage in buildings shall be orderly, shall not be within two feet of the ceiling, and not so located as to endanger exit from the building. Storage in the open shall not be more than twenty feet in height, shall be so located, with respect to adjacent buildings, as not to constitute a hazard, and shall be compact and orderly.
(e) Flammable decorative materials in stores. Cotton batting, straw, dry vines, leaves, trees, or other highly flammable materials shall not be used for decorative purposes in show windows or other parts of stores unless flame proofed; provided however, that nothing in this section shall be held to prohibit the display of saleable goods permitted and offered for sale. Electric light bulbs in stores shall not be decorated with paper or other combustible materials unless such materials shall first have been rendered flame proof.
(f) Christmas Tree Sales. For the purpose of this paragraph, the following minimum standards shall apply to the storage, handling, and display of live Christmas Trees and Foliage.
a. Trees and foliage shall be stacked not closer than ten feet from any gasoline pump or other device for the transfer of petroleum products.
b. Aisles or clear spaces of not less than three feet shall be maintained at all times.
c. A fire extinguisher with a “2A-10BC” rating or greater shall be provided by the merchant for each seventy-five (75) feet of travel display and/or storage area.
d. All storage and sales of live Christmas Trees and Foliage shall be held outside of buildings.
e. It shall be unlawful to light a match or any flame-producing device, or to smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette, or pipe in areas where live Christmas trees or foliage is displayed, sold, or stored. The person in charge of the Christmas tree
Chapter 34 Page 26
sales shall post a “NO SMOKING” sign in locations designed to give persons entering the area a notice of this regulation.
Ord. of 3/24/2011; Amended via Ord. 15-025 11/7/2015
Sec. 34.211. Fire Hazards.
(a) Orders to eliminate. Whenever any officers, members, or inspectors of the fire department as mentioned in Section 34.207(b), shall find in any building or upon any premises dangerous or hazardous conditions as follows, he/she or they shall order such dangerous conditions or materials to be removed in such manner as may be specified in the order:
(1) Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustibles or explosive matter;
(2) Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed equipment for handling or using combustible or explosive matter;
(3) Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, waste paper, boxes, shavings, or other highly flammable materials;
(4) Accumulations of dust or waste material in air conditioning systems or of grease in kitchen exhaust ducts;
(5) Obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors, or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire;
(6) Any building or other structure which for want of repairs, lack of sufficient fire escapes or other exit facilities, automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fire extinguishing equipment, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or from any other cause, creates a fire hazard or a threat to life and safety.
(b) Service of orders.
(1) The service of such orders as mentioned in Section 34.209 (a) may be made upon the owner, occupant or other person responsible for the conditions, either by delivering a copy of same personally or by delivering the same to and leaving it with any person in charge of the premises or by mailing such orders to the owner or other responsible person. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon the owner of premises such order may be served either by delivering to and leaving with the person a copy of the order, or, if such owner is absent from the jurisdiction of the officer making the order, by mailing such copy to the owner’s last known post office address.
(2) If buildings or other premises are owned by one person and occupied by another under lease or otherwise, the orders issued in connection with the enforcing of
Chapter 34 Page 27
this code shall apply to the occupant thereof, except where the rules or orders require the making of additions to or changes in the premises themselves, such as would immediately become real estate and be the property of the owner of the premises; in such cases the rules or orders shall affect the owner and not the occupant unless it is otherwise agreed between the owner and occupant.
(3) Receipt of such orders by the owner or occupant shall be sufficient to effect compliance with the order.
(c) Revocation.
(1) The AHJ may revoke any permit issued in accordance with this Code in any case where they may find that any of the conditions for the issuance have not been maintained or where there has been false statement or misrepresentation of any material fact in the application or plans on which the issuance was based.
(2) The AHJ shall promptly notify the permit holder of the request for revocation and, if so requested by the permit holder, the effective date of the revocation shall be deferred pending a hearing before the Chief of the Fire Department. The decision of the Chief for revocation, following the hearing, shall be final.
(d) Closing and Vacating Buildings.
(1) The AHJ may order the compliance with this section and all other lawful orders or laws relating to fire prevention and fire protection in existing building and structures.
(2) Where the public is exposed to immediate danger, the AHJ shall order the closing and vacating of the building at once.
Ord. of 3/24/2011; Amended via Ord. 15-025 11/7/2015
Sec. 34.212. Enforcement.
(a) Fire chief to enforce. The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the Fire Chief and such subordinates in the fire department as the Fire Chief shall designate.
(b) Liability. This code shall not be construed to affect the responsibility of any person owning, operating, or installing any equipment for damage to persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the municipality be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection or re-inspection authorized herein or permit issued as herein provided or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized herein.
Ord. of 3/24/2011; Amended via Ord. 15-025 11/7/2015
Sec. 34.213. Places of assembly.
Chapter 34 Page 28
(a) Inspection of exits. Not more than ninety minutes prior to the scheduled commencement of any non-continuous activity, event, performance, show, meeting, function, or other occasion for which persons will gather at a Class A or B commercial place of assembly (as defined in the 2006 Edition of the Life Safety Code
– NFPA No. 101*), the owner (or designee pursuant to written authority, instructions, or procedures), shall inspect every required exit, ways of approach thereto, and way of departure therefrom. If such inspection reveals that any required means of egress is obstructed, inaccessible, locked, fastened, or otherwise unsuited for immediate use, the scheduled program shall not begin, nor shall admittance to the place of assembly be permitted until necessary corrective action has been completed.
(b) Announcements. Immediately prior to the start of the program, the owner or an authorized agent shall orally notify all attendees concerning the location of the exit(s) to be used in case of fire or other emergency.
(c) Records.
(1) Accurate records of all inspections, corrections, and notifications made pursuant to this chapter shall be kept and retained for at least two years in the offices of the building owner. The records shall contain:
a. A brief description of each activity, event, performance, etc., including date, time, and location;
b. The name and signature of the person who performed each requirement of this chapter; and
c. The date and time when each requirement was performed.
(2) Such records shall be made available upon request to the State Fire Marshal, deputies, assistants, or any fire inspector of the municipality.
(d) Alternative. In cases of practical difficulty or undue hardship, or in which compliance with this chapter would not significantly increase life safety, the fire inspector may approve or accept alternative means of accomplishing the objectives of this chapter.
* Available from the National Fire Protection Association, NFPA Fulfillment Center, 11 Tracy Drive, Avon, MA 02322; Phone 1-800-344-3555; www.nfpa.org.
(Ord. of 3-24-2011) [Amended via Ord. 15-025, 11/7/2015; Amended via Ord. 18-020, 7/19/2018]
Sec. 34.214. General fire safety requirements.
(a) Tents.
Chapter 34 Page 29
(1) Permit required. No tent exceeding two hundred forty square feet in area shall be erected, maintained, operated, or used without a permit when erected, maintained, operated, or used in or on a commercial property.
(2) Fire watchers to be employed. One or more qualified persons to serve as fire watchers shall be employed by all circuses, carnivals, or other exhibitions where large crowds assemble. They shall familiarize themselves with all fire protection facilities, fire prevention features and with the conditions of exits, and shall patrol the entire tent area during the time of occupancy. They shall see that aisles and exit ways are kept open and that “No Smoking” rules are enforced.
(3) Tents for assembly to conform to recognized safe practices. The design, construction, flame proofing, location, maintenance, and use of tents for assembly shall be in accordance with Wisconsin Administrative Code, SPS 314. Compliance with the American Standard of Outdoor Assembly, Grandstands and Tents, as adopted by the National Fire Protection Association, shall be considered prima facie evidence of compliance with such recognized safe practices.
(b) Access boxes.
(1) Access boxes of the fire department-approved type (Knox® brand) shall be installed in an approved accessible location for all structures or areas that have fire alarm systems, automatic fire suppression systems, or where access is difficult because of security.
(2) Elevator key boxes shall be of fire department-approved type (Knox® brand) and shall be installed in a fire department-approved location as required by Wisconsin Administrative Code, SPS 318.1702(10)(b)3.b.
(c) Commercial change in occupancy. Any owner, agent, or occupant making a change in occupancy of an existing commercial building, or occupying a previously vacant space, to exclude any private dwelling portion thereof, shall be required to obtain a fire inspection by this department prior to the new tenant taking occupancy of any building or structure that was previously vacated or any change in occupancy of any existing building or structure portion thereof.
(1) Inspection. The owner, agent, or occupant of a commercial building shall schedule an appointment with a fire inspector for an inspection of the building and occupied space(s). Any violations of this chapter or any portion of the Weston Municipal Code observed at the time of inspection shall be corrected prior to the new tenant taking occupancy.
(d) Tavern licensing. All licensed taverns with the municipality shall be inspected for compliance with this code at least four months prior to the renewal of their license. Any violations at the time of this inspection shall be corrected within the time
Chapter 34 Page 30
stated on such order. A final copy of all orders shall be submitted for review at the time of renewal. Failure to comply with any written order may result in the suspension of, or non-issuance of their license by the municipal board or any other municipal authority. The occupancy person load number shall be placed/written on the license.
(e) Fireworks/pyrotechnics.
(1) There shall be no indoor or outdoor display of fireworks/pyrotechnics within the municipality without a permit from the fire department. An officer of the fire department must inspect the fireworks/pyrotechnics before they are used.
(2) Anyone caught using pyrotechnics without the appropriate permits is subject to the penalties as set forth in Section 34.214(e)(7).
(3) The use of fireworks allowed by Wis. Stat. § 167.10 does not require a permit.
(4) State law adopted. Wis. Stat. § 167.10, regulating the sale and use of fireworks, exclusive of penalties, is adopted by reference as part of this Code.
(5) Wholesale sales. Nothing in Wis. Stat. § 167.10, shall be construed to prohibit any resident wholesaler, dealer or jobber from selling fireworks at wholesale, provided the same are shipped or delivered directly outside the limits of the municipality subject to the following:
a. Fire extinguishers, approved by the chief of the fire department, shall be provided where fireworks are stored or handled.
b. Smoking shall be prohibited where fireworks are stored or handled.
c. Exposing for sale, within the municipality, fireworks of any description to immediately notify the chief of the fire department of the receipt of such stock of fireworks, or upon removal from one location to another, and the location where the stock of such fireworks is stored. No such fireworks shall be stored in any building or portion thereof used for dwelling purposes or in any building situated within 50 feet of any building used for dwelling purposes or places of public assemblage.
(6) Use or storage of dangerous materials. No person shall use dangerous materials or devices such as Class 1 Explosives as defined by the United States Department of Transportation or unattended gas (propane, natural gas, butane, white gasoline, or fuel oil) heaters in construction projects, or store Class 1 Explosives or similar explosive materials, including initiators, in the municipality without first notifying the police and fire departments. In accordance with applicable Wisconsin Department of Administration SPS Codes.
Chapter 34 Page 31
(7) Penalties. Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than $30.00, or not more than $500.00.
Code 1982, (Code 1982, § 4.156(f); Ord. of 7-16-2001, § 1; Ord. of 3-24-2011; Ord. of 3-19-15)
(f) Elevators. All passenger and freight elevators in all buildings and structures hereinafter constructed, except one and two family residential occupancies, shall:
(1) Provide at least one elevator to all floors of such size and arrangement to accommodate a twenty-four (24) inch by eighty-five (85) inch ambulance stretcher in the horizontal open position.
(2) The elevator arranged to accommodate an ambulance stretcher shall be identified by the “Star of Life”. This symbol shall not be less than three inches in height and shall be placed on both sides of the hoist way door frame.
(g) Addresses and door labeling. See Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations.
(h) Door, floor and stairway identification. Any occupancy having more than five means of egress and or more than two floors in height, shall number the individual egress areas according to this section:
(1) An identifying number shall be placed on the interior and exterior of each means of egress doorway, not less than six inches high in contrasting color and light reflective. The main entrance or means of egress shall be numbered one with each additional means of egress, progressing clockwise around the exterior of the structure to reflect its relationship to the main entrance. All means of egress leading into the structure shall be numbered, not just the required exit egress.
(2) Each interior door providing access to an enclosed stairway that is considered part of an accessible means of egress shall be identified with numbers and letters not less than three and one half inches high in the following manner:
a. Have a sign indicating floor level posted on both sides (inside and outside) of the egress door in a location acceptable to the Fire Department.
b. Have a sign indicating the exterior exit door assigned in compliance with Section 34.214(h) (1) located on both sides of the egress door in a location acceptable to the Fire Department.
(3) Sprinkler room doors shall be labeled with a sign on the door.
a. The sign shall be permanently attached and no less than 6” x 6” in size.
Chapter 34 Page 32
(4) Fire Department connections shall be marked with a sign that identifies them.
a. Sign shall be weatherproof and attached with corrosion resistant screws, chain, wire or other approved means.
b. FDC signs shall be visible to approaching fire apparatus, signs shall be made of metal or plastic and have the letters FDC in a contrasting color and no less than 6” in size.
(i) Standpipes.
(1) Where required. A standpipe shall be provided in all new structures over two stories in height and in accordance with this section.
(2) Installation. The installation of standpipes shall be in accordance with this Section and NFPA 14.
a. The class and location of standpipe and Fire Department connections shall be determined by the AHJ.
b. The location of standpipe connections shall be accessible and shall be so located that all portions of the building are within thirty (30) feet of a nozzle attached to one hundred (100) feet of hose.
c. When required by the AHJ, an approved standpipe shall be installed as construction progresses to make them available for fire department use in the top most floors constructed. Temporary standpipes shall be provided in place of permanent standpipes, when required, during the period of construction on buildings over three stories in height.
d. The location of fire department connections for the standpipe shall be approved by the AHJ.
e. The fire department connections shall be located at least forty (40) feet from all electrical transformers, gas meter, or propane storage.
(ii) Additions to, change of use, or remodeled buildings.
(1) If fifty (50) percent or more of the total floor area of a building is remodeled and/or added, the entire building shall be brought into compliance with the requirements of this code.
(2) If twenty-five (25) to forty-nine (49) percent of the total floor area of a building is remodeled and/or added, that part of the building which is remodeled and/or added shall be brought into compliance with the requirements of this code.
Chapter 34 Page 33
(3) If less than twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area is remodeled and/or added, the requirements of this code need not be provided unless the area includes dwelling units. If the total floor area includes dwelling units, that part of the building which is remodeled and/or added shall be brought into compliance with this code. The area added must comply with the requirements as they pertain to the original floor area.
(4) All percentages of additions or remodeling shall be cumulative as applied to (1), (2), and (3) above.
(5) If the use of and/or contents of any existing building is changed and becomes more hazardous as determined by the Building Inspector, Zoning Administrator and/or Fire Chief, the building shall be brought into compliance with this code.
(6) Those portions, elements, systems, or components of existing buildings and structures to be altered or modified on or after the effective date of the rules under this code and where the alteration, modification, or the addition affects a building element or component relating to subject matters regulated by this code, shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the applicable rules of this code as the rules exist on one of the following:
a. The date plans for the alteration or modification are conditionally approved by the Building Inspector, Zoning Administrator and/or Fire Chief.
b. The date the local building permit is issued.
c. The date the replacement is initiated, where Section (1) do not apply.
(k) Notification of use or occupancy change. See Chapter 14 Buildings and Building Regulations.
(l) Fire Damaged Buildings (Securing). All dwellings and buildings within the municipality damaged from fire shall be secured within twenty-four hours of release of the property by the AHJ. The owner of the damaged property shall assume the liability for the protection of the public until the property is secured.
(Ord. of 3-24-2011) Amended via Ord. 15-025, 11/7/2015; Amended via Ord. 18-020 7/19/2018
Sec. 34.215. Possession of ignition devices prohibited.
(a) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall mean:
Chapter 34 Page 34
(1) “Ignition Device” means matches, lighters and, any other material used for the purpose of ignition.
(2) “Minor” means any person who has not yet attained the age of eighteen (18) years.
(b) Possession Prohibited. No minor may possess any ignition device, unless under the direct supervision of an adult.
(c) Delivery Prohibited. No adult shall permit an ignition device to be served, sold, dispensed, given away, or made available to any minor, unless such minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, or spouse who has attained the age of eighteen
(18) years.
(d) Confiscation. Any ignition devise possessed by a minor, contrary to subsection (2), may be confiscated by a police officer.
(e) Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall forfeit twenty- five dollars ($25.00) for the first violation and fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second and subsequent violation, together with the costs of the prosecution and, in default of payment thereof, by imprisonment in the Marathon County Jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not more than the number of days set forth in Wis. Stat. § 800.095(4), or by suspension of the defendant’s operating privilege, pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 343.30 and 345.47.
(f) Education Program. In addition to or in lieu of any other penalties provided for in this Code, the Judge of any court of competent jurisdiction may order any person found guilty of violating this section to any education programs, as the court deems appropriate, and include as part of the penalty thereof that such person pay the costs of such education program.
(Ord. of 3-24-2011) [Amended via Ord. 15-025, 11/7/2015]
ARTICLE III. FALSE FIRE ALARMS
Sec. 34.300. Purpose.
(a) The purpose of this Article is to encourage Alarm Users and Fire Alarm Contractors to properly install, use and maintain Fire Alarm Systems in order to improve the reliability of such Systems and thereby reduce or eliminate False Fire Alarms.
(b) This Chapter governs the use of Fire Alarm Systems intended to summon the S.A.F.E.R Fire Department to properties within the municipality; requires registration of such Systems; allows for the assessment of Service Fees; and provides for civil penalties.
[Created via Ord. 15-025, 11/7/2015]
Chapter 34 Page 35
Sec. 34.301. Definitions.
(a) Adopted Code(s) means the 2003 International Fire Code as amended by this municipality.
(b) Alarm User means any person; whether owner, occupant, or tenant, upon whose premises a Fire Alarm System is maintained or operated within the municipality.
(c) Department means the S.A.F.E.R Fire Department.
(d) Enforcement Official means the S.A.F.E.R. Fire Chief or his/her designated representative.
(e) False Fire Alarm means the activation of any Fire Alarm System not caused by heat, smoke or fire, resulting in response by the Department. A False Fire Alarm includes, but is not limited to activation of a Fire Alarm System through any of the following:
(1) negligent or intentional use or misuse of the System;
(2) mechanical failure;
(3) malfunction; or
(4) improper installation.
A False Fire Alarm does not include an alarm caused by naturally occurring weather, seismic or other condition; interruptions of electrical or telephone service to the Alarm User; or malicious or criminal activity by a third party who is not an agent or employee of the alarm user.
(f) Fire Alarm Contractor means any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity appropriately licensed as a Fire Alarm Contractor by the State of Wisconsin, Department of Safety and Professional Services, Industry Services Division.
(g) Fire Alarm Registration means the documentation required by the Department to register a Fire Alarm System.
(h) Fire Alarm System means any device or equipment designed to signal visibly, audibly, electronically, mechanically or by any combination of these methods the presence of a heat, smoke or fire hazard to which the Department is trained to respond. The term Fire Alarm System does not include an alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a Premises.
(i) Letter for Excessive False Fire Alarms means a notification provided to an Alarm User by the Department for three (3) or more False Fire Alarms. This warning notice will require that the Fire Alarm System be inspected and/or serviced within fifteen (15) days, and that written documentation be submitted to the Department certifying that the Fire
Chapter 34 Page 36
Alarm System is in working order. Failure to provide this written documentation will result in a Service Fee for excessive False Fire Alarms.
(j) Premises means any building, structure or combination of buildings and structures, in which a Fire Alarm System is installed.
(k) Qualified Fire Alarm Technician means any person who inspects, installs, repairs or performs maintenance on Fire Alarm Systems and is factory trained and licensed by the State of Wisconsin.
(l) Record of Completion means the form required to be filed with the Department pursuant to the National Fire Protection Association's National Fire Alarm Code (NFPA 72).
(m) Service Fee means the monetary charge payable to the Village of Weston to defray the expenses of implementing the purposes of this Chapter.
(n) Report of Service/Repair means the appropriate documentation in a format acceptable to the Enforcement Official that verifies proper repairs or maintenance have been performed by both the Fire Alarm Contractor and the Alarm User.
[Created via Ord. 15-025, 11/7/2015; Amended via Ord. 18-020 7/19/2018]
Sec. 34.302. Registration of Fire Alarm Systems.
(a) Registration Required. All newly-installed Fire Alarm Systems shall be required to be registered at the time that a Record of Completion is prepared, in accordance with Adopted Codes. The Alarm User or his duly authorized agent shall complete and deliver the Fire Alarm Registration in the required format to the Enforcement Official before the Fire Alarm System is activated. For all existing Fire Alarm Systems as of the date of adoption of this Ordinance, Fire Alarm Registration shall occur not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of this Chapter.
(b) Change in Registration Information. When any information contained in the Fire Alarm Registration Form is no longer accurate for any reason, the Alarm User shall re-register the Fire Alarm System not later than fifteen (15) days after the Alarm user becomes aware of any such change, noting all necessary changes on said Registration Form.
(c) Transferals Prohibited. Fire Alarm Registrations shall not be transferable from one Premise to another or from one Alarm User to another.
(d) Notice to Department of Existence of System; Notice to Alarm User. Every Fire Alarm Contractor shall notify the Enforcement Official of the existence of a Fire Alarm System before the Fire Alarm System is put into operation. It is the responsibility of the installing Fire Alarm Contractor to provide the Alarm User with notice of the existence of this Article, a Fire Alarm Registration form and a copy of the Fire Alarm System operation
Chapter 34 Page 37
instructions in accordance with Adopted Codes, as well as the manufacturer's instructions.
[Created via Ord. 15-025, 11/7/2015]
Sec. 34.303. Display of Fire Alarm Registration.
The Fire Alarm Registration shall be kept on the Premises serviced by the Fire Alarm System and shall be displayed upon request of the Enforcement Official or a member of the Department.
[Created via Ord. 15-025, 11/7/2015]
Sec. 34.304. Responsibility for Compliance; Requirement of Alarm Users to Respond to Scene.
(a) Unless otherwise stated herein, the Alarm User shall be responsible for complying with all provisions of this Chapter.
(b) The Alarm User or any person identified on the Fire Alarm Registration Application shall appear at the Premises upon request of the Department when a Fire Alarm System has been activated.
[Created via Ord. 15-025, 11/7/2015]
Sec. 34.305. False Fire Alarms.
(a) Notification to Alarm User. If the Department records three (3) or more False Fire Alarms at one (1) Premises within a thirty (30) day period, a Letter for Excessive False Fire Alarms shall be mailed by first class mail to the Alarm User and any Fire Alarm Contractor. Said notice shall direct that the Alarm User submit a Report of Service/Repair within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of said letter stating that:
(1) The Fire Alarm System has been examined by a Qualified Fire Alarm Technician; and
(2) A bona fide attempt has been made to identify and correct any defect of design, installation or operation of the Fire Alarm System which was identified as a possible cause of the False Fire Alarm.
(b) No Fee shall be assessed for the first two (2) False Fire Alarms at the same premises requiring response by the Department within a thirty (30) day period.
Chapter 34 Page 38
(c) Failure of the Alarm User to return a satisfactory Report of Service/Repair to the Enforcement Official within said fifteen (15) day period shall result in the imposition of a Service Fee.
(d) A Fire Alarm Contractor, Alarm User, or any other individual shall not conduct testing or perform repair work on any Fire Alarm System, sprinkler system or fire suppression system without first notifying the Marathon County Dispatch Center that such testing or repair work is being performed. Violation of this subsection shall result in the imposition of a Service Fee.
(e) False Fire Alarms activated by any components connected to the Fire Alarm System shall be included in computing the total number of False Fire Alarms for purposes of this Chapter.
(f) During the fifteen (15) day period after receipt of a Letter for Excessive False Fire Alarms any additional False Fire Alarms will not be counted toward the year's total False Fire Alarms, provided that the provisions of subsection a. above have been met.
[Created via Ord. 15-025, 11/7/2015]
Sec. 34.306. Service Fees.
(a) The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any newly installed Fire Alarm System for a period of forty-five days (45) from the date of installation. In an existing building the forty-five (45) days begin when the installation of the new system is completed. In new construction the forty-five (45) days begin when the installation of the system is completed and an occupancy permit is issued. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply from and after the expiration of the initial forty-five (45) day period following the issuance of the occupancy permit and/or completed installation.
(b) Should any Service Fee assessed pursuant to this Chapter remain unpaid in excess of thirty (30) days, a Late Fee shall be assessed and shall be payable in addition to the Original Service Fee.
(c) The Service Fees established by this Chapter shall be calculated periodically based on employee labor rates, equipment costs and the Department service costs and established by the South Area Fire & Emergency Response District Board of Directors.
(Created via Ord. 15-025, 11/7/2015, Amended by Ord. No 18-001, 1/20/2018; Ord. No 19-009 of 8/21/2019)
Sec. 34.307. Conflict with Other Village Ordinances.
If the provisions of this Chapter conflict with any ordinance or resolution previously adopted by the municipality, the provisions of this Chapter shall control.
Chapter 34 Page 39
[Created via Ord. 15-025, 11/7/2015]
Sec. 34.308. Penalties.
A violation of this Chapter shall be a Civil Infraction.
[Created via Ord. 15-025, 11/7/2015]
Sec. 34.309. Frequency of Inspections.
The following types of occupancies shall be inspected at least once per calendar year, provided the interval between those inspections does not exceed 15 months. Any occupancy not listed below shall be inspected at least once in each non-overlapping 6-month period per calendar year.
(a) Offices, outpatient clinics, and dental clinics, if less than 3 stories in height.
(b) Unoccupied utility facilities, such as a water well facility, electric power substation and communication facility
(c) Places of worship that do not have a rental hall, child day care facility or pre school to 12th grade instruction within the immediate church building
(d) Buildings at colleges and universities, if used exclusively for classroom lecture or offices, provided there are no laboratories, chemical storage or industrial arts rooms in the building
(e) Libraries, museums, and art galleries
(f) Hotels and motels if less than 3 stories in height
(g) Townhouses and rowhouses, if less than 3 stories in height
(h) Residential condominiums and apartments, if there are less than 5 units under one roof
(i) Convents and monasteries
(j) Detention and correctional facilities
(k) Garages used for storage only
(l) Pedestrian walkways and tunnels, membrane structures, open parking structures, outdoor theaters, assembly seating areas, greenhouses, and mini-storage buildings. If interior access to mini storage buildings cannot be obtained an exterior inspection shall be conducted
(m) Vacant or unoccupied buildings. If interior access to vacant or unoccupied buildings cannot be obtained, an exterior inspection shall be conducted
(n) Confined spaces. An area that is identified by a sign as a permit required confined space need not be internally inspected, but an exterior inspection shall be conducted
(o) Townhouses, rowhouses, residential condominiums and apartments with no common use areas. An exterior inspection of these occupancies shall be conducted
(p) Fully sprinklered office buildings up to 60 feet in height
(q) Fully sprinklered residential condominiums and apartments, if less than 3 stories in height
(r) Fully sprinklered townhouses and rowhouses, if less than 4 stories in height
Chapter 34 Page 40
(s) Season or periodic occupancies, provided at least one interior inspection is conducted during an occupancy period and provided the occupancy does not extend beyond 6 months in any calendar year.
[Created via Ord. 18-020, 7/19/2018]
Chapter 38 Health and Sanitation Page 1
Chapter 38
HEALTH AND SANITATION*
Sec. 38.100. Exposure prohibited.
Sec. 38.101. Vehicles giving off offensive odor or noise or spilling loads.
Sec. 38.102. Rat control and extermination.
Sec. 38.103. Solid waste disposal.
__________
* Cross References--Animals, Chapter . 10; Buildings and Building Regulations, Chapter 14; Mobile Homes, Chapter 46; Nuisances, Chapter 50; Tobacco Smoking, and Prohibited Substances Chapter 54 Article III ; Solid Waste, Chapter 66; Utilities, Chapter 86.
Chapter 38 Health and Sanitation Page 2
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Sec. 38.100. Exposure prohibited.
No person shall place, throw, permit to flow or leave any slops, dirty water or other liquid of offensive smell or otherwise nauseous or unwholesome, or any dead carcass, carrion, meat, fish, entrails, manure or other rubbish, or any ashes, garbage, dirt, paper or refuse of any kind or description in or upon any street, gutter, sidewalk, alley, public ground or upon any private lot or lands in the village; nor shall any putrid or decaying matter be kept in a house, cellar or adjoining outbuilding for more than 24 hours, except in receptacles and in the manner provided in section 66.103.
(Code 1982, § 6.07(3)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 38.101. Vehicles giving offensive odor or noise or spilling loads.*
(a) Parking or stopping. No operator of any vehicle carrying any livestock, fertilizer or other commodity or material that gives off any offensive or unusual odor or noise shall park, stop or leave such vehicle standing, whether attended or unattended, upon the streets or alleys or upon any public or private property in any inhabited residence or business district in the village for a longer period than five minutes, except for the necessary and lawful loading or unloading of such vehicle or in case such vehicle is disabled in such a manner or as to such an extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping or temporarily leaving such vehicle in such position or place.
(b) Escape of contents. No vehicle shall be operated, moved, parked or left standing in the streets of the village unless such vehicle is so constructed and loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping.
(c) Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be assessed a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $200.00 and in default of payment shall be confined in the county jail for not exceeding 30 days.
(Code 1982, § 6.10) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Cross References--Solid Waste, Chapter 66; Traffic and Vehicles, Chapter 82.
Sec. 38.102. Rat control and extermination.*
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Chapter 38 Health and Sanitation Page 3
Hardware cloth means wire screen of such thickness and spacing as to afford reasonable protection against the entrance of rats and mice.
Owner or manager includes any person having actual possession, charge, care or control of any property or premises in the village.
Rat harborage means any place where rats can live and nest without fear of frequent molestation or disturbance.
Rat proof container means a container constructed of concrete or metal or the container shall be lined with metal or other material that is impervious to rats; and openings into the container, such as doors, shall be tight fitting to prevent the entrance of rats.
Rat proofing means closing openings in buildings, foundations and openings under and around doors, windows, vents and other places that could provide means of entry for rats with concrete, sheet iron, hardware cloth or other types of rat proofing material approved by the health officer.
(b) Elimination of rat harborages. Whenever accumulations of rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, car bodies or any other materials provide rat harborage, the person owning or in control of such materials shall cause the materials to be removed or the materials stored as to eliminate the rat harborage. Lumber boxes and similar materials shall be neatly piled. These piles shall be raised at least a foot above the ground. When the owner of the materials cannot be found after reasonable search, the owner or manager of the premises on which the materials are stored shall be responsible for the disposal or proper piling of the materials.
(c) Elimination of rat feeding places. No person shall place or allow to accumulate any materials that may serve as a food for rats in a site accessible to rats. Any waste material that may serve as food for rats shall be stored in rat proof containers. Feed for birds shall be placed on raised platforms, or such feed shall be placed where it is not accessible to rats.
(d) Extermination. Whenever rat holes, burrows or other evidence of rat infestation is found on any premises or in any building within the village, it shall be the duty of the owner or manager of such property to exterminate the rats or to cause the rats to be exterminated. Within ten days after extermination, the owner or manager shall cause all of the rat holes or burrows in the ground to be filled with earth, ashes or other suitable material.
(e) Rat proofing. It shall be the duty of the owner or manager of any building in the village to make such building reasonably rat proof, to replace broken basement windows and, when necessary, to cover the basement window openings with hardware cloth or other suitable material for preventing rats from entering the building through such window openings. The owner or manager of any premises
Chapter 38 Health and Sanitation Page 4
upon which sheds, barns, coops or similar buildings are located shall eliminate the rat harborages from within and under such buildings by rat proofing, raising the buildings above the ground, or by some other suitable method; or such sheds, barns, coops or other buildings shall be razed.
(Code 1982, § 6.08) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Cross References--Animals, Chapter 10.
Sec. 38.103. Solid waste disposal.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate the disposal of waste, garbage, refuse, and sludge by individuals, corporations, and municipalities within the Village of Weston. Because of the possible danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the public, such disposal within the village shall be permitted only under the terms and conditions of this section.
(2) Definitions.
(a) Disposal. Disposal includes, but is not limited to, unloading, throwing away, discarding, emptying, abandoning, discharging, burning, spreading onto open fields, or burying waste, garbage, refuse, or sludge on, into, or under any property or lands, whether publicly or privately owned within the Village of Weston.
(b) Waste. Waste is garbage, refuse, and all other discarded or salvageable material, including materials resulting from industrial, commercial, and agricultural operations and from domestic use and public service activities.
(c) Garbage. Garbage is discarded material resulting from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving, and consumption of food.
(d) Refuse. Refuse is combustible and non-combustible discarded material including, but not limited to, trash, rubbish, paper, wood, metal, glass, plastic, rubber, cloth, ashes, litter, and street rubbish, industrial waste, dead animal tissue, blood or parts, mine tailings, gravel pit and quarry spoils, and materials and debris resulting from construction or demolition.
(e) Sludge. Sludge is sewage treatment residue or residue which represents waste material generated from the industrial or commercial slaughtering of farm animals which residue is in any form whatsoever, whether solid or semisolid, or liquid. This definition includes septage as defined by Wis. Stat. § 281.48(2)(d).
(f) Municipality. Municipality is any city, village, village or county.
(g) Farm. Land owned, rented, or leased that is used for agricultural purposes.
Chapter 38 Health and Sanitation Page 5
(3) Permit required. Except as expressly permitted in subsection (4), no person, corporation, or municipality shall dispose of waste, garbage, refuse, or sludge within the Village of Weston unless a permit to engage in such dumping or disposal is first obtained from the village under the conditions prescribed herein.
(4) Exceptions. The following are not within the scope or meaning of this section:
(a) Sites used for the disposal of waste, garbage, or refuse from a single family or household, a member of which is the owner, occupant, or lessee of the property, provided, however, that such waste, garbage, or refuse is placed in suitable containers or stored in such other way as not to cause a public or private nuisance.
(b) The use of sanitary privies and what are commonly known as seepage beds or septic tanks, which conform to applicable ordinances of the village, or the discharge of human waste products into any public sewerage system located within the village.
(c) A farm on which only animal waste resulting from the operation of the farm is disposed of.
(d) Any waste disposal operation under the direction and control of the village.
(5) General regulations. Persons or municipalities permitted to engage in disposal operations in the village are subject to the following regulations:
(a) The disposal operations must be conducted in such a way as not to constitute a public or private nuisance.
(b) Persons or municipalities engaged in dumping or disposal operations must conduct the operations in such a way that dust, dirt, debris, or other materials or substances will not be carried by wind or water across the boundary of the parcel of land being used for the operations.
(c) A covering, which meets standards established by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, shall be placed over all of the area used for the disposal operation within a reasonable time, not to exceed two days, after the disposal occurs. The covering must be done so as to make the area covered compatible with the surrounding and adjacent property in such a way as not substantially to depreciate property values within the immediate area unless property owners have been previously compensated for the loss.
(d) All permits and licenses required by the State of Wisconsin must be obtained prior to any application having been filed with the Village of Weston.
Chapter 38 Health and Sanitation Page 6
(6) Application. An application shall be filed with the village clerk at least 30 days before a public hearing is held. The application and accompanying information shall be followed by a sworn statement that they are true and factual. The information to be provided shall include:
(a) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
(b) Location, current owners, and legal description of the proposed facility.
(c) Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of any persons who will represent the applicant.
(d) Copies of available site reports, feasibility reports, engineering plans, or other documents filed or to be filed with the department of natural resources, or the U.S. EPA, that are related to the proposed facility.
(e) A plan for construction, operation, maintenance, closure, and long term care of the proposed facility that describes the size, capacity, and other features of the site and its proposed future.
(f) A plan for financial, legal, and environmental protection of the village government, its employees and agents, for current and future residents living within one mile of the facility.
(g) Proposed traffic patterns to and from the proposed facility and for roadway usage for access to the site.
(h) Copies of current financial statements or other financial information.
(7) Public hearing. A public hearing will be held at which the village board will invite all interested parties from the village and the applicant to provide information as to (1) the need for the permit; (2) positive and negative potential effects of the proposed facility on the village and its residents; and (3) the probability of reasonable compliance by the applicant with the general regulations of this section. The hearing will be of an informational nature for the village board. The hearing will be held under the following conditions:
(a) A Class 3 notice as prescribed by statute will be given.
(b) The cost of the publication of such notice will be deposited in advance by the applicant.
c) The hearing will be held on the date specified in the notice or on any adjourned date.
Chapter 38 Health and Sanitation Page 7
(8) Application fee and costs. An application for a permit for a solid waste facility shall be filed with the village clerk in writing. The initial application fee of $5,000.00 shall accompany the application, unless waived or reduced by the village board. In addition, the village board may charge the applicant an additional fee to reimburse the village for appropriate and necessary costs and expenses incurred by the village for attorneys' fees and experts' fees related to the application process. The total application fees, both initial and subsequent, shall not exceed $20,000.00 for any application.
(9) Bond and revocation of permit. A permit under this section shall not be effective unless here is on file with the village clerk a cash bond or a bond with a corporate surety duly licensed in the state of Wisconsin in the penal amount of $500,000.00. This bond must be maintained for a period of 20 years after the operation or facility is terminated. This bond is to assure that the applicant will comply with all the provisions of this ordinance and will save harmless, indemnify, and defend the village, its officers, its representatives, and its agents from any expenses or costs incurred through action of the applicant with regard to the facility. If the ordinance is violated or if the disposal plan is not carried out, the village shall have the right to revoke the disposal permit after a public hearing and, if necessary, to obtain a court order terminating such operation. If the owner of the land does not cover the disposal area in accordance with the disposal plan, the village board shall have the right to correct the violation and to charge the expense against the bond. The applicant for a disposal permit, in making the application, grants to the village the right to go on the land for necessary inspections at any time and to carry out the disposal plan if the owner or occupant of the land fails to o so after reasonable notice is given.
(10) Issuance. The application for a permit shall be processed within 90 days of the receipt of a completed application accompanied by full documentation and required bond. It shall be issued if the village board is satisfied that there has been and will be reasonable compliance with the conditions of this section.
(11) Revocation. The permit, once issued, may be revoked after public hearing upon a published Class 1 notice by the village at any time if any of the conditions upon which it was issued or any terms of the ordinance are violated.
(12) State law also applies. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to limit or restrict the application of any state law or administrative regulation of any state agency regulating the subject of this section.
(13) References. References to the term "person", or "anyone", or like references shall be deemed to refer to a person, a sole proprietorship, a partnership, a corporation, a municipal corporation, and also a responsible officer or a responsible managing agent of any single proprietorship, partnership, or corporation unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
Chapter 38 Health and Sanitation Page 8
(14) Severability and conflict. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this section is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions.
(15) Penalty. Any person violating this section shall be fined not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense under this section. Imprisonment in the county jail can be ordered only for failure to pay the fine that may be imposed. If imprisonment is ordered for failure to pay the fine, it shall be limited to one day of confinement for each $10.00 of fine or fraction thereof.
(Ord. of 1-21-2002, § 1) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 42 Law Enforcement Page 1
Chapter 42
LAW ENFORCEMENT*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 42.100. Establishment of joint police department.
ARTICLE II. COMMENCEMENT OF ACTION AND FORM OF CITATION IN MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATION CASES
Sec. 42.101. Commencement of Action.
Sec. 42.102. Form of Citation.
Sec. 42.103. Amended Citation.
Sec. 42.104. Plea of No Contest Prior to Initial Appearance
Sec. 42.105. State Statutes Adopted by Reference.
__________
* Cross References--Administration, Chapter 2; Emergency Alarm Systems, § 18.115 et seq.; Civil Emergencies, Chapter 22; Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, Chapter 54; Traffic and Vehicles, Chapter 82.
Chapter 42 Law Enforcement Page 2
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 42.100. Establishment of joint police department.
There shall be a joint police department operated by the Village, the Town of Weston and the City of Schofield. It shall be organized in accordance with joint agreements made from time to time between the three municipalities, or as set forth by mutual resolution by the three municipalities in accordance with state law and the ordinances of the municipalities.
(Ord. of 11-1-1993, § 1) [Amended via Ord. No. 15-026, 11/7/2015]
ARTICLE II. COMMENCEMENT OF ACTION AND FORM OF CITATION IN MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATION CASES
Sec. 42.101. Commencement of Action.
(a) In Village of Weston municipal ordinance violation cases personal jurisdiction is obtained when the Defendant is served with a Citation, and the Citation is filed with or transmitted to the Municipal Court, or when the Defendant is arrested and brought before the Court personally, or voluntarily appears before a Municipal Judge.
(b) Service of the Citation shall be as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 801.11 or 968.04(3)(b)2. Or by personal service by an adult who is a resident of the state where the service is made, but who is not a party to the action. If the Citation is personally served, the law enforcement officer or municipal employee serving the Citation shall sign a statement of personal service on the Citation. The signature required herein does not apply to a traffic citation issued under Wis. Stat. § 345.11.
(c) Upon the commencement of an action by a Citation, a deposit may be taken from the Defendant. The Defendant may be released on his or her own recognizance. A nonresident Defendant who does not make a deposit may be detained in jail to be brought before the Court at the earliest opportunity.
(Ord. of 11-1-1993, and 01-16-06 § 1) [Amended via Ord. No. 15-026, 11/7/2015]
Sec. 42.102. Form of Citation.
(a) Action. An action in Municipal Court for violation of a municipal ordinance is a civil action and the forfeiture or penalty imposed by any ordinance of the Village of Weston may be collected in an action in the name of the VILLAGE OF WESTON.
(b) Citation Form.
Chapter 42 Law Enforcement Page 3
The Citation shall be signed by a peace officer or endorsed by the municipal attorney, or by the Village Administrator, Director of Public Works, Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, Parks Superintendent, Humane Officer, S.A.F.E.R Fire Chief, S.A.F.E.R. Deputy Fire Chief, S.A.F.E.R. Captain of Inspections or by the Planning and Development Director. Officials granted the authority to issue citations may delegate, with the approval of the Village Board, the authority to employees. The Citation shall contain substantially the following information:
1. The name, address and date of birth of the Defendant.
2. The name and department of the issuing officer.
3. The violation alleged, the time and place of occurrence, a statement that the Defendant committed the violation, the ordinance violated, and a designation of the violation in language, which can be readily understood.
4. A date and place for the Court appearance, and a notice to appear.
5. Provisions for amount of deposit and stipulation in lieu of Court appearances, if applicable.
6. Notice that the Defendant may make a deposit and thereby obtain release if an arrest has been made.
7. Notice that the Defendant may by mail, prior to the Court appearance, enter a plea of Not Guilty and may within 10 days after entry of the plea request a jury trial.
8. Notice that, if the Defendant makes a deposit and fails to appear in Court at the time fixed in the citation, the Defendant is deemed to have tendered a plea of No Contest and submits to a forfeiture plus costs, fees, and surcharges imposed under Wis. Stats. Chapter 814, not to exceed the amount of the deposit. The notice shall also state that the Court may decide to summon the Defendant rather than accept the deposit and plea.
9. Notice that if the Court finds that the violation involves an ordinance that prohibits conduct that is the same as or similar to conduct prohibited by state statute punishable by fine or imprisonment or both, and that the violation resulted in damage to the property of or physical injury to a person other than the Defendant, the Court may summon the Defendant into Court to determine if restitution shall be ordered under Wis. Stat. § 800.093.
10. Notice that if the Defendant does not make a deposit and fails to appear in Court at the time fixed in the Citation, the Court may issue a summons or a warrant for the Defendant’s arrest or may enter a default judgment against the Defendant.
Chapter 42 Law Enforcement Page 4
11. Any other pertinent information.
(c) Except for parking violations, in traffic regulation actions, in Municipal Court, the Uniform Traffic Citation specified in Wis. Stat. § 345.11, shall be used in lieu of the Citation form specified in subparagraph (b) hereinabove. In actions for violations of local ordinances enacted in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 23.33 (11)(am) or Wis. Stat. § 30.77, the Citation form specified in Wis. Stat. § 23.54 shall be used in lieu of the Citation form specified in subparagraph (b) hereinabove.
(Ord. of 11-1-1993, Ord. of 01-16-06 § 1, Ord. of 8-6-10, Ord. of 3-6-14) [Amended via Ord. No. 15-026, 11/7/2015]
Sec. 42.103. Amended Citation.
The Citation may be amended once as a matter of course prior to the initial appearance of the Defendant. Otherwise the Citation may be amended only by leave of the Court or by written consent of the Defendant.
(Ord. of 11-1-1993, and 01-16-06 § 1) [Amended via Ord. No. 15-026, 11/7/2015]
Sec. 42.104. Plea of No Contest Prior to Initial Appearance.
(a) If a person is issued a Citation, the person may make a plea of No Contest and deposit as follows:
(i) traffic regulation cases, as provided in Wis. Stat. § 345.26.
(ii) In boating violations, as provided in sec. Wis. Stat. § 23.67.
(iii) In other violations, the person may make such a plea and deposit only if the Village Board has approved a deposit schedule. The person may make the plea of No Contest and deposit to the Municipal Court at any time prior to the initial appearance.
(b) The person who has made a plea and deposit under sub. (a) may appear in Court, in such case, the Court shall allow the person to withdraw his or her plea of No Contest. The person need not appear in Court.
(c) The amount of the deposit shall be set by the Municipal Judge, but shall not be effective until approved by the Village Board. The amount shall not exceed the maximum penalty for the offence, plus costs, fees, and surcharges imposed under ch. Wis. Stat. § 814.
Chapter 42 Law Enforcement Page 5
(d) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) hereinabove, a Court appearance may be required by a representative of the Village for a violation of a local ordinance in conformity with Wis. Stat. § 346.63(1). If a person fails to make a required appearance under this subsection and the Judge issues an arrest warrant, the law enforcement agency, which filed or transmitted the Uniform Citation shall file a detailed description of the warrant with the Department of Justice.
(e) Notwithstanding subsection (a) hereinabove, a Court appearance may be required if the Court finds that the violation involves an ordinance that prohibits conduct that is the same or similar to conduct prohibited by state statute punishable by fine or imprisonment or both, and that the violation resulted in damage to property of or physical injury to a person other than the alleged violator.
(Ord. of 11-1-1993, and 01-16-06 § 1) [Amended via Ord. No. 15-026, 11/7/2015]
Sec. 42.105. State Statutes Adopted by Reference.
All of the provisions of Chapter 800 of the Wisconsin Statutes entitled “Municipal Court Procedure,” including any subsequent amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein at length, including sections 800.01 (Commencement of Action), 800.02 (Form of Citation, Complaint, Summons and Warrant in Municipal Ordinance Violation Cases), 800.025 (Amended Citation and Complaint), 800.035(2)(d) (Plea of No Contest Prior to Initial Appearance), 800.035(2)(d) (Initial Appearance; Stipulation of Guilt; Deposit), 800.05 (Substitution of Municipal Judge), 800.06 (Illness, Absence or Vacancy; Pending Actions Triable by Court which Received Papers; Continuance on Vacancy and Notice of Trial), 800.065 (Temporary Reserve Judges; Service), 800.07 (Discovery in Municipal Court), 800.08 (Procedure at Trial), 800.09 (Judgment; Failure to Appear; Plea of Guilty), 800.095 (Nonpayment of Judgment or Noncompliance with Work Order; Further Proceedings), 800.10 (Fees and Costs in Municipal Court), 800.11 (Municipal Court Record and Transcript Entries), 800.115 (Relief From Judgment), 800.12 (Municipal Court Contempt Procedure), 800.13 (Recording in Municipal Court), and 800.14 (Appeal From Municipal Court Decision).
(Ord. of 11-1-1993, and 01-16-06 § 1) [Amended via Ord. No. 15-026, 11/7/2015]
Chapter 46 Mobile Homes Page 1
Chapter 46
Manufactured and Mobile Home Communities*
Article I. In General
Sec. 46.100. Adoption of Standards by Reference.
Sec. 46.101. Definitions.
Sec. 46.102. Fire Extinguishers Required.
Sec. 46.103. Location outside manufactured and mobile home communities.
Sec. 46.104. Occupancy.
Sec. 46.105. Alterations, additions and repairs.
Article II. Manufactured and Mobile Home Communities
Sec. 46.200. Management.
Sec. 46.201 Applicability of plumbing, electrical and building codes.
Sec. 46.202. Screening of communities.
Sec. 46.203. Licensing requirement.
Sec. 46.204. Zoning of communities.
Sec. 46.205. Community plan, water supply, sewage disposal and related facilities.
Sec. 46.206. Monthly parking permit fees.
Sec. 46.207. Revocation and suspension.
Sec. 46.208. License renewal.
Sec. 46.209. Penalties for violation.
__________
* Cross References--Buildings and Building Regulations, Chapter 14; Health and Sanitation, Chapter 38; Nuisances, Chapter 50; Planning Commission, Chapter 62; Solid Waste, Chapter 66; Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places, Chapter 70; Subdivision Regulations, Chapter 74; Utilities, Chapter 86; Vegetation, Chapter 90; Zoning, Chapter 94.
Chapter 46 Mobile Homes Page 2
ARTICLE I IN GENERAL
Sec. 46.100. Adoption of Standards by Reference.
All applicable Federal, State and local regulations that address standards for manufactured and mobile home communities, manufactured homes and mobile homes including, but not limited to, Wis. Stats. §§ 101.935, 101.937, 101.94, 101.95, 101.951, 101.952, 101.953, 101.954 101.96, 710.15, and 66.0435 and Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters SPS 321 and 326 and Chapter ATCP 125 are adopted by reference as fully set forth herein. In case of conflict between this Chapter and applicable Federal and State Regulations and any other Village Ordinance, the more stringent provision shall apply.
[Amended via Ord. 17-001, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 46.101. Definitions.
Whenever used in this Chapter, unless a different meaning appears from the context, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
(a) “Community” means a manufactured and mobile home community.
(b) “Licensee” means any person licensed to operate and maintain a manufactured and mobile home community under this Chapter.
(c). “Manufactured and mobile home community” means any plot or plots of ground upon which three or more manufactured homes or mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether a charge is made for the accommodation.
(d) “Mobile home” means a vehicle manufactured or assembled before June 15, 1976, designed to be towed as a single unit or in sections upon a highway by a motor vehicle and equipped and used, or intended to be used, primarily for human habitation, with walls of rigid uncollapsible construction, which has an overall length in excess of 45 feet. “Mobile home” includes the mobile home structure, its plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems, and all appliances and all other equipment carrying a manufacturer’s warranty, and includes any additions, attachments, annexes, foundations and appurtenances
(e) “Manufactured home” means a structure that is designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation and that it is certified by the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development as complying with the standards
Chapter 46 Mobile Homes Page 3
established under 42 USC §§ 5401 to 5424, and includes any additions, attachments,
annexes, foundation and appurtenances.
(f) “Unit” means a single manufactured or mobile home.
[Amended via Ord. 17-001, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 46.102. Fire Extinguishers Required.
Each occupied unit shall be equipped with a fire extinguisher, conveniently attached thereto, and
approved by SAFER, and working smoke and carbon monoxide alarms consistent with Wis. Stat.
§§ 101.645 and 101.647.
[Amended via Ord. 17-001, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 46.103. Location outside manufactured and mobile home communities.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any unit on any
street, alley or highway or other public place or on any tract of land owned by any
person within the Village, except as provided in this Chapter.
(b) No person shall park or occupy any unit on any premises situated outside a licensed
manufactured and mobile home community unless prior written approval is obtained
from the Village Board.
[Amended via Ord. 17-001, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 46.104. Occupancy.
A unit shall not be occupied unless it is properly connected with the public water supply and
sanitary systems in a licensed manufactured and mobile home community. Each manufactured
home shall meet or exceed all HUD Manufactured Housing Standards. Each mobile home shall
meet or exceed the standards required when the mobile home was placed at its current location.
[Amended via Ord. 17-001, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 46.105. Alterations, additions and repairs.
(a) Repairs to a manufactured home shall be performed in accordance with HUD
Manufactured Housing Standards and are not subject to the Wisconsin Uniform
Dwelling Code. Additions or alterations to a manufactured home shall comply with
the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code and require permits and inspections.
Chapter 46 Mobile Homes Page 4
(b) Repairs to a mobile home shall be performed in accordance with Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code standards. Additions or alterations to a mobile home shall also comply with the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code and require permits and inspections.
[Amended via Ord. 17-001, 2/22/2017]
ARTICLE II MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOME COMMUNITIES
Sec. 46.200. Management.
(a) Office. Community Management shall be available in the community during reasonable hours.
(b) Duties, owner or operator. It is the duty of the owner, operator and licensee of a manufactured and mobile home community, together with any attendants or persons in charge of the community to:
1. Keep a register, which is to be open at all reasonable times to inspection by appropriate state and local officials, of all owners and occupants of each unit located in the community.
2. Maintain the community in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times.
3. Post copies of this chapter and community rules in one or more conspicuous places in the community, where they can be easily seen by residents of the community and visitors.
(c) Duties, occupants. It is the duty of all occupants of each unit to:
1. Register with the Community Operator.
2. Maintain their site in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times.
3. Abide by all applicable Federal, State and local regulations and the rules established by the Community Management.
[Amended via Ord. 17-001, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 46.201. Applicability of plumbing, electrical and building codes.
All plumbing, electrical, building and other work on or at any community licensed under this article shall be in accordance with the Ordinances of the Village and all applicable Federal, State and Village laws and regulations pertaining to such work.
Chapter 46 Mobile Homes Page 5
[Amended via Ord. 17-001, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 46.202. Screening of Communities.
All communities shall have trees, shrubbery or fencing, that conform to Village of Weston Zoning Ordinance §§ 94.4.02(4) and 94.12.04, to screen the community from the area surrounding the community.
[Amended via Ord. 17-001, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 46.203. Licensing requirement.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a community within the Village without having first secured a community license from the Village Clerk/Treasurer. The license fee shall be consistent with Wis. Stat. § 66.0435.
(b) The Village shall collect a fee consistent with Wis. Stat. § 66.0435 for each transfer of a license.
(c) The owner, operator and licensee shall furnish information to the Village Clerk/Treasurer and the Assessor regarding each unit added to the community within five days after arrival.
[Amended via Ord. 17-001, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 46.204. Zoning of Communities.
In addition to licensing requirements, no community shall be located in any area of the Village, where it is prohibited by the applicable zoning requirements of Chapter 94 Zoning.
[Amended via Ord. 17-001, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 46.205. Community plan, water supply, sewage disposal and related facilities.
The community plan, water supply, sewage disposal, plumbing, solid wastes and service building and related facilities shall, in all respects, comply with the minimum standards set forth in the applicable administrative code and state board of health provisions.
[Amended via Ord. 17-001, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 46.206. Monthly parking permit fees.
Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.0435(3), a monthly Municipal Permit Fee shall be imposed on each unit occupying space or lots in a community. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to collect the monthly Municipal Permit Fee from the unit owner. The Licensee shall pay to the Village Clerk/Treasurer such monthly Municipal Permit Fees on or before the tenth of the month
Chapter 46 Mobile Homes Page 6
following the month for which such fees are due. The licensee is liable for the monthly
Municipal Permit Fee for any unit occupying space in the community as well as the owner and
occupant of each such unit, except that the licensee is not liable until the Village has failed, in an
action under Wis. Chapter 799, to collect the fee from the owner and occupant of the unit.
[Amended via Ord. 17-001, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 46.207. Revocation and suspension.
A community license is subject to revocation or suspension for cause by the Village Board upon
complaint filed with the Village Clerk, if the complaint is signed by a law enforcement officer,
local health officer, or building inspector, after a public hearing upon the complaint. The license
holder shall be given 10 days written notice of the hearing, and is entitled to appear and be heard
as to why the license should not be revoked. A license holder that is revoked or suspended by the
Village Board may within 20 days of the revocation or suspension, appeal the decision to the
circuit court by filing a written notice of appeal with the Village Clerk, together with a bond
executed to the Village in the sum of $500.00 with two sureties or a bonding company approved
by the Village Clerk, conditioned for the faithful prosecution of the appeal and the payment of
costs adjudged against the license holder.
[Amended via Ord. 17-001, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 46.208. License renewal.
No license will be renewed without an inspection of the community to ensure compliance with
the regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto. For the purposes of making an inspection
and securing enforcement, the Village and their authorized agents are hereby empowered to enter
any licensed community to inspect the community and all accommodations connected therewith
at any reasonable time. Upon application by any licensee, after approval by the Village Board
and upon payment of the annual license fee, the Village Clerk shall issue a certificate renewing
the license for another year, unless sooner revoked.
[Amended via Ord. 17-001, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 46.209. Penalties for violation.
Any person violating any prevision of this chapter shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in
Sec. 1.111 of this Code.
[Amended via Ord. 17-001, 2/22/2017]
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 1
Chapter 50
NUISANCES*
Sec. 50.100. Things prohibited.
Sec. 50.101. Other prohibited nuisances.
Sec. 50.102. Property Maintenance.
Sec. 50.103. Loud, Disturbing Noises Prohibited.
Sec. 50.104. Chronic Nuisance Premises.
Sec. 50.105. Accumulation of used motor vehicles.
* Cross References--Health and Sanitation, Chapter 38; Mobile Homes, Chapter 46; Solid Waste, Chapter 66; Utilities, Chapter
86.
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 2
NUISANCES
Sec. 50.100. Things prohibited.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety; but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming within other provisions of this Code:
(1) All signs and billboards, awnings and other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public so situated or constructed as to endanger the public's safety.
(2) All buildings erected, repaired or altered within the fire limits in violation of the provisions of ordinances relating to materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures within that district.
(3) All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing which purport to be or may be mistaken as an official traffic control device, railroad sign or signal or which because of its color, location, brilliance or manner of operation interferes with the effectiveness of any such device, signal or sign.
(4) All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.
(5) All limbs of trees which project over and less than 14 feet above the surface of a public sidewalk or street or less than ten feet above any other public place.
(6) All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous and unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use.
(7) All abandoned and wrecked or dilapidated motor vehicles, buses, railroad cars and house trailers.
(8) All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung less than 13 feet above the surface.
(9) All loud, discordant and unnecessary noises or vibrations of any kind which tend to cause or create a disturbance.
(10) All obstructions of and excavations in or under streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks, except as permitted by ordinance or which, although being in accordance with ordinance, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable or illegal length of time after their purpose has been accomplished.
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 3
(11) All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused basements freely accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk.
(12) All piles of dirt, wood rubble, rocks or yard waste located upon any property within the Village of Weston with the following exceptions:
a. Dirt, wood or lumber which is being actively used in connection with an ongoing construction project.
b. The storage of topsoil, fill material or lumber on the premises of a lumberyard, contract or storage yard or similar type establishment providing such business is a permitted use under the village zoning code.
c. The temporary storage of dirt, wood or lumber for a period not exceeding 90 days following the completion of a private subdivision development or construction project. In the event such material is not completely removed from the premises within 90 days by the owner of the property or the contractor responsible for the construction, the village shall cause the material to be removed with all costs associated with said removal to be assessed against the owner's property as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0701.
(Code 1982, § 4.156(1); Ord. of 10-16-2000(2), § 1; Amended via Ord. No 16-030, 6/8/2016)
Sec. 50.101. Other prohibited nuisances.
In addition to the acts, omissions, places, conditions and things declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety in Sec. 50.100, the following are declared to be a public nuisance:
(1) All abandoned refrigerators, iceboxes and other containers having airtight doors or covers from which the doors or other covers have not been removed or which are not equipped with a device for opening from the inside.
(2) Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather obstructing traffic and free use of the streets or sidewalks.
(3) Repeated or continuous violations of the ordinances of the village or the laws of the state relating to the storage of flammable liquids.
(Code 1982, § 4.156(3); Amended via Ord. No 16-030, 6/8/2016)
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 4
Sec. 50.102. Property Maintenance Code
(a) Title. This section shall be known as "The Property Maintenance Code," and may be referred to in this section as "this code."
(b) Findings and declaration of Policy. It is hereby found and declared that there exist,
in the Village, structures used for residential and nonresidential use which are, or may become in the future, substandard with respect to structure, equipment or
maintenance or further, that such conditions, including, but not limited to, structural deterioration, lack of maintenance and appearance of exterior of premises, infestation and existence of fire hazards constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, welfare and reasonable comfort of the citizens of the Village. It is further found and declared that, by reason of lack of maintenance and because of progressive deterioration,
certain properties have the further effect of creating blighting conditions and initiating slums, and that if the same are not curtailed and removed, these conditions will grow and spread and will necessitate the expenditure of large amounts of public funds to correct and eliminate such conditions, that by reason of timely regulations and restrictions contained in this code, the desirability and amenities of residential and nonresidential uses and neighborhoods may be enhanced and the public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered.
(c) Purpose. The purpose of this code is to protect the public health, safety, morals and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance, appearance and condition of residential and nonresidential premises; to fix certain responsibilities and duties upon owners and operators and distinct and separate responsibilities and duties upon occupants; to authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of residential and nonresidential premises; and to provide for the repair, demolition or vacation of premises unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use.
It is recognized that there may now be, or may in the future be, residential and nonresidential buildings, structures, yards or vacant areas and combinations thereof which are so dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous, unhygienic, overcrowded, inadequately maintained or lacking in basic equipment or facilities, light, ventilation and heating so as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, and general welfare of the people. The establishment and enforcement of minimum housing and property maintenance standards is necessary to preserve and promote the private and public interest of the community.
(d) Rules and definitions. The following words and terms, wherever used herein or referred to in this code, shall have the respective meanings assigned to them unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context. Words used in the present tense shall include the future. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the singular. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for.”
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 5
(1) Adequate. "Adequate" shall mean adequate as determined by the Building Inspector or their designee under the regulations of this chapter or adequate as determined by an authority designated by law or this chapter. "Adequately" shall mean the same as adequate.
(2) Apartment. "Apartment" means one (1) or more rooms with provisions for living, cooking, sanitary and sleeping facilities arranged for use by one (1) family.
(3) Approved. "Approved" shall mean approved by the Building Inspector or their designee under the regulations of this chapter or approved by an authority designated by law or this chapter.
(4) Attractive Appearance. "Attractive appearance" refers to the exterior appearance of buildings, structures, stairs, porches, and similar appurtenances and the improvement, planting and landscaping of yards and vacant areas. The determination of "attractive" used herein shall be as determined by the Building Inspector under the regulations of this chapter or as determined by an authority designated by law or this chapter.
(5) Basement. "Basement" means that portion of a dwelling between floor and ceiling which is below or partly below and partly above grade but so located that the vertical distance from the grade to the floor below is more than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling.
(6) Blighted Property. “Blighted property” means any property, on which there exists any one or more of the following conditions or activities, is a blighted property for purpose of this chapter:
a. Abandoned building or structure.
1. A building or structure which is not occupied, inhabited, used, or secured. For purposes of this Chapter, a building or structure is unsecured when it is unlocked or the public can gain entry without the consent of the owner.
2. Any partially constructed, reconstructed or demolished building or structure upon which work is abandoned. Work is deemed abandoned when there is no valid and current building or demolition permit or when there has not been any substantial work on the project for six months.
b. Attractive Nuisance. Property which is in an unsecured state so as to potentially constitute an attraction to children, a harbor for vagrants,
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 6
criminals, or other unauthorized persons, or so as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing a nuisance or unlawful act.
c. A Building or Structure which is in a State of Disrepair.
1. Any building or other structure which by reason of rot, weakened joints, walls, floors, underpinning, roof, ceilings, or insecure foundation, or other cause has become dilapidated or deteriorated.
2. Any building or other structure with exterior walls and /or roof coverings which have become so deteriorated as to not provide adequate weather protection and be likely to, or have resulted in, termite infestation or dry rot.
3. Buildings or structures with broken or missing windows or doors which constitute a hazardous condition or a potential attraction to trespassers. For purposes of this chapter “window” shall include any glazed opening, including glazed doors, which upon a yard, court, or vent shaft open unobstructed to the sky.
4. Buildings or structures including, but not limited to, walls, windows, fences, signs, retaining walls, driveways, or walkways which are obsolete, broken, deteriorated, or substantially defaced to the extent that the disrepair visually impacts on neighboring property or presents a risk to public safety. For purposes of this chapter “defaced” includes, but is not limited to, writings, inscriptions, figures, scratches, or other markings commonly referred to as “graffiti” and peeling, flaking, blistering, or otherwise deteriorated paint.
d. Property Inadequately Maintained.
1. Property which is not kept clean and sanitary and free from all accumulations of offensive matter or odor including, but not limited to, overgrown or dead or decayed trees, weeds or other vegetation, rank growth, dead organic matter, rubbish, junk, garbage, animal intestinal waste and urine, and toxic or otherwise hazardous liquids and substances and material. For the purposes of this section the term “rubbish” shall include combustible and noncombustible waste
materials, except garbage; and the term shall also include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible material; and the term shall also include paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, hay, straw, tin cans, metal, mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust; and the term shall also include animal feed and the products of and residue from animal quarters.
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 7
2. Property which constitutes a fire hazard or condition considered dangerous to the public health, safety, and general welfare.
3. Property which is likely to or does harbor rats or other vectors, vermin, feral pets, or other non-domesticated animal nuisances.
4. Property which substantially detracts from the aesthetic and economic values of neighboring properties including, but not limited to, personal property and wares and foodstuffs, premises garbage and refuse receptacles, and commercial and industrial business activities which are inadequately buffered from any street, sidewalk, or other publicly trafficked area or such buffering which is inadequately maintained.
5. Landscaping which is inadequately maintained or which is not installed as required by village codes or any permit issued in accordance with such codes.
6. Matter including, but not limited to, smoke, odors, dust, dirt, debris, fumes, and sprays which is permitted to be transported by wind, or otherwise upon any street, course, alley, sidewalk, yard, park, or other public or private property and which is determined to be a violation of federal, state, regional, or local air quality regulations.
7. Property including, but not limited to, building façade, window, doorway, driveway, walkway, fence, wall, landscaped planter or area, sidewalk, curb and gutter, and edge of street pavement on which dirt, litter, vegetation, garbage, refuse, debris, flyers, or circulars have accumulated.
8. Property on which a swimming pool, pond, stream or other body of water which is abandoned, unattended, unfiltered, or not otherwise maintained, resulting in the water becoming polluted. “Polluted water” is defined for the purpose of this chapter, as water which contains bacterial growth, remains of garbage, refuse, debris, papers and any other foreign matter or material which constitutes an unhealthy or unsafe condition.
9. Parking lots, driveways, paths, and other areas used or intended to be used for commercial and industrial business activities including, but not limited to, dismantling, processing, transferring, handling, transporting, storing, compounding, or assembling which are inadequately maintained and pose a risk of harm to public health or safety including, but not limited to, unpaved surfaces which generate
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 8
fugitive dust and paved surfaces with cracks, potholes, or other breaks.
10. Property on which recyclable materials are openly stored. For the purposes of this chapter, “open storage” means storage on private property other than in a completely enclosed building. Materials shall be deemed to be held in “open storage” even though screened from public view, or view of residents of adjacent property, by a fence or other such partition.
11. Property which is not securely fenced or adequately lighted to prevent illegal access and activity related to the dumping of garbage, waste, debris and litter. “Recyclable materials” includes any materials, goods, vehicles, machinery, appliances, product or article, new or used, which is suitable for reuse.
e. Property Which Creates a Dangerous Condition.
1. Property having a topography, geology, or configuration which, as a result of grading operations, erosion control, sedimentation control work, or other improvements to said property, causes erosion, subsidence, unstable soil conditions, or surface or subsurface drainage problems as to harm or pose a risk of harm to adjacent properties.
2. Property where on any condition or object obscures the visibility of public street intersections to the public so as to constitute a hazard, including but not limited to, landscaping, fencing, signs, posts, or equipment.
3. Conditions which due to their accessibility to the public pose a hazard including, but not limited to, unused and broken equipment, abandoned wells, shafts, or basements, hazardous or unprotected pools, ponds, or excavations, structurally unsound fences or structures, machinery which is inadequately secured or protected, lumber, trash, fences or debris that may pose a hazard to the public, storage of chemicals, gas, oil, or toxic or flammable liquids.
(7) Boarding House: See Lodging House and Lodging Room.
(8) Building. "Building" means a combination of materials to form a construction that is safe and stable, and adapted to permanent or continuous occupancy for assembly, business, education, high hazard, industrial, institutional, mercantile, residential, or storage purpose; the term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or portion thereof." For the purpose of this CODE each
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 9
portion of a building completely separated from other portions by an unpierced fire wall shall be considered as a separate building.
(9) Compliance Inspection. An inspection performed in conjunction with a lawful order of the Chairperson of the Weston Public Safety Committee, Village Administrator, Chief of Police, Village Fire Inspector, Zoning Administrator, Property Inspector or Building Inspector or their designees for the purpose of certifying the fulfillment of an official requirement listed in the order.
(10) Cooperative Living Arrangement. A “cooperative living arrangement” shall mean a collective number of individuals connected by membership in a cooperative, who equally share ownership, occupancy and control of a dwelling and who live, cook and share expenses as a bona fide single housekeeping unit. For the purposes of determining the applicability of the Village of Weston Municipal Code relating to construction and maintenance of buildings, a building occupied by a cooperative living arrangement shall be construed to be
a lodging house and shall meet all the requirements of same, except where an exception is explicitly provided in the ordinances.
(11) Deterioration. The condition of a building or part thereof characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, lack of maintenance or excessive use. All exterior wood and composition surfaces shall be properly protected from the elements and against decay by paint, stain or other protective coating and applied in a workmanlike manner.
(12) Dwelling. "Dwelling" is a place of abode, a residence or house for use by one
(1) or more persons, excluding hotels or motels.
(13) Dwelling Unit. "Dwelling unit" means one (1) or more rooms with provisions for living, cooking, sanitary, and sleeping facilities arranged for use by one (1) family.
(14) Elements. Any element, whether created by nature or by man, which, with reasonable foreseeability could carry litter from one place to another. Elements shall include, but not be limited to, air current, rain, water current and animals.
(15) Exposed to Public View. Any premises, or any part thereof, or any building, or any part thereof, which may be viewed by the public.
(16) Exterior of the Premises. Open space on the premises outside of any building thereon.
(17) Extermination. "Extermination" shall mean the control or elimination of infestation by eliminating harboring places and removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as food, and by poisoning, spraying,
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 10
trapping, fumigation by a licensed fumigator or any other effective elimination procedure.
(18) Family. A “family” is an individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or legal adoption living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, including foster children, domestic servants and not more than four (4) roomers, except that the term family shall not, in SF-S, SF-L, 2F, MF, and MH residence districts, include more than one roomer except where such dwelling unit is owner-occupied. In any residence district, a family may
consist of two unrelated adults and the minor children of each. Such family may not include any roomers except where the dwelling unit is owner-occupied. For the purpose of this section, "children" means natural children, grandchildren, legally adopted children, stepchildren, foster children, or a ward as determined in a legal guardianship proceeding. Up to two (2) personal attendants who provide services for family members or roomers who, because of advanced age or a physical or mental disability, need assistance with activities of daily living shall be considered part of the "family." Such services may include personal care, housekeeping, meal preparation, laundry or companionship.
(19) Friable Material. "Friable material" shall mean any material applied on ceilings, walls, structural members, piping, duct work, or any other part of a building which when dry may be crumbled, pulverized, or reduced to powder by hand pressure. The term includes non-friable material after such previously non- friable material becomes damaged to the extent that when dry it may be crumbled, pulverized, or reduced to powder by hand pressure.
(20) Garbage. Decayed and decomposed animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preemption, cooking and consumption of food. (See also Refuse and Rubbish)
(21) Good Working Condition. "Good working condition" shall mean capable of performing the task for which it was designed and in the manner intended by this code.
(22) Habitable Space. "Habitable space" is one (1) or more rooms in a dwelling used primarily for sleeping, living or dining purposes.
(23) Impervious to Water. "Impervious to water" shall mean constructed of concrete, cement block, terrazzo, brick, tile, or other material approved by the Building Inspector, and having tight fitting joints, and not having more than four and one- half percent (4 1/2%) absorption by test.
(24) Infestation. "Infestation" means the sustained presence of household pests, insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on the premises, which constitute a health hazard.
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 11
(25) Litter. Includes any uncontainerized man-made or man-used waste which, if deposited within the Village otherwise than in a litter receptacle, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare or to impair the environment of the citizens of the Village. Litter may include, but is not limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse, confetti, debris, grass clippings, leaves or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper, magazine, glass, metal, plastic or paper container or other construction material, motor vehicle part, furniture, appliances, oil, carcass of a dead animal or nauseous or offensive matter of any kind or any object likely to injure any person or create a traffic hazard.
(26) Living Room. "Living room" shall mean a room used primarily for living, dining or cooking purposes.
(27) Lodging House. "Lodging house" is a dwelling containing lodging rooms that will accommodate five (5) or more persons not members of a family.
(28) Lodging Room. "Lodging room" is a portion of a dwelling used primarily for sleeping and living purposes, excluding cooking facilities.
(29) Mixed Occupancy. Any building containing one or more dwelling units or rooming units and also having a portion thereof devoted to nondwelling uses or used as a hotel.
(30) Nuisance.
a. Any public nuisance, as defined by statute or this Chapter.
b. Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions exists.
(31) Operator. Any person who has charge, care or control of a dwelling or premises, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or lodging rooms are located or let, whether with or without the knowledge and consent of the owner.
(32) Owner. The term "owner" shall mean every person, firm, partnership, or any individual member thereof, corporation, business organization of any kind, the state, the country, the village, any sewer district, drainage district, the University of Wisconsin and any associated corporation or organization, and any other public or quasi-public corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property under consideration and shall include the representative, officer, agent or other person having the ownership, control, custody or management of any building. Owner does not include any person whose legal or equitable
interest in the building is a security interest derived solely from the extension of credit to permit construction or remodeling of the dwelling or purchase of the dwelling by a third party.
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 12
(33) Park. A public or private park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any public park private area devoted to active or passive recreation or any other area under the supervision of the Village.
(34) Parking lot. Any private or public property with provisions for parking vehicles to which the public is invited or which the public is permitted to use or which is visible from any public place or private premises.
(35) Person. A "person" shall mean and include any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
(36) Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or structures thereon.
(37) Private Premises. Any dwelling, house, building, or other structure designed to be used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule, mailbox or other structure belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling house, building or other structure.
(38) Properly. "Properly" shall mean as deemed proper by the Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector or their designee under the regulations of this chapter or deemed proper by an authority designated by law of this chapter.
(39) Provided. "Provided" shall mean furnished, supplied, paid for or under control of the owner.
(40) Public Place. All streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys or other public ways and parks, squares, plazas, grounds and buildings frequented by the general public, whether publicly or privately owned.
(41) Refuse. All decayed and decomposed solid waste, except body wastes, including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid wastes. (See also Garbage and Rubbish)
(42) Residential Building. A "residential building" is a building which is arranged, designed, used, or intended to be used for residential occupancy by one (1) or more families or lodgers, and which includes, but is not limited to, the following types:
a. Single-family detached dwellings. b. Two-family detached dwellings.
c. Multiple-family dwellings (including apartment hotels.)
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 13
d. Lodging houses.
e. Fraternity and sorority houses.
For the purpose of this chapter, any building containing any of the above uses together with other uses shall be considered a residential building.
(43) Room. A “room” is a partitioned part of the inside of a building. For the purpose of this definition, partition shall mean something that divides interior space, especially an interior dividing wall. A wall is one of the sides of a room or building connecting floor and ceiling and may also include anything which encloses or separates space. A partition or wall which intrudes into the space by more than one-third (1/3) of the least dimension of an existing room may be regarded as creating an additional separate room. The partitioned space shall be considered as a room if privacy is implied; light and ventilation are affected; or
a bedroom through a bedroom, bathroom through a bedroom or bedroom through a bathroom situation is created.
(44) Rooming House. See Lodging House and Lodging Room.
(45) Rubbish. Solid wastes consisting of both combustible and non-combustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. (See also Garbage and Refuse)
(46) Sleeping Room. A "sleeping room" shall mean a room used for sleeping purposes.
(47) Structure. "Structure" is anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground, or attached to something having permanent location on the ground.
(48) Supplied. "Supplied" shall mean paid for, furnished, provided by or under control of the owner or operator
(e) Applicability. Every residential, nonresidential or mixed occupancy building and the land on which it is situated, used or intended to be used for dwelling, Mobile Home Park, commercial, business or industrial occupancy shall comply with the provisions of this code, whether or not such building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment of this code.
(f) Minimum standards for basic equipment, lighting, ventilation, heating and electrical service.
(1) The purpose of this subsection is to establish minimum standards for basic equipment, lighting, ventilation, and electrical services for all residential
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 14
buildings and parts thereof and to obtain the public and private benefits accruing from the provision of such services. A suitable environment for safe and healthy living is encouraged by adequate water and sanitary facilities, proper storage
and disposal of garbage, recyclables, and other refuse, safe means of egress, provision of light, air, heat and electrical service.
(2) No person shall occupy as an owner or let to another for occupancy any space in a residential building for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
a. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink, a flush water closet, a lavatory basin and a bathtub or shower, all in good working condition and properly connected to hot and cold water lines and to an approved water and sewer system. The flush water closet and bathtub or shower shall be contained within a separate room. Water pressure shall be available at all fixtures as specified in Wis. Admin. Code sec. SPS 382.40.
b. Every residential building shall have supplied water heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working conditions, are properly connected with the hot water lines required hereunder and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at any required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than one hundred ten (110) degrees Fahrenheit.
c. The owner of every residential building shall be responsible for supplying such building with garbage, recycling and refuse storage as required in Chapter 66, "Village of Weston Solid Waste Ordinance," Village of Weston Municipal Code.
d. Every dwelling unit and lodging room shall have direct access to at least two (2) accessible unobstructed means of egress leading to a safe and open public street. Exterior stairways or exit platforms, or a combination
thereof, will be permitted as second exits provided the platform or stairways terminate at a point not more than fifteen (15) feet above the grade directly below the lowest platform. All stairs shall terminate at grade or a platform. Platforms shall have a minimum area of fourteen (14)
square feet within a minimum dimension of three (3) feet.
All stairways and platforms shall be protected with handrails and guardrails as specified in Wis. Admin. Code secs. SPS 321.04(3) or Wisconsin Commercial Building Code SPS 361 through SPS 366 as dictated by the type of occupancy in the building. Existing variances to the height limitations specified above may be approved by the Weston Community Life and Public Safety Committee and the Village Board provided platforms or stairs are maintained in a sound structural condition.
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 15
e. Each lodging house shall provide at least one (1) flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to an approved water and sewer system and in good working condition for each seven (7) persons or fraction thereof residing therein including members of the operator's family wherever they share use of said facilities, except that the required number of bathtubs or showers may be reduced by the Weston Community Life and Public Safety Committee and the Village Board for lodging houses utilizing gang bathrooms containing multiple bathtubs or showers. All such facilities shall be located on the floor occupied by persons sharing such facilities or the floor directly above or below and shall be accessible from a common hall or passageway. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water at all times.
f. Every living, sleeping, kitchen or bathroom shall have available natural light and ventilation complying with SPS 321.05 or Wisconsin Commercial Building Code as dictated by the occupancy of the building. Existing light and ventilation conditions which do not comply with Comm. Codes may remain in use with the granting of a variance by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Exhaust ventilation shall be installed in all toilet rooms except those having only one (1) fixture (water closet or one urinal) and the window area is greater than four (4) square feet and more than two (2) square feet is openable directly to the exterior of the building. The volume of air exhausted shall not be less than two (2) cubic feet per minute per square foot of floor area.
All openable windows shall be protected with insect screens equivalent to not less than sixteen (16) wire mesh installed to prevent the entrance of flies, mosquitoes and other insects, annually during May, before June 1, and maintained until October 1.
All exterior uninsulated doors and non-thermo glazed windows shall have storm windows or storm doors installed or maintained to prevent excessive drafts and heat loss no earlier than October 15, but no later than November
15 annually. All common area exterior doors shall have door closers, and all installed hardware shall be properly maintained.
g. Electrical. Every dwelling unit and all public and common areas in multiple dwellings shall be supplied with electrical service, outlets, and fixtures which shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition, and shall be connected to a source of electric power in a manner prescribed by the Wisconsin Electric Code. The minimum capacity of such electrical services and the minimum number of outlets and fixtures shall be as listed below. (For the purpose of this
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 16
section "electrical service" shall mean: "The conductors and equipment for delivering electrical energy from the supply system to the wiring system
of the premises or the unit served." The electrical service shall be of sufficient size to handle the load connected to it. The branch circuits shall be protected by S-type or equivalent safety type, tamper-proof fuses or circuit breaker, not to exceed the amp/capacity of the smallest wire size in the circuit.
i. Every dwelling unit or room shall have electric service capable of providing at least three (3) watts per square foot of total floor area (air conditioners, ranges, space heaters and motor drive equipment
1/8 hp. or over excluded).
ii. Every lavatory, bathroom, kitchen or kitchenette, dining room, laundry room, furnace room shall contain at least one (1) approved ceiling or wall type electric light fixture equipped with sufficient lamps or tubes to provide no less than five (5) foot candles at floor level at center of room. Where more than one (1) fixture is used or required, they shall be equally spaced as far as practicable. (A switched outlet may be substituted for ceiling or wall fixture in dining room.)
iii. Convenience outlet receptacles shall be provided as follows: (measurements are at room perimeter and include doors and door- alcoves.)
1. Living Room - 1 per 75 sq. ft. or major fraction (minimum of
2)
2. Dining Room - 1 per 75 sq. ft. or major fraction (minimum of
2)
3. Kitchen - 1 per 8 ft. or fraction of counter top and preparation area measured at rear (preparation area includes countertops, sinks, range tops, and all other similar areas at counter height.) Island type work areas require one for each 8 ft. or less of length. Separate outlets shall be provided for refrigerators.
4. Dining Areas in Kitchen - 1 per 75 sq. ft. or major fraction.
5. Bedroom - 1 per 75 sq. ft. or major fraction (minimum of 2).
6. Laundry - 1 (when laundry equipment is present.)
7. Bathrooms and Lavatories - 1 (may be part of wall fixture if
72.0 inches or less from floor).
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 17
8. Other Habitable Rooms - minimum of 2.
Fixed appliances exceeding 1/8 hp. or 300 watts rating shall not be connected to general purpose branch circuits. Convenience outlets are to be located to prevent use of extension cords (NEC 400-8). All cords and temporary wiring not in compliance with NEC Article
400-A, and all exposed abandoned wiring shall be removed immediately upon the direction of the Building Inspector, S.A.F.E.R. Fire Chief, or S.A.F.E.R. Fire Department.
iv. Switches or equivalent devices for turning on one (1) light in each room or passageway shall be located so as to conveniently control the area to be lighted.
v. Public halls and stairways in multiple dwellings shall be adequately lighted by natural or electric light at all times, so as to provide in all parts thereof at least two and one-half (2 1/2) foot candles of light at the tread or floor level. Halls and stairways in structures containing not more than three (3) dwelling units may be supplied with conveniently located switches, controlling the lighting system, which may be turned on when needed. Other occupancies require full-time or automatic time-switched lighting. When dwelling unit doors open to the outside a minimum of two and one-half (2 1/2) foot candles of illumination at the locks are required. Required parking areas for more than three (3) cars shall be lighted to a minimum of one (1)
foot candle on all surfaces.
vi. When the service in existing residential building is changed for any reason, the entire building electrical system shall be brought to the above minimum standards. The minimum replacement electrical service shall be:
1. 100 amp for first two (2) dwelling units in a building.
2. 50 amp for each additional unit.
Where electric heat and air conditioner over 20 amps are added or in place, additional capacity to cover this demand is required. All electrical work shall be done in accordance with the National
Electric Code and Wisconsin SPS 316.
h. Heating. All habitable rooms, kitchens and bathrooms shall be provided with permanently connected heating system. This heating system shall be maintained in a safe and efficient condition by a qualified person and a record kept at the premises showing the date of service and by whom. A minimum temperature of
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 18
sixty-seven (67) degrees Fahrenheit shall be maintained in all habitable rooms, kitchens and bathrooms. The only exception to this provision is that the occupant of a room or an apartment may maintain a lesser temperature than is specified above as long as it does not affect the temperature in other habitable areas of the building.
i. Illumination. Illumination shall be provided at all intersections of passageways, at all exits, exit discharges, and at the head, foot and landings of every stairway in all buildings having three (3) or more apartments and/or lodging houses. The illumination shall be provided during the period commencing one (1) hour before sunset and ending one (1) hour after sunrise.
Every residential building that will accommodate three (3) or more families, twenty (20) persons, or contains more than (4) lodging rooms, shall have signs at the emergency exit doors or other places as may be necessary to direct the occupant to the exit doorways. The signs shall be red illuminated translucent
exit signs bearing the word EXIT in plain letters not less than five (5”) inches in height.
j. The owner or operator of every residential building shall not provide, use, or permit to be used, and the occupant shall not provide, use, or permit to be used, in any room other than a kitchen, any equipment designed or intended to be used for cooking or preparation of meals.
k. Every owner of a multi-family dwelling shall make available to the occupants the names of two (2) or more persons that may be called to arrange for emergency work. The names with the telephone numbers shall be posted in a conspicuous place readily accessible to the occupants. The names with the telephone numbers shall be revised periodically to maintain accurate information at all times.
(g) Duties and Responsibilities of Owners and Operators.
(1) Maintenance of Exterior of Premises. The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be kept free of all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of the occupant, pedestrians, or any other person utilizing the premises, and free of unsanitary conditions. Any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated by the owner or operator. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator to keep the premises free of hazards, which include, but are not limited to, the following:
(a) Refuse, such as brush, weeds, yard waste, broken glass, stumps, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris.
(b) Natural growth, such as dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth, which, by reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 19
damage, constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity. Trees shall be kept pruned and trimmed to prevent such conditions.
(c) Overhangs, such as loose and other hanging objects, which, by reason of location above ground level, constitute a danger of falling on the persons in the vicinity.
(d) The exterior of the premises, the exterior of structures and the condition of accessory structures shall be maintained so that the appearance of the premises and structures shall not constitute a blighting factor.
(e) All courts, yards, or other areas on the premises shall be properly graded to divert water away from the building. Adjacent ground surface shall be sloped away from the structure with a grading of at least one-half (1/2) inch per foot for a minimum of five (5) feet where possible or by other means such as eaves troughs and downspout extensions.
(f) All exterior property areas shall be properly maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from debris, rubbish or garbage, physical hazards, rodent harborage and infestation, and animal feces. All animal feces shall be removed per Weston Municipal Code Sec. 10.129(a) or Sec. 10.130.
(g) Fences, other minor construction, walks, driveways, parking areas and similar paved areas shall be properly maintained in a safe, sanitary and substantial condition. Approved walks shall provide convenient all weather access to buildings.
(h) Exterior surfaces of buildings and structures not inherently resistant to deterioration shall be treated with a protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative which will provide adequate resistance to weathering and maintain an attractive appearance. Any exterior surface treated with paint or other preservative shall be maintained so as to prevent chipping, cracking or other deterioration of the exterior surface or the surface treatment and to present an attractive appearance. All paint or other preservative shall be applied in a workman like fashion. Roofs shall be maintained to prevent leaking of water in to the building.
(2) Storage of Commercial and Industrial Material. There shall not be stored or used at any location visible from the sidewalk, street or other public areas, equipment and materials relating to commercial or industrial use unless permitted under the Village of Weston Municipal Code, Chapter 94 for the premises.
(3) General Maintenance. The exterior of every commercial structure or accessory structure, except accessory farm structures, including fences or enclosures, shall be maintained in good repair. The same shall be maintained free of broken
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 20
glass, loose shingles, crumbing stone or brick, excessive peeling paint, loose boards or other conditions reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance to the end that the property itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated and adjoining properties protected from blighting influences.
(4) Safe and sanitary maintenance of property.
1. The purpose of this subsection is to recognize the private and public benefits resulting from the safe, sanitary and attractive maintenance of residential and nonresidential buildings, structures, yards, or vacant areas. Attractive and well-maintained property will enhance the neighborhood and Village, and provide a suitable environment for increasing physical and monetary values.
2. Every owner or operator shall improve and maintain all property under his/her control to comply with the following minimum requirements:
a. All courts, yards, or other areas on the premises shall be properly graded to divert water away from the building. Adjacent ground surface shall be sloped away from the structure with a grading of at least one-half (1/2) inch per foot for a minimum of five (5) feet where possible or by other means such as eaves troughs and downspout extensions.
b. All exterior property areas shall be kept free from noxious weeds, as defined in Wisconsin Statutes and the Village of Weston Municipal Code.
c. All exterior property areas shall be properly maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from debris, rubbish or garbage, physical hazards, rodent harborage and infestation, and animal feces. All animal feces shall be removed per Sec. 10.129(a) or Sec.
10.130 of the Weston Municipal Code.
d. Fences, other minor construction, walks, driveways, parking areas and similar paved areas shall be properly maintained in a safe, sanitary and substantial condition. Approved walks shall provide convenient all weather access to buildings.
e. Exterior surfaces of buildings and structures not inherently resistant to deterioration shall be treated with a protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative which will provide adequate resistance to weathering and maintain an attractive appearance. Any exterior surface treated with paint or other preservative shall be maintained so as to prevent chipping, cracking or other
deterioration of the exterior surface or the surface treatment, and to
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 21
present an attractive appearance. All paint or other preservative shall be applied in a workman like fashion. Roofs shall be maintained to prevent leaking of water in to the building.
f. Landscaping, plantings and other decorative surface treatments, including common species of grass, shall be installed if necessary and maintained to present an attractive appearance in all court and yard areas. Lawns shall be maintained to a height not to exceed eight inches (8") in length. Plantings shall be maintained so as not to present hazards to adjoining properties or to persons or vehicles traveling on public ways and shall be maintained so as to enhance the appearance and value of the property on which located and thereby the appearance and value of the neighborhood and Village. The Village, after due notice to the property owner, will cause to
be cut or trimmed nonconforming areas and place said cost as a special assessment/charge due against the property.
g. Every interior floor, wall and ceiling, including door and window assemblies, shall be kept clean and in good repair, and shall be capable of affording privacy. Any sagging or bulging shall be properly repaired to a level or plumb position. All surfaces shall be free from serious cracking, irregularities, and peeling paint. A waterproof, hard surface shall be provided in spaces subject to moisture. All surface repairs shall be completed to closely match the existing surface color and texture. Floor surfacing shall provide ease of maintenance and durability appropriate for the use of the room.
h. Every foundation, exterior wall, floor and roof shall be reasonably weather tight, watertight and rodent proof and shall be kept in proper repair and shall be capable of affording privacy. Any sagging or bulging shall be properly repaired to a level or plumb position. All chimneys and breeching shall be so constructed and maintained so as to insure that it safely and properly removes the products of combustion from the building. Every gap allowing the accumulation of dirt or other objectionable matter in bathing, toilet, or food preparation areas shall be tightly sealed with an impervious and cleanable material.
i. Every window, exterior door, interior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably weather tight, watertight and rodent proof and kept in proper repair. All common area exterior doors of two or more dwelling units are required to have self-closing hardware. All door and window hardware shall be installed and maintained in proper working condition.
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 22
j. Every inside and outside stair, every porch, and every appurtenance thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use
and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be kept in proper condition and repair and shall present an attractive appearance. All interior and exterior stairs, steps, porches and every appurtenance thereto shall comply with the requirements specified in Wis. Admin. Code Sections.
SPS 321.04 or SPS 362, and IBC 2009 as dictated by the type of occupancy in the building.
k. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good working condition, free from defects, leaks and obstructions.
l. Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor surface shall be properly constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in clean and sanitary condition.
m. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility shall be so constructed, installed and maintained so that it will function in a proper working condition.
n. The owner of any dwelling or apartment in which a cooking stove and/or refrigerator are furnished for the use of the tenants as part of a rental agreement, shall keep such cooking stove and/or refrigerator in good mechanical condition.
o. It shall be the responsibility of the tenant to maintain supplied facilities in a clean and sanitary condition when contained within the tenant's dwelling unit.
p. Smoke and CO alarms shall be installed and maintained per Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Codes SPS 321.09, SPS 321.097 , Wisconsin Commercial Building Codes SPS 362.1200, SPS
362.0907, and/or Wis. Stat. § 101.645 as dictated by the type of occupancy in the building.
q. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment, or utility which is required under this chapter to be removed from, shut off from, or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, dwelling unit, or lodging room, let or occupied by him/her, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs are in process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by an authorized inspector.
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 23
r. Abandoned Fuel Oil Tanks. Abandoned fuel oil tanks shall be removed from the building.
s. The S.A.F.E.R. Fire Prevention Officer / Inspector or the S.A.F.E.R. Fire Chief shall have the authority under this chapter to enter and commence a structural fire inspection. Any violations found should be remedied by the owner of the property. If the owner does not comply, penalties may be assessed under this chapter. This is to be considered a separate offense and in addition to any State Code violations.
t. All unpaved driveways and parking areas shall be maintained in a dust-free condition and shall be graded so that no potholes exist. No stone or other materials may be deposited in the street.
u. Removal of Debris.
i. No person shall dispose of rocks, trees, stumps, waste building material or other debris from land development, building construction, street grading, or installation of underground utilities, upon the surface of any land in the Village of Weston except at approved disposal sites.
ii. No land owner shall allow an accumulation of rocks, trees, stumps, waste building material or other debris from land development, building construction, street grading, or installation of underground utilities upon the surface of his land for a period of more than ten (10) days.
iii. All developed or formally developed vacant lands within the Village shall be leveled off to permit the mowing of tall grass and weeds as outlined within the Weston Municipal Code. This includes the removal of stones, bottles, wire, and other debris that will interfere with mowing operations.
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 24
(h) Fixing the responsibility of Owners, Operators and Occupants.
(1) The purpose of this subsection is to fix the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants of residential buildings.
(2) The responsibility of owners, operators, and occupants of residential buildings is as follows:
a. Every owner of a residential building containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean, proper and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the residential building and premises thereof.
b. Every occupant of a residential building shall keep in a clean, proper and sanitary condition that part of the residential building and premises thereof which he/she occupies and controls. Every occupant of a residential building shall dispose of all his/her refuse, recycling and garbage in the containers required by the Weston Municipal Code.
c. Every owner of a residential building shall be responsible for hanging, installing, and maintaining all screens, double or storm doors, and windows whenever the same are required under the provisions of the Weston Municipal Code.
d. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a residential building shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing, by failure of the owner to maintain a residential building in a reasonable condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two (2) or more of the dwelling units or lodging rooms in any residential building or in the shared or public parts of any residential building, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
e. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
f. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep the dwelling unit clean and clear of clutter, trash, and debris for their own safety and the safety of others.
g. The owner or operator shall not occupy, or let to another for occupancy, any space in a residential building unless it is clean, sanitary, fit for human
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 25
occupancy, complies with the requirements of the Weston Municipal Codes, the Village of Weston Building Inspector and/or the S.A.F.E.R.
Fire Prevention Officer / Inspector.
h. Every owner of a rental unit shall make available to the occupants the names of two (2) or more persons that may be called to arrange for emergency work. The names with the telephone numbers shall be posted
in a conspicuous place readily accessible to the occupants. The names with the telephone numbers shall be revised periodically to maintain accurate information at all times.
(i) Designation of unfit buildings or structures and legal procedures of repair or razing.
(1) The purpose of this section is to provide for the designation and repair or razing of those buildings or structures which are so dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous, unhygienic, inadequately maintained or lacking in basic equipment, facilities, light, ventilation, and heating so as to constitute a menace to the occupants or to the public.
(2) Any building or structure which shall be found to have any of the following defects may be designated as unfit for human habitation and in need of repairs or razing and so placarded by the Building Inspector. Legal notice shall be served upon the owner and on the operator of any building:
(a) Which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, dangerous, unsanitary, unsafe, or vermin infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public.
(b) Which lacks illumination, ventilation, heating, basic equipment or sanitary facilities adequate to protect the health, safety, or general welfare of the occupants or of the public.
(c) Which, because of its general condition, location, or appearance, is a blighting influence or causes decreasing physical or monetary value of property in the neighborhood.
(3) Any building or structure or part thereof designated and placarded by the Building Inspector as unfit for human habitation and in need of repairs or razing shall be vacated within a reasonable time as ordered by the Building Inspector.
(4) No building or structure, or part thereof, which has been designated and placarded as unfit for human habitation and in need of repairs or razing shall again be used for human habitation until written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by, the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall remove such placard whenever the defect, or defects, upon which the designation and placarding action were based have been eliminated.
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 26
(5) No person shall deface or remove the placard from any building or structure, or part thereof, which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded as such.
(6) Any building or structure, or part thereof, designated as unfit for human habitation and in need of repairs or razing by the Building Inspector, which in the opinion of the Building Inspector, would be unreasonable to repair shall be razed or removed upon legal written service of the order of the Building
Inspector. If the owner shall fail or refuse to comply with the order, the Building Inspector shall refer such violation to the Village Attorney who will start any legal proceedings necessary to cause such building to be razed or removed as a violation of this chapter.
(7)
(a) Any building which has been vacant for more than thirty (30) days for any reason and has been damaged, illegally entered or vandalized shall be secured against entry. This shall include adequately boarding up doors, windows and other openings in a workmanlike manner so as to prevent illegal entry, vandalism or damage.
(b) The building utilities, plumbing, electrical and heating systems in vacant buildings shall be maintained at all times in a safe condition or inactivated so as to prevent the possibility of damage to the structure by the failure of such utilities and so as to prevent hazardous and dangerous conditions.
(c) When any building has been damaged by fire or other cause, and when hazardous or dangerous conditions exist, and when such building cannot be secured by conventional locking or boarding up of windows and doors, such building shall be fenced off so as to prevent access and entry to the structure and the area immediately surrounding the structure within three (3) days of the damage by fire or other cause.
(j) Litter Control.
(1) Litter Collections and Storage Area. Every owner, occupant or lessee of a building used for residential, business or commercial purposes shall maintain litter collection and storage areas in a clean condition and insure that all litter is properly containerized. Failure to so maintain clean litter collection and storage areas shall constitute a violation of this subsection.
(2) Duty to Collect Litter Before it is Carried From the premises. All litter that is subject to movement by the elements shall be secured by the owner of the premises where it is found before the litter is allowed to be removed from the premises by the elements.
(3) Neglected Premises Visible to the Public. It shall be the duty of any person owning or controlling any premises, including vacant lots visible from any public
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 27
place or private premises, to maintain such premises in a reasonable clean and orderly manner. It shall be a violation of this subsection to abandon,
neglect or disregard the condition or appearance of any premises so as to permit it to accumulate litter.
(4) Areas Around Business Premises. The owner or person in control of any public place, including, but not limited to, restaurants, shopping centers, fast food outlets, stores, hotels, motels, industrial establishments, office buildings, apartment buildings, housing projects, gas stations and hospital and clinics shall at all times keep the premises clean of all litter and shall take measures, including daily cleanup of the premises, to prevent litter from being carried by the elements to adjoining premises. It shall be a violation of this subsection to abandon, neglect or disregard to the condition or appearance of such premises
so as to permit it to accumulate litter.
(5) Loading and Unloading Docks. The person owning, operating or in control of loading or unloading docks shall at all times maintain the dock area free of litter in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried from the premises by the elements.
(6) Construction Sites. The property owners and the prime contractors in charge of any construction site shall maintain the construction site in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried from the premises by the elements. All litter from construction activities or any related activities shall be picked up at the end of each workday and placed in containers, which will prevent litter from being carried from the premises by the elements.
(7) Maintaining Sidewalks and Alleys. Persons owning, occupying or in control of any premises shall keep the sidewalks and alleys adjacent thereto free of litter. Owners or occupants shall sweep or rinse off the sidewalks abutting their premises as often as may be required to keep the walk reasonably free from dirt, paper, waste, snow and ice. This paragraph shall not apply to sidewalks maintained by the Village as provided in the Village of Weston Municipal
Code, Chapter 70.
(8) Abandoned Garbage. It shall be unlawful for any person who is in control of any premises upon which is located or on whose behalf there is maintained any container of refuse, waste or garbage, which has been containerized in accordance with a contract for its removal, to allow that refuse, waste or garbage to remain uncollected for longer than 7 days or, in any case, until after
that refuse, waste or garbage creates any condition which is offensive to persons upon any private premises or public place.
(9) Animal Excreta.
a. Allowing Discharge Regulated. It is unlawful for any owner, keeper or walker of any dog or cat to have his dog or cat discharge such animal's excreta upon any public or private property within the Village other than the property of the
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 28
owner of such dog or cat if such owner, keeper or walker does not immediately thereafter remove and clean up such animal's excreta from the public or private property.
b. Carrying Feces Scoop Required. No person shall walk a dog beyond the limits of his own property without carrying or having in his possession scoop, bag or other items designed to pick up and remove dog feces; and, further, it is unlawful for any person to dispose of the dog feces on public or private property other than his own.
c. Exception. This subsection shall not apply to blind persons having control of guide dogs.
(k) Lawn and Yard Maintenance.
(1) Definitions. The terms used herein are defined as follows.
a. Turf Grass. Grass commonly used in regularly cut lawns or play areas such as, but not limited to, blue grass, fescue and rye grass blends.
(2) General Requirements. The owner or occupant of any developed commercial lot or parcel in the Village and any developed residential lot or parcel in the Village which is less than 2 acres in area shall install and maintain landscaping, plantings and other decorative surface treatments, including turf grass, so as to present an attractive appearance in all court and yard areas in accordance with generally accepted landscaping practices in north central Wisconsin. For all new residential construction in the village, lawns shall be installed within 1 (one) year of the occupancy issuance date. For all new commercial and industrial construction, landscaping and lawn shall be installed 18 (eighteen) months from the issuance of the building permit. Lawns shall be maintained to a length not to exceed 8 (eight) inches and property owners shall be responsible for mowing the lawn all the way to the street. Plantings and established lawns shall be maintained so as not to present hazards to adjoining properties or to persons or vehicles traveling on public ways and shall be maintained so as to enhance the appearance and value of the property on which located and thereby the appearance and value of the neighborhood and the Village.
a. Mowing required. Lawns which exceed eight (8) inches in length adversely affect the public health and safety, including, but not limited to, producing hay fever, emitting pollen and other discomforting bits of plants, concealing filthy deposits, providing a place for the accumulation of trash or litter, creating a fire hazard and adversely affecting property values within the Village. For these reasons, any lawn which exceeds eight (8) inches in length is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. In order to prevent such public nuisance, it shall be the duty of every person who owns, occupies or controls land within the Village to mow or cause to be mowed said lawn so that it never exceeds eight (8) inches in length. This mowing requirement does not apply to those portions of a lot or parcel that are located in a designated flood plain, wetland area, or undeveloped lot; however, where public sidewalks or multi-use paths are
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 29
present, the property owner shall mow, or cause to be mowed, the portion of the lawn from the street to four feet beyond the right-of-way boundary and where an on-street multi use path is present, the property owner shall mow or cause to be mowed a strip no less than 4 feet wide from the edge of the street toward the property line.
b. Mowing by Village.
i. Notice to Owner of Record by Mail.
The Weed Commissioner shall send a notice of violation/abatement order by mail to the owner of record of any land which is in violation of this section. Said notice of violation/abatement order shall order the owner of record, occupier and/or person in control of the land to immediately abate the nuisance or provide written notice to the Village Administrator of the reasons for objecting to the notice of violation/abatement order by a specified date and time, not to exceed seven (7) days. If the nuisance is not abated and no timely objection is received by the Village Administrator, the Weed Commissioner may mow or have mowed said lawn to meet the requirements of this section. The Weed Commissioner or his/her designee are expressly authorized to enter upon the private property for such abatement purposes. All costs associated with mowing shall be placed on the tax roll of said land as a special charge. In addition, any person who is in violation of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture as set forth in sec. 1.111.
ii. Due Process Hearing. If the owner, occupier and/or controller of the land subject to a notice of violation/abatement order contends that his/her lawn is not a nuisance, as defined in this section, he/she may object to the notice of violation/abatement order and request a hearing before the Plan Commission. The objection and request for hearing must be made in writing to the Village Administrator by the specified date and time identified in the notice of violation/abatement order. The objection and request for hearing shall include payment of a one hundred dollar bond ($100). If a decision is rendered in favor of the owner, occupier and/or controller of the land, the one hundred dollars ($100) will be returned. If the owner, occupier and/or controller of the land fails to appear for the hearing, or if the decision is rendered against him/her, the deposit shall be forfeited and applied to the cost of abating the nuisance. When a hearing is requested to challenge a notice of violation/abatement order, the hearing shall be held within fourteen (14) days from the date of the objection and request for hearing is received by the Village Administrator. At the hearing, the owner, occupier and/or controller of the land may appear in person or by his/her attorney, may present witnesses and may cross-examine witnesses as well as subpoena witnesses for his/her own case. At the close of the hearing, the Plan Commission shall make its determination in writing specifying its findings of fact and conclusions. If the Plan Commission determines that a nuisance exists on the land at issue, the Plan Commission shall order the Weed Commissioner and/or his/her designee to mow the lawn in question unless the owner, occupier and/or controller of the land abates the nuisance within forty-eight (48) hours of the Plan Commission’s decision.
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 30
(l) Public nuisances prohibited. No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within the Village.
(m) Abatement – generally.
(1) Responsibility for enforcement; inspections. It shall be the duty of each department head to enforce those provisions of this chapter that come within the jurisdiction of their respective offices, and each department head shall
make or cause to be made periodic inspections and inspections upon complaint to ensure such provisions are not violated. No action shall be taken under this section to abate a public nuisance unless the officer has inspected or caused to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and has satisfied himself that a nuisance does in fact exist.
(2) Summary abatement.
a. Order of abatement. If the inspecting officer determines that a public nuisance exists within the Village and that there is imminent danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he/she may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of a public nuisance constituting imminent danger to the public and requiring immediate action be taken as he/she deems necessary to abate the nuisance. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the order shall be effective
immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply with the order immediately.
b. Abatement by Village. Whenever the owner or occupant shall refuse or neglect to remove or abate the condition described in the order, the inspecting officer shall, in his/her discretion, enter upon the premises and cause the nuisance to be removed or abated and the Village shall recover the expenses incurred thereby from the owner or occupant of the premises or from the person who has caused or permitted the nuisance.
(3) Nonsummary abatement by Village for nuisances other than long grass, noxious weeds, trees and shrubs.
a. Order to abate nuisance. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to threaten imminent danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he/she shall issue an order reciting the existence of a public nuisance and requiring the owner or occupant of the premises to remove or abate the condition described in the order within the time period specified therein. The inspecting officer shall send a notice of violation/abatement order by mail to the owner of record. Said notice of violation/abatement order shall order the owner of record, occupier and/or person in control of the land to abate the condition described in the order within the time specified therein. If sent by certified mail and the owner of record does not sign for the notice of violation/abatement order that is sent by certified mail, the inspecting officer or
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 31
his/her designees shall post a notice of violation/abatement order upon the land in violation, in letters not less than one inch (1”) height.
b. Abatement by the Village. If the owner or occupant fails or refuses to comply within the time period prescribed, the inspecting officer shall enter upon the premises and cause the nuisance to be removed or abated and the Village shall recover the expenses incurred thereby from the owner or occupant of the premises or from the person who has caused or permitted the nuisance.
c. Remedy from order. Any person affected by such order shall, within fourteen (14) days of notice of violation/abatement order or posting of the notice of violation/abatement order upon the land in violation, apply to the Circuit Court for an order restraining the Village and the inspecting officer from
entering upon the premises and abating or removing the nuisance, or be forever barred. The court shall determine the reasonableness of the order for abatement of the nuisance.
(4) Authority to assess costs. The cost of the abatement or removal of a nuisance under this section shall be collected from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance and, if notice to abate the nuisance, if applicable, has been given to the owner, such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge.
(5) Abatement in accordance with state law. Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the Village or its officials in accordance with the laws of the State.
(k) Same – collection of costs. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this article for the erection, contrivance, creation, continuous or maintenance of a public nuisance,
the cost of abatement of a public nuisance by the Village shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance and, if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such costs shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge.
(l) Penalty. Any person who violates, disobeys, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in Sec.
1.111 of this Code.
[Ord. of 1-13-2005; Ord. of 5-24-2007; Ord. of 9-19-2008; Ord. of 5-24-2013; Amended via
Ord. No 16-030, 6/8/2016; Ord. No 18-001 of 1-20-2018; Ord. No 19-013 of 8-21-2019]
Sec. 50.103. Loud, Disturbing Noises Prohibited.
(a) Loud, disturbing noises prohibited generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to create or assist in creating any unreasonably loud and disturbing noise in the Village of Weston (see also Sec. 50.100 Things prohibited).
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 32
(b) Measurement. For the purpose of determining db.(A)’s as referred to in this Ordinance, the noise shall be measured on the A-weighting scales on a sound level meter of standard design and quality having characteristics established by the American Standards Institute and shall be measured at the complainants property line.
(c) Residential Zones.
(1) It shall be unlawful to carry on the following activities in any residentially zoned area of the Village:
a. The operation of construction machinery between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
b. The operation of household power tools between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
c. The operation of lawn mowers, chain saws, powered garden equipment
and other domestic tools out-of-doors between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
d. Working on vehicles or revving vehicle motors between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
e. Musical bands practicing in residential areas between the hours of 8 p.m. and 7 a.m.
f. Any mechanical noise which registers more than 85 db.(A) for 4 consecutive hours at the nearest complainant’s property line will be probable cause for a violation.
g. This section shall not apply to emergency operations designed to protect the public health and safety.
In residential zones, it shall be unlawful for any person to make or engage in
any unreasonably loud and raucous noise, yelling, screaming, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. A noise shall be presumed to be unreasonably loud and raucous, if it is plainly audible within a residence and measures 85 db.(A) or more at the complainant’s property line. There shall be excepted from this provision any organized sporting events,
fairs, carnivals, or similar activities. The person(s) in violation of this ordinance shall be ordered to reduce the noise to acceptable levels immediately by the monitoring officer.
(d) Construction Noise. Construction equipment in all zones may be operated between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
(e) Business Deliveries Adjacent to Residential Zoning Prior to 6 a.m.
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 33
(1) Any business deliveries received prior to 6 a.m. to a business adjacent to a residentially zoned area of the Village must follow the subsequent guidelines:
a. Staging of trucks for early delivery must be silent. No engine idling and refers must be turned off until delivery time if waiting in the parking lot.
b. Horns cannot be used to signal arrival.
c. All off loading must take place below 60 db.(A), at point source, and vehicles must be silent during delivery (no idling).
d. Outside off loading cannot include any dumping action that causes loud or sudden noises.
e. Back-up alarms must be used at the reduced sound level if equipped.
f. When possible, deliveries should take place on the side of the building away from the residentially zoned district.
(f) Non-residential zoning districts adjacent to Residential zoning districts. It shall be unlawful for any non-residentially zoned property adjacent to a residentially zoned property to operate their business at or over 85 db.(A) for four consecutive hours measured at the complainants property line between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Decibel readings over 110 db.(A) at the complainants property line will be subject to automatic citation.
(g) Schools, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street or property adjacent to any school, institution of learning, or church while in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the normal operation of that institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, is prohibited.
(h) Enforcement. Enforcement of this ordinance shall be at the discretion of the Everest Metro Police Department or Village of Weston staff on the basis of complaints filed with the Village of Weston or the Everest Metro Police Department. In all non- residential zones, the violator shall be given 30 days from written notice of his violation to reduce the sound pressure levels to acceptable levels. Decibel readings over 110 db.(A) at the complainants property line will be subject to automatic citation.
(i) Exceptions. Operation of emergency equipment and equipment used to comply with state mandates for a safe environment shall be exempt from this ordinance. Snowblowers not operated on a commercial basis shall be exempt from this ordinance when used to gain access to a village street. Garbage and recycling trucks shall be exempt. (Emergency equipment shall include ambulance, police, fire, snow removal, civil defense sirens, etc., necessary for the health, safety, and protection of the
citizens of the Village of Weston.)
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 34
(j) Appeals. The Village Board may grant an exemption to individuals proving evidence of substantial hardship. Evidence that reasonable technological attempts have been made to correct the problem shall be considered grounds for granting an exemption to this ordinance for existing businesses and industries.
(k) Penalties. Failure to comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall be punished by a minimum fine of $75.00, not to exceed $500.00. Each day the condition exists shall constitute a new and separate offense.
(Ord. of 5-18-2006; Amended via Ord. No 16-030, 6/8/2016)
Sec. 50.104. Chronic Nuisance Premises.
(a) Declaration. The Board of Trustees finds that from time to time certain premises in the Village of Weston require a disproportionate amount of Village resources (including public safety services provided by the Everest Metro Police Department) to be devoted to addressing various nuisances, criminal activities and other incidents that occur thereon. Often this disproportionate devotion of Village resources is due to property owner’s own actions or failure of the property owners to accept and exercise sufficient responsibility for and over the actions of occupants, guests, agents or employees that reside or frequent that premises. Such premises, as further described in subsection (b) below, are deemed chronic nuisance premises and are hereby recognized as a public nuisance due to the resource drain it causes the community as a whole. This section is enacted to encourage property owners and/or managers to engage in their responsibility to ensure that activities occurring on their property conform to the law and do not unduly burden the Village’s resources and to provide a mechanism for the Village to take action against property owners who fail to ensure premises they own do not require a disproportionate devotion of resources to the premises. This section of the Municipal code is not intended to discourage crime victims or any person in legitimate need of police services from requesting them.
(b) Determination of Chronic Nuisance Premises.
(1) Any residential unit premise to which a Village Department (including the Everest Metro Police Department) responds to complaints of any nuisance activity, that results in a municipal citation or Village enforcement action, three or more separate times within any sixty (60) day period is deemed to have received and required more than the general acceptable level of municipal services and places an undue burden upon the taxpayers of the Village. A residential unit shall be defined as a delineated, single family residence that is housed in a home, duplex unit, apartment complex, condominium or other residential dwelling.
For the purposes of this subsection, a nuisance activity shall be any offense(s) under Village of Weston Municipal Code, Chapters 10, 14, 38, 50, 54, 66, 82 and 94, or their statutory counterparts, or any offense under state law for which
a penalty under state law for which a penalty of forfeiture, fine or imprisonment is
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 35
provided.
(2) Any non-resident owner of a residential unit (s) available for lease or rent within the Village of Weston that has had 3 units or 10% of their available units for lease or rent – whichever is the greater number of units, designated as a chronic nuisance premise, shall be deemed a chronic nuisance landlord and shall be subject to the notice, abatement, hearing and penalties and remedies provisions found herein this ordinance. Further, the designation of a chronic nuisance landlord shall be posted in the Village’s official newspaper, website, and newsletter for the purpose of public awareness.
For the purposes of this subsection, a determination of chronic nuisance premises or the designation of a chronic nuisance landlord of a mobile home park shall be a reviewable item in consideration of renewal of the mobile home park’s annual operating license under Wis. Stat. 66.0435(2).
(3) Any business or commercial venture to which a department responds to complaints of nuisance activity, that results in a municipal citation or Village enforcement action, five (5) or more separate times within any sixty (60) day period is deemed to have received and required more than the general, acceptable level of municipal services, and places an undue burden upon the taxpayers of the Village. For the purposes of this subsection, a nuisance activity is defined under Section (b) (1) of this ordinance. For the purposes of this subsection, a determination of a chronic nuisance premise that carries any class of Village liquor license, shall be a reviewable item in consideration of the revocation of the premise’s liquor license per Wis. Stat. 125.12 (2) and shall be assigned the appropriate violation points as determined by the Village of Weston’s alcohol beverage demerit point system.
(4) For the purpose of this ordinance, a residential unit or business venture shall automatically be designated as a chronic nuisance premise if any single nuisance is affiliated with illegal drug distribution or gang activity Wis. Stat.§
823.113(1m)(a).
(5) An offense shall not be considered a nuisance if it is committed by a person having no association with the premises by acquaintance with, relation to or expressed or implied invitation from the owner, occupant, operator, or agent of the premises.
(6) An offense shall not be considered a nuisance if it is:
a. An offense that results from the property owner/landlord’s self-
notification to a Village official or the Everest Metro Police Department as a means of mitigating the nuisance or a crime;
b. A report of domestic violence per Wis. State Statutes.
(7) Whenever any such premises exist, the appropriate Village department head or the Everest Metro Police Department Chief shall determine from the facts of each incident and considering the purpose of this subsection as set forth in Section (a)
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 36
above, whether the premises is a chronic nuisance premises. A chronic nuisance premises shall be defined as a public nuisance.
(c) Notice. Whenever a Village department head or EMPD Chief finds a premise constitutes a chronic nuisance premises under section (a) (1), the department head or EMPD Chief shall provide written notice of his determination to the owner of the premises as identified by the records of the Village Assessor and Marathon County Land Records. Such notice shall be delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested or by personal service. If the owner cannot be located, the notice shall be published as a Class 2 notice under Wis. Stats. Chapter 985. The notice shall contain the following information:
(1) The street address and number, if applicable, otherwise the parcel number of legal description sufficient to identify the premises.
(2) A brief statement, including a description of the relevant activities, supporting the determination that the premise is a chronic nuisance premises.
(3) A statement that the owner shall, within 10 (ten) days of receipt of the notice, or last day of publication if published, respond to the appropriate department head or EMPD Chief requesting a hearing before the Village Board of Trustees or proposing in writing a course of action that will be taken to abate the nuisance activities.
(4) A statement that owner shall immediately notify the appropriate department head of any change in address to ensure receipt of future notices.
(d) Owner Abatement. If the owner responds to the notice in section (c) within 10 (ten) days of receipt of notice or the last day of publication if published with a nuisance abatement proposal, the department head or EMPD Chief may accept, reject, or work with the owner to modify the proposal in his or her discretion. If the department head or EMPD Chief rejects the abatement proposal, determines that an agreement on an appropriate abatement proposal cannot be reached or determines that owner abatement is for any reason unsuccessful, the matter shall be referred to the Village Board of Trustees for hearing.
(e) Chronic Nuisance Landlord Abatement. If the non-resident owner of residential units available for lease or rent responds to the notice in section (c) within 10 (ten) days of the receipt of notice or the last day of publication with a nuisance abatement proposal for all units (3 units or more than 10% of the units available for lease or rent, whatever is greater), the department head or EMPD Chief may accept, reject , or
work with the owner to modify the proposal in his or her discretion and remove the designation of Chronic Nuisance Landlord. The designated Chronic Nuisance Landlord nuisance abatement proposal shall include remedies that shall be undertaken to mitigate chronic nuisances, which may include, but is not limited to, landlord – tenant screening, tenant education, tenant eviction procedures, and other preventative practices to improve the residential unit (s). If a non-resident owner of residential
units for lease or rent abatement of a nuisance causes the number of nuisance
premises to be reduced below the Chronic Nuisance Landlord threshold of (3) units or more than 10% of the units available for lease or rent, whatever is greater, the Village shall drop the designation of Chronic Nuisance Landlord.
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 37
(f) Hearing. If a hearing is requested by the owner or if the department head or EMPD Chief determines that a satisfactory abatement plan cannot be agreed upon or if the department head or EMPD Chief determines that abatement actions taken by the owner are unsuccessful, a hearing shall be held before the Village Board of Trustees. The owner shall receive ten (10) days written notice of the hearing sent by regular mail or, if the owner cannot be located, by publication of a Class 2 notice under Wis. Stat. Chapter 985. The Village Board shall hear any and all evidence it deems relevant and shall affirm or reverse the determination of the department head or EMPD Chief.
(g) Penalties and Remedies.
(1) If the department head’s or EMPD Chief’s determination is affirmed, the Village Board of Trustees may order the owner to pay the actual cost of Village services to respond to any nuisance activities occurring after the three (3) responses that led to the determination that the premises was a chronic nuisance premises. Such costs shall be presented to the Village Board of Trustees and may include costs incurred prior to the Village Board of Trustee’s determination. The Village Board of Trustee’s may order costs of all such calls to the chronic nuisance premises be paid until the public nuisance is abated under section (g). Such costs, plus a reasonable administrative charge, shall be billed to the owner by invoice sent by regular mail and if not paid within thirty (30) days of the date on the invoice shall be charged to the property as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stat §. 66.0701.
(2) The Village Board of Trustees may authorize any other penalty or remedy authorized by law.
(h) When Nuisance is Deemed Abated. The public nuisance created by a chronic nuisance premises shall be deemed abated when no Village resources have responded to the premises to address nuisance activities occurs for a period of six (6)
consecutive months. The Village or EMPD may also deem a chronic nuisance premise to be abated, if the occupant, which may include a tenant or resident-owner, vacates the premise.
(i) Abatement of Public Nuisances.
(1) Inspection of Premises. Whenever a complaint is made to any Village official or employee that a public nuisance exists within the Village, said complaint shall
be directed to the appropriate department head or EMPD Chief who shall in his or her reasonable discretion inspect or cause to be inspected the premises complained of and shall make a written report of his or her findings to the Village Administrator. Whenever practicable, the inspecting officer shall cause photographs to be made of the premises.
(j) Summary Abatement.
(1) Notice to Owner. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists within the Village, the department head or EMPD Chief may serve notice
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 38
personally or by certified mail on the persons causing, permitting, or maintaining such nuisance and/or upon the owner or occupant of the premises where such nuisance is caused, permitted, or maintained and to post a copy of said notice on the premises. Such notice shall direct the person causing, permitting, or maintaining such nuisance or the owner or occupant of the premises to abate or remove such nuisance within a specified, reasonable period of time after consideration of all relevant circumstances and shall state that unless the same is done will cause the nuisance to be abated and will charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant, or person causing, permitting, or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be and that said costs may be collected as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.0701.
(2) Abatement by the Village. If the nuisance is not abated within the time provided or if the owner, occupant, or person causing the nuisance cannot be found, the department head or EMPD Chief shall cause the abatement or removal of such public nuisance. Wherever possible, costs of abatement shall be billed to the owner, occupant, or person causing the nuisance. If said costs are not paid
within thirty (30) days of billing such costs, or if the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance cannot be found, said costs may be collected pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.0701
(3) Other Methods Not Excluded. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the Village or its officials in accordance with the laws of the State of Wisconsin including, but not limited to an action under Wis. Stat. Chapter 823.
(k) Cost of Abatement. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Chapter for the erection, contrivance, continuance, or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the Village shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant, or person causing, permitting, or maintaining the nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge.
(l) Penalty Provisions.
(1) General Penalty. Whenever so provided in this Code, any person who shall violate any provision of this Code shall upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a penalty, which shall be as follows:
(2) First Offense – Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
Code subject to a penalty shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not more than
$2,500 together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until said forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding ninety (90) days.
(3) Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Code who shall previously have been convicted of a violation of the same provision shall upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $50.00 nor more than $2,500 for each such offense, together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of such
Chapter 50 Nuisances Page 39
forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until said forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid, but not to exceed six (6) months.
(4) What Constitutes a Separate Offense. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the Village from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision contained in this Code.
(m) Execution Against Defendant’s Property. Whenever any person fails to pay any forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of the court for violation of any ordinance of the Village the Court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the defendant, or after the defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution against the property of the defendant for said forfeiture and costs.
(Ord. of 12-5-2008; Ord. of 4-22-2010; Amended via Ord. No 16-030, 6/8/2016)
Sec. 50.105. Accumulation of used motor vehicles.
No person, except a person licensed under Sec. 18.131(a) or a licensee of a motor vehicle dealer's license issued under statute, shall accumulate or store or allow to remain outside of any building on real estate located within the Village for a period of more than ten days, or dump, deposit or otherwise abandon upon any property or upon any highway, street, road, alley or way within the Village, any used motor vehicle, as defined by statute, or any detached part thereof, for which no current registration fee has been paid under statute or which, if paid, does not have properly attached thereto under statute a current license plate, if required, and which is in a condition which would mechanically prevent the immediate operation thereof upon any public highway or its operation thereon would be in violation of the law. Each day that any used motor
vehicle, as defined in this section, or any detached part thereof, shall be accumulated or stored or allowed to remain contrary to this section shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. of 7-23-2010; Amended via Ord. No 16-030, 6/8/2016)
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 1
Chapter 54
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS*
Article I. In General
Sec. 54.100. Offenses against property; state statutes adopted.
Sec. 54.101. Restrictions on use of weapons.
Sec. 54.102. Firearms and weapons restricted where prohibited.
Sec. 54.103. Reckless use of weapons.
Sec. 54.104. Disorderly conduct with a motor vehicle.
Sec. 54.105. Disorderly conduct prohibited.
Sec. 54.106. Resisting arrest, refusing to assist an officer, impersonating an officer.
Sec. 54.107. Signs and bills on public property.
Sec. 54.108. Public parks, closing hours.
Sec. 54.109. Drunkenness.
Sec. 54.110. Indecent exposure.
Sec. 54.111. Misuse of 911 emergency services number.
Sec. 54.112. Loitering.
Sec. 54.113. Unauthorized person on school property.
Sec. 54.114. Reserved.
Sec. 54.115. Regulation of Sexual Offenders.
Sec. 54.116. Escorts and Escort Services.
Sec. 54.117 Prostitution.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 2
Article II. Minors
Sec. 54.200. Curfew.
Sec. 54.201. Harboring, aiding, assisting and abetting minor runaways.
Sec. 54.202. Truancy.
________
* Cross References--Law Enforcement, Chapter 42; Traffic and Vehicles, Chapter 82.
Article III. Tobacco, Smoking and Prohibited Substances.
Sec. 54.300. Smoking prohibited in certain areas.
Sec. 54.301. Prohibition concerning children.
Sec. 54.302. Restrictions on sale or gift.
Sec. 54.303. Synthetic Cannabinoid Prohibited.
Article. IV. Property
Sec. 54.400. Right of privacy regarding valuation of property for assessment purposes.
Sec. 54.401. Disposal of abandoned property.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 3
ARTICLE I IN GENERAL
Sec. 54.100. Offenses against property; state statutes adopted.
The following statutes are adopted by reference and incorporated in this section, except for the penalty provision, which shall be governed by Sec. 1.111.
Wis. Stat. § 940.19(1)
(Battery)
Wis. Stat. § 940.291
(Law enforcement officer; failure to render aid)
Wis. Stat. § 940.34
(Duty to aid victim or report crime)
Wis. Stat. § 940.42
(Intimidation of witnesses; misdemeanor)
Wis. Stat. § 941.01
(Negligent operation of a vehicle)
Wis. Stat. § 941.10
(Negligent handling of burning material)
Wis. Stats. §§ 941.12(2), (3)
(Interfering with firefighting)
Wis. Stat. § 941.23
(Carrying concealed weapon)
Wis. Stat. § 941.235
(Carrying firearm in public buildings)
Wis. Stat. § 941.237
(Carrying firearm where alcohol beverages may be sold and consumed)
Wis. Stat. § 941.24
(Possession of switchblade knife)
Wis. Stat. § 941.2965
(Restrictions on use of facsimile firearms)
Wis. Stat. § 941.297
(Sale or distribution of imitation firearms)
Wis. Stat. § 941.36
(Fraudulent tapping of electric wires or gas or water meters or pipes)
Wis. Stats. §§ 943.01(1), (3), and (4)
(Criminal damage to property)
Wis. Stat. § 943.017(1)
(Graffiti)
Wis. Stat. § 943.07
(Criminal damage to railroads)
Wis. Stat. § 943.11
(Entry into locked vehicle)
Wis. Stat. § 943.125
(Entry into locked coinbox)
Wis. Stat. § 943.13
(Trespass to land)
Wis. Stat. § 943.14
(Criminal trespass to dwellings)
Wis. Stat. § 943.15
(Entry into a construction site or into a locked building, dwelling or room)
Wis. Stats. §§ 943.20(1), (2)
(Theft, not exceeding $1,000.00)
Wis. Stat. §§ 943.21(1), (2)
(Fraud on hotel or restaurant keeper, $1,000.00 or less)
Wis. Stat. § 943.215
(Absconding without paying rent)
Wis. Stat. § 943.22
(Use of cheating tokens)
Wis. Stat. § 943.225
(Refusal to pay for bus ride)
Wis. Stat. § 943.23(4m)
(Operating a vehicle without owner's consent)
Wis. Stat. § 943.24
(Issuance of worthless check, not over $1,000.00)
Wis. Stat. § 943.26
(Removing or damaging encumbered property)
Wis. Stat. § 943.34
(Receiving stolen property, not exceeding $1,000.00)
Wis. Stat. § 943.37
(Alteration of property identification marks)
Wis. Stats. §§ 943.41(2), (3)(a)-- (d), (4)(b)
(Financial transaction card crimes)
Wis. Stats. §§ 943.45(1), (2), (3)(a), (b)
(Obtaining telecommunication service by fraud)
Wis. Stats. §§ 943.455(1), (2), (4)(a), (b)
(Theft of cell phone service)
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 4
Wis. Stats. §§ 943.46(1), (2), (4)(a), (b)
(Theft of CATV service)
Wis. Stats. §§ 943.50(1), (1m), (2), (3), (3m)
(Retail theft, not over $1,000.00)
Wis. Stat. § 943.55
(Removal of shopping cart)
Wis. Stats. §§ 943.61(1), (2), (3), (4)
(Theft of library material, not over $1,000.00)
Wis. Stats. §§ 943.70(1), (2)(a), (b)(1)
(Computer crimes)
Wis. Stat. § 947.012
(Unlawful use of telephone)
Wis. Stat. § 948.63
(Receiving property from children)
Wis. Stats. Chapter 961
(Uniform Controlled Substances Act)
(Ord. of 6-9-1986, § 1; Ord. of 4-20-1998; Ord. of 12-11-2009) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 54.101. Restrictions on use of weapons.
(a) Shooting prohibited. No person except a sheriff, police officer or deputy shall fire or discharge any firearm, rifle, spring gun, air gun, or BB gun or any other similar device of any description within the village except in the areas designated Rural and Open Space Districts according to the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 94 Sec. 94.2.02(1) excluding Parks and Municipal Properties; and no such person shall have any firearms, rifle, spring gun, air gun, BB gun or any other similar device of any description in his possession or under his control in prohibited areas unless it is unloaded and knocked down or enclosed within a carrying case or other suitable container; however, this section shall not prevent the maintenance and use of a duly supervised rifle or pistol range or shooting gallery authorized by the board. The Village of Weston shall establish the permitted areas, which shall be shown on a designated map, updated as population and traffic patterns change and develop in accordance with the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 10, Article III, Sec. 10.301(a).
(b) Restrictions in permitted areas. No person except a sheriff, police officer or deputy shall fire or discharge any firearm, rifle, spring gun, air gun, BB gun or any other similar device of any description within those areas of the village where such use is permitted under subsection (a) unless such person shall be more than 500 feet away from all buildings and other structures and at least 200 feet from the center of all roadways.
(c) Permits. The chief of police may issue written permits to owners or occupants of private premises to hunt or shoot on such premises if he finds such privileges necessary for the protection of life or property and subject to such safeguards as he may impose for the safety of the lives and property of other persons within the village.
(d) Throwing or shooting of arrows, stones or other missiles prohibited. No person shall throw or shoot any object, arrow, stone, snowball or other missile or projectile by hand or by any other means at any other person or at, in or into any building,
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 5
vehicle, street, sidewalk, alley, highway, park, playground or other public place within the village. This subsection shall not apply to archery ranges within the village that are under the supervision of the board or any committee of the board or of the county park commissioner.
(e) Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this section shall be subject to Sec. 1.111. In addition to any penalties so imposed, any person who shall do physical damage to or destroy any public property shall be liable for the cost of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed property; and the parents of any unemancipated minor who shall violate any provision of this section may also be held liable for the cost of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed public property in accordance with Wis. Stat. § 895.035.
(Code 1982, §§ 4.015, 4.16; Ord. of 10-19-1992, § 1) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 54.102. Firearms and weapons restricted where prohibited.
(a) Definition. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and the enforcement of this Ordinance:
(1) “Firearm” means a weapon that acts by force of gunpowder.
(2) “Law enforcement” means any person employed by the State of Wisconsin or any political subdivision of this State, for the purpose of detecting and preventing crime and enforcing laws or ordinances and who is authorized to make arrests for violations of the laws or ordinances he or she is employed to enforce.
(3) “Weapon” means a handgun, an electronic weapon as defined in Wis. Stat. § 941.295, a knife or a billy club.
(b) In addition to the provisions of Wis. Stat. § 175.60 enumerating those places where the carrying of a weapon or a firearm is prohibited, including exceptions thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person, other than law enforcement officers or other village employees, or officials with a valid Wisconsin CCW permit, who are approved by the Board Trustees, to enter any and all municipal buildings owned or operated by the Village of Weston while carrying a weapon or firearm. Any Village employee or official wishing to carry a weapon under this subsection shall attend a training presentation as directed by the Chief of Police. The final approval of Village employees or Village officials to carry a weapon or firearm under this subsection will be made by the Village Board of Trustees during a closed session under Wis. Stat. § 19.85(1)(c). The Village Board of Trustees reserves the right to revoke such permissions for Village employees or officials at any time. Upon the cessation of employment for employees, or the term end for elected officials, such approval shall
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 6
immediately expire. This prohibition would apply to any municipal buildings now in existence or later constructed if posted pursuant to law.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person other than a law enforcement officer to enter any building, facility, or location open to the public that is posted as a no firearms or concealed weapons location while possessing, carrying, or concealing a firearm or weapon, whether with or without a state permit.
(d) Any person who is carrying a concealed weapon shall display his or her license document and photographic identification card to a law enforcement officer upon the request of the law enforcement officer while the law enforcement officer is acting in an official capacity and with lawful authority.
(e) Signs meeting the requirements of Wis. Stat. § 943.13(2)(bm)1 shall be posted in all prominent places near all entrances of all buildings, structures, or locations that restrict or prohibit firearms or concealed weapons.
(f) Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof be subject to the general penalty sections and shall further be subject to penalty for trespass as prescribed in Wis. Stat. § 943.13. In addition, any violation of subsection (d) shall be subject to those penalties set forth in Wis. Stat. § 175.60(17).
(Ord. of 11-11-11) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 16-018, 3/25/2016; Ord. No 17-004, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 54.103. Reckless use of weapons.
No person shall endanger the safety of another or of himself or herself in the Village of Weston by reckless conduct in the operation or handling of a firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, air gun, knife or bow and arrow; nor shall any person operate or go armed with a firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, in the Village of Weston while he/she is under the influence of an intoxicant; nor shall any person intentionally point a firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, at or toward another within the village.
(Ord. of 6-7-99, § 3; Ord. of 11-11-11) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 54.104. Disorderly conduct with a motor vehicle.
No person shall within the village, on public or private property, by or through the use of a motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile or minibike, under circumstances that tend to cause or provoke a disturbance or annoy one or more persons, engage in violent, abusive, unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly conduct, including but not limited to unnecessary or deliberate or intentional spinning of wheels, squealing of tires, revving of the engine, blowing the horn, causing the engine to backfire, or cause the vehicle, while commencing to move or in motion, to raise one or more of its wheels off the ground. Such conduct is hereby declared to be both
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 7
unlawful and a public nuisance and all violators of this section shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in Sec. 1.111.
(Code 1982, § 4.06; Ord. of 11-11-11) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
___________
Cross References--Traffic and Vehicles, Chapter 82.
Sec. 54.105. Disorderly conduct prohibited.
(1) Types of conduct prohibited. No person shall, in a public or private place,
engage in violent, abusive, indecent, profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud, or
otherwise disorderly conduct under circumstances in which such conduct tends
to cause or provoke a disturbance; nor shall any person, with intent to annoy
another, make a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensures.
(2) Fighting prohibited. No person shall within the Village of Weston,
intentionally cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl, riot or noisy
altercation other than a bona fide athletic contest.
(Ord. of 6-7-99, § 1; Ord. of 11-11-11) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 54.106. Resisting arrest, refusing to assist an officer, impersonating an officer.
(1) Resisting an officer. No person shall unlawfully, knowingly resist or obstruct
an officer while such officer is doing any act in his/her official capacity and
with lawful authority.
(2) Aiding an officer. No person shall without reasonable excuse, refuse or fail,
upon command, to aid any person known to him/her to be a police officer.
(3) Impersonating police officer. No person shall impersonate a policeman or
peace officer within the Village of Weston.
(4) Definitions. In this section:
(a) Obstructs includes without limitation, knowingly giving false information
to the officer or knowingly placing physical evidence with intent to
mislead the officer in the performance of his or her duty, including the
service of any summons or civil process. Said definition also includes
without limitation the interference with any police officer or member of
the police department in the discharge of his/her duty, or the hindering or
preventing of a police officer or member of the police department in the
discharge of his/her duties as such officer or member, or any act which
would in any manner assist a person in the custody of any police officer or
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 8
member of the police department to escape or attempt to escape from such custody or any attempt to rescue in custody.
(b) Officer means a peace officer or other public officer or public employee having the authority by virtue of the officer's or employee's office or employment to take another into custody.
(Ord. of 6-7-99, § 2; Ord. of 11-11-11) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 54.107. Signs and bills on public property.
No person, firm or corporation shall put up, erect, fasten, post, paint or maintain any sign, picture, poster or advertisement of any description upon any curb, sidewalk, fence, board, barrel, box, case, railing, post, barricade, material, structure or building of any kind located upon any street, alley, public way, public ground or public highway.
(Ord. of 6-7-99, § 4; Ord. of 11-11-11 ) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 54.108. Public parks, closing hours.
It should be unlawful for any person, except registered campers, in or en route to designated campgrounds, to enter or to be in any public park in the Village of Weston, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and the following 5:00 a.m. Nor shall any person during these hours, park, stop, or leave standing, whether attended or unattended, any vehicle or watercraft in any such public park in the village. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be penalized as provided in Sec. 1.111.
(Ord. of 6-7-99, § 5; Ord. of 11-11-11) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 15-032, 12/23/2015]
Sec. 54.109. Drunkenness.
No person shall within the village be habitually drunk or intoxicated so as to disturb the good order and quiet of the village or be found in any place within the village in such a state of intoxication that he is unable to care for his own safety or for the safety of others.
(Code 1982, § 4.07; Ord. of 11-11-11) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
__________
Cross References--Alcohol Beverages, Chapter 6.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 9
Sec. 54.110. Indecent exposure.
Any person who shall appear in any public place in the state of nudity or in any indecent or lewd dress or shall make any indecent exposure of his person shall pay a penalty as prescribed in section 1.111.
(Code 1982, § 4.09; Ord. of 11-11-11) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 54.111. Misuse of 911 emergency services number.
(a) Definitions. In this section "911 emergency telephone system" means a telecommunications system which connects a person dialing the digits "911" to a public safety answering point and/or which has the ability to automatically identify either the address or the telephone number of the caller at a central location when a caller dials the digits 911.
(b) Regulated use.
(1) No person may use the 911 emergency telephone system except in emergencies such as transmitting requests for law enforcement, fire fighting and emergency medical and ambulance services to the public safety agencies providing such services.
(2) No person may intentionally dial the telephone number 911 to report an emergency knowing that the fact or situation which he or she reports does not exist.
(c) Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $30.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and all costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
(Ord. of 11-20-2000(1), § 1(54.115); Ord. of 11-11-11) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Editors Note--Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Nov. 20, 2000, added provisions designated as § 54.115. For better categorizing and indexing, said provisions have been redesignated as § 54.104.1, at the discretion of the editor. The original section designation has been retained in the history note at the end of the section.
Sec. 54.112. Loitering.
(a) Loitering on posted private property. It shall be unlawful for any person to congregate, loiter, wander, stroll or stand upon any private property in the village which has been posted with a notice stating "No Loitering," "Patrons Only," or other
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 10
notice indicating that the said property is not a thoroughfare for use of the general public. Such notice shall be at least eight and one-half by eleven inches in size, or of comparable area, and plainly posted, at least one to each property intended to be so posted. This section shall include loitering in or on parked motor vehicles.
(b) Penalties. Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than $30.00, or not more than $500.00.
(Ord. of 7-5-2000, § 1(54.111) (54.120); Ord. of 11-11-11) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 54.113. Unauthorized persons on school property.
(a) Types of conduct prohibited. No person, not in official attendance at or on official business with the DC Everest School District shall enter into any public school building or onto the grounds or campus of any public school, not shall any person congregate, loiter, idle, stand, remain or play upon any property adjacent to and under the control of any public school between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on official school days.
(b) Exceptions. This section shall not apply to persons who have obtained the requisite permission from DC Everest public school officials in accordance with the DC Everest School District’s rules and regulations.
(c) Penalty. Any person violating this section shall upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $30.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of said forfeiture and costs, shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period of 30 days until said forfeiture and costs are paid, whichever is less.
(Ord. of 10-16-2000, § 1(54.113) (54.123); Ord. of 11-11-11) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 54.114. Reserved.
[Repealed via Ord. No 18-003, 3/27/2018]
Sec. 54.115. Regulation of Sexual Offenders
(a) Declaration of Purpose. This ordinance is a regulatory measure aimed at protecting the health and safety of children in the Village of Weston from the risk that convicted sex offenders may re-offend in locations close to their residences and close to where children congregate. Further, this measure is intended to enhance the community’s citizen observation and reporting of individuals who may pose a threat to children by “grooming behaviors.” The Village finds and declares that in addition to schools and
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 11
state licensed child day care centers, children congregate or play in a number of public places, including public parks, athletic fields, libraries, and other places.
(b) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Ordinance, shall be defined as follows, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(1) “Sexually violent offense” is an offense defined as a “sexually violent offense” by Wis. Stat.§ 980.01(6).
(2) “Restricted Zone” is the building, facilities and improvements, and the legal parcel of real property on which they are situated, to the extent the property is within the Village, that are used for or which support a use set forth as follows:
a. A public park, parkway, parkland, park facility;
b. A public swimming pool;
c. A public library;
d. A recreational trail;
e. A public playground;
f. A school for children;
g. Athletic fields used by children;
h. A state-licensed, commercial day care center;
i. Any specialized school for children, including, but not limited to, a gymnastics academy, dance academy, music school or charter school.
j. Aquatic facilities open to the public; and
k. Any facility for children (which means a public or private school, a group home as defined in Wis. Stat. § 48.02(7), a residential care center for children and youth as defined in Wis. Stat. § 48.02(15d), a shelter care facility as defined in Wis. Stat. § 48.02(17), a foster home as defined in Wis. Stat. § 48.02(6), a treatment foster home as defined in Wis. Stat.§ 48.02(17m), a day care center licensed under Wis. Stat. § 48.65, a day care program established under Wis. Stat. § 120.13(14), a day care provider certified under Wis. Stat. § 48.651, or a youth center as defined in Wis. Stat. § 961.01(22)).
(3) “Grooming behavior” means actions deliberately undertaken by an offender with the aim of befriending a child in order to lower the child’s sexual inhibitions or establish an intimate friendship in preparation for a sexual act with the child.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 12
(4) “Loiter-free zone” means the 250-foot radius surrounding each restricted zone.
(5) “Loiter” or “Loitering” means, whether in a group, crowd, or as an individual, to stand idly about, loaf, prowl, congregate, wander, stand, lingers aimlessly, proceed slowly or with many stops, to delay or dawdle.
(6) The term “designated offender” means:
a. a person required to register as a sex offender under Wis. Stat. § 301.45, if the sex offense which required registration involved a child; or
b. a person who has been convicted of, or has been found delinquent of, or has been found not guilty by reason of disease or mental defect of a sexually violent offense.
(7) “Residence” or “Reside” means any place where a designated offender, either temporarily or permanently, sleeps, lodges, or abides.
(8) “Child” or “Children” means a person under the age of 18.
(9) “Wisconsin Statutes” “Wis. Stats.” and “Wis. Stat.” shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes in effect when this Ordinance is adopted and shall include any amendment to or renumbering of the statutes after the adoption of this Ordinance.
(c) Prohibited Location and/or Acts.
(1) Within a restricted zone(s) No designated offender shall:
a. Enter or be present in any restricted zone that is a public playground, school for children or a daycare center;
b. Enter or be present in any other restricted zone between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., or at any time when a child is present;
c. Loiter within a Loiter-free zone;
d. Participate in a holiday event involving children, such as distributing candy or other items to children on Halloween, wearing a Santa Claus costume on or proceeding Christmas or wearing an Easter Bunny costume on or proceeding Easter unless the designated offender is the parent or guardian of the children involved, and no non-familial children are present.
(2) A designated offender does not violate this Ordinance if any of the following apply:
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 13
a. If the designated offender has official business in the restricted zone, which is determined by the reasonable person standard and the designated offender is accompanied by another adult who is not a designated offender.
b. If the designated offender enters or is present in a restricted zone that includes a church, synagogue, mosque, temple or other house of religious worship (collectively “church”), but only if the following conditions are all satisfied:
(i) That the entrance and presence upon the property occurs only during hours of worship or other religious program/service as posted to the public; and
(ii) Written advance notice Is made from the designated offender to the Everest Metro Police Department and approval is received back from the Everest Metro Police Department; and that
(iii) the designated offender shall not participate in any religious education programs which include children.
(3) If the designated offender enters or is present in a restricted zone to attend an event involving the designated offender’s natural or adopted child/ren, but only if the following conditions are all satisfied:
a. Entrance and presence on the restricted zone occurs only during hours of activity related to the event as posted to the public; and
b. Written advance notice is made from the designated offender to the Everest Metro Police Department and approval is received back from the Everest Metro Police Department.
(4) If the designated offender enters or is present at a polling location in a restricted zone for the purpose of voting in any local, state or federal election, but only if the following conditions are all satisfied:
a. The person is eligible to vote;
b. The polling location is the designated polling place for the designated offender; and
c. The person enters the polling place property, proceeds to cast a ballot with whatever usual and customary assistance is provided to any member of the electorate and the person vacates the property immediately after voting.
(5) If the designated offender enters or is present in a restricted zone that supports an elementary or secondary school that the designated offender currently attends, but only if the designated offender’s presence is required for educational purposes.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 14
(d) Residency Restrictions.
(1) A designated offender shall not reside within 250 feet of a restricted zone. The distance shall be measured from the closest boundary line of the real property supporting the residence of a designated offender to the closest real property boundary line of the restricted zone.
(2) Exceptions. A designated offender residing within 250 feet of the real property comprising any restricted zone does not violate this ordinance if any of the following apply:
a. The person is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile facility, or other correctional institution or facility within 250 feet of a restricted zone.
b. The person has established a residence prior to the effective date of this section which is within 250 feet of any restricted zone, or if a property becomes a restricted zone after the effective date of this Ordinance and it is located within such 250 feet of a residence of a designated offender which was established prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
c. The designated offender is a minor or ward under guardianship.
(e) Property Owners Prohibited From Renting Real Property to Sexual Offenders. It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any designated offender prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to the terms of this Ordinance, if such place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance, is located within 250 feet of any restricted zone.
(f) Violations. A person who violates this Ordinance may be punished by a forfeiture which shall, together with the costs of prosecution, including attorney fees. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the Village may undertake all other legal and equitable remedies available (including, but not limited to, obtaining injunctive relief and/or a restraining order against a designated offender or any other person who violates this Ordinance).
(g) Petition. The above prohibitions may be waived upon approval by the Village of Weston Board of Trustees through petition by the affected party. Such petition shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk's Office who shall forward the request to the Village of Weston Board of Trustees, which shall receive reports from the Everest Metro Police Department on such petition. The Board of Trustees shall convene and consider the public interest as well as the affected party's presentation and concerns. After deliberation, the Board shall forward its decision in writing to the Everest Metro Police Department for their information and action. A written copy of the decision shall be provided to the affected party. The Board’s decision shall be final and is not subject to appeal or final review.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 15
(h) Accountability Program.
(1) The Everest Metro Police Department shall establish and maintain department policy and procedures to verify the registered address of designated offenders and to identify those designated offenders not in compliance with the Wisconsin Department of Corrections Sex Offender Registry.
(2) Designated offenders shall provide the Everest Metro Police Department or any official law enforcement officer requesting same, with current photograph and address, employment location, vehicle description(s), and other related information that may be deemed appropriate and lawful.
(i) Severability. If any provision of this Ordinance is invalid or unconstitutional, or if the application of this Ordinance to any person or circumstances is found invalid or unconstitutional by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the provisions or application of this Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provision or application.
(j) Obstruction.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay the enforcement of any order, rule, regulation or plan issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do any act forbidden by any order, rule regulation or plan issued pursuant to the authority contained in this section.
(2) Any person violating a provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to forfeiture as designated in the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 1 Sec. 1.111 (General Penalty).
(Ord. of 10-4-2012) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 54.116. Escorts and Escort Services.
(a) Definitions. For the purpose of this article, certain terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless this context clearly indicates otherwise.
Escort means any person who, for a fee, commission, salary, hire, profit, payment or other monetary considerations accompanies or offers to accompany another person to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of entertainment or places of amusement or consorts with another person about any place of public resort or within any private quarters or agrees to privately model lingerie, perform a striptease or perform in a nude or semi-nude state for any person or persons
Escort Service means service provided by any person who, for a fee, commission, salary, hire, profit, payment or other monetary consideration,
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 16
furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters or agrees to privately model lingerie, perform a striptease or perform in a nude or semi-nude state for another person or persons.
Person means any individual and is also extended and applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies and politics and corporate.
(b) Exemptions. This section does not apply to businesses, agencies and persons licensed by the State of Wisconsin or the Village of Weston pursuant to a specific statute or ordinance, and employed by a business so licensed and which performs and escort or an escort service function as a service merely incidental to the primary function of such profession, employment or business and which do not hold themselves out to the public as an escort or an escort service.
(c) License Required.
(1) No escort shall operate or provide service in the Village of Weston without first obtaining an escort service license issued by the Village of Weston.
(2) No person shall escort in the Village of Weston unless employed by an escort service licensed by the Village of Weston and properly registered pursuant to Sec. 54.116(j).
(3) Any person, partnership or corporation which desires to operate or provide services from more than one (1) location must have a license for each location.
(4) No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any person, partnership or corporation.
(5) No person may advertise indicating that an escort service is available in the Village of Weston unless that service possesses a valid license. No escort service may in any manner advertise its services as licensed by the Village of Weston.
(6) No escort service shall provide a person with the actual services of an escort at its establishment address except when the escort service has met the standards and requirements of adult-oriented establishments and is in possession of an adult-oriented establishment permit as required in the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 18 Sec. 18.103.
(d) Application for License.
(1) Any person desiring to secure a license under this article shall make applications to the Village Clerk.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 17
(2) The application for a license shall be a form approved by the Village Clerk. An applicant for a license (which shall include each partner and limited partner of a partnership applicant, each officer and director of a corporate applicant, each stockholder holding ten percent (10%) or more of the stock or beneficial ownership and every other person who is interested directly in the ownership of operation of the business) shall furnish the following information under oath:
a. Name and address, including all aliases;
b. Written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age;
c. All residential addresses of the applicant for the past ten (10) years;
d. The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of application;
e. Whether the applicant previously operated in this or any other states, county or city under an escort service license or similar business license; whether the applicant has ever had such a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefore and the business entity or trade name under which the applicant operated that was subject to the suspension or revocation;
f. All convictions and pending charges of felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violations, except minor traffic violations;
g. Fingerprints and photograph registration with the Everest Metro Police Department;
h. The address of the escort service to be operated by the applicant;
i. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify the name of the corporation, the date and state of the incorporation, the name and address of the registered agent and all officers and directors of the corporation.
(3) Additional Information. Each service shall furnish the following information under oath at the time of application.
a. The trade name of the escort service. An escort service may operate under only one (1) trade name per license.
b. The complete address of the proposed business location with a copy of the deed, lease, or other document pursuant to which the applicant occupies or will occupy, such premises.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 18
c. The service’s Federal Employer Identification Number.
d. A written plan setting forth:
i. Description of the nature of business to be conducted and services to be offered;
ii. Hours that the service will be open to the public;
iii. Copies of contracts to be used with escorts and customers;
iv. A receipt from the Finance Department showing payment of the appropriate fee shall be submitted with the application. The amount of the fee shall be listed in the Village’s Schedule of Fees.
(e) Standards for license issuance.
(1) To receive a license to operate an escort service, an applicant must meet the following standards:
a. If the applicant is an individual:
i. The applicant shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age;
ii. Subject to Wis. Stats Chapter 111, the applicant shall not have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere, or no contest, to a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction;
iii. The applicant shall not have been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation which substantially relates to the licensed activity;
iv. The applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated this ordinance within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application.
b. If the applicant is a corporation:
i. All officers, directors and others required to be named under Sec. 54.116(d)(2) shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age;
ii. Subject to Wis. Stats. Chapter 111, no officer, director or other person to be named under Sec. 54.116(d)(2) shall have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere, or no contest, to a felony or
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 19
any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction;
iii. No officer, director or other person required to be named under Sec. 54.116(d)(2) shall have been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation which substantially relates to the licensed activity.
iv. No officer, director or other person required to be named under Sec. 54.116(d)(2) shall have been found to have previously violated this ordinance within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application.
c. If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or any other type of organization where two (2) or more persons have a financial interest:
i. All persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age;
ii. No persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall, subject to Wis. Stats. Chapter 111, have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere, or no contest, to a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction;
iii. No persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall have been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation which substantially relates to the licensed activity;
iv. No person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall have been found to have violated any provision of this ordinance within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application.
d. No license shall be issued unless the Everest Metro Police Department has investigated the applicant’s qualifications to be licensed.
e. If any charges are currently pending which, if resulting in a conviction, would disqualify the applicant pursuant to subsections (e) (1) (a), (b) and (c) above, the Village Board may postpone action on the application until such time as the charge is resolved. Should the Village Board fail to act upon an application within sixty (60) days of the resolution of the charge, the application shall be deemed granted.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 20
(f) Renewal of license.
(1) Every license issued pursuant to this article will terminate on June 30th following its issuance, unless sooner revoked. Application for renewal shall be on a form provided by the Village Clerk.
(2) No renewal application will be considered filed in the office of the Village Clerk unless it is accompanied by the receipt of the Finance Department showing payment of the appropriate fee. The amount of the renewal fee shall be on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
(g) Denial of application. Whenever an initial application is denied, the duties of the Village Clerk and the rights of the applicant shall be as set forth in the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 18 Sec. 18.110(3) and Wis. Stat. § 68.13.
(h) Suspension, revocation, or non-renewal license.
(1) Any license issued under this article may be suspended for not less than ten (10) days nor more than ninety (90) days, or revoked, pursuant to the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 18 Sec. 18.114. The same provisions shall apply to denial of an application for renewal of a license under this article.
(2) Any violation of the requirements of this article shall be grounds for revocation of a license issued under this article.
(i) Responsibilities of the operator.
(1) The operator of an escort service shall maintain a register of all employees or independent contractors, showing the name and aliases used by the employee, home address, birth date, sex, telephone numbers, social security number and the date of employment and termination. The above information on each employee shall be maintained in the register on the premises for a period of three (3) years following termination.
(2) Records and reports required. Every escort and escort service shall:
a. Provide to each patron a written contract and receipt of payment for services. The contract shall clearly state the type of services to be performed, the length of time such services shall be performed, the total amount of money such services shall cost the patron, and any special terms or conditions relating to the services to be performed.
b. Maintain a legible written record of each transaction of any escort furnished to or arranged for on behalf of any person or customer. The record shall show the date and hour of each transaction, the name, address
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 21
and telephone number of the person requesting an escort, and the name of every escort furnished
c. The record required by subsections (e) (1) (a), (b) and (c) shall be kept available and open for inspection by the Police Department during business hours.
(3) The operator of an escort service shall make the register of employees, along with any other records required to be maintained under this article, available immediately for inspection by police upon demand of a member of the Everest Metro Police Department at all reasonable times.
(4) Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator’s negligent failure to supervise the employee’s conduct. The operator shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission.
(5) Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator for the purposes of determining whether the operator’s license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed.
(6) No person shall escort or agree to escort a person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(j) Registration of employees.
(1) All operators or employees working for any escort service and independent contractors shall, prior to beginning employment or contracted duties, obtain a photo identification card from the Village Clerk. Prior to issuance, the person shall provide:
a. Name, address, birth date, any aliases used, telephone numbers, date of employment and name of employer;
b. Photographs and fingerprinting with the Everest Metro Police Department.
(2) Upon registration, the Everest Metro Police Department will provide to each registered employee or independent contractor an identification card, containing the employee’s or independent contractor’s photograph identifying the persons as such, which shall be kept available for production upon request.
(3) All identification cards shall expire on December 31st following its issuance.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 22
(4) The applicant shall pay a fee, which shall be determined by the Everest Metro Police Department.
(5) Any escort employed by more than one (1) escort service shall submit a separate registration for each service by which the escort is employed.
(k) Penalties. Any person found to have violated any provisions of this article shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than two thousand dollars ($2,000) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000).
(l) Severability. If any provisions of this ordinance are deemed invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions of the same.
(Ord. of 6-5-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 19-009 of 8/21/2019]
Sec. 54.117. Prostitution.
(a) Adoption of state law regarding prostitution. Wis. Stat. § 944.30 prohibiting prostitution, exclusive of the penalty, is hereby adopted by reference and made an offense punishable as a violation of this Code.
(b) Offering or engaging in sexual contact for compensation.
(1) It shall be unlawful and prohibited for any person to pay a fee or receive a fee, directly or indirectly, or to offer or ask for anything of value, for touching or offering to touch the sexual parts of another either directly or by employing a mechanical or electrically operated device for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of either party.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person owning, managing or otherwise controlling any place of business to cause or to permit any agent, employee or other person under his control or supervision to participate in conduct prohibited in subsection (1) of this section.
(c) Penalties. Any person found to have violated any provisions of this article shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than two thousand dollars ($2,000) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000).
(Ord. of 6-5-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
ARTICLE II MINORS
Sec 54.200. Curfew
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 23
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Curfew hours means:
(1) 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and
(2) 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday.
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes but is not limited to a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
Guardian means:
(1) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
(2) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
Minor means any person prosecutable per Wis. Stat. § 48.02(2).
Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation LLC and LLP.
Parent means a person who is:
(1) A natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of another person; or
(2) At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, including but not limited to streets, highways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.
Remain means to:
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 24
(1) Linger or stay; or
(2) Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
(b) Offenses.
(1) A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the village during curfew hours.
(2) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits or by insufficient control allows the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the village during curfew hours.
(3) The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
(c) Defenses.
(1) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b) that the minor was:
a. Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
b. On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
c. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
d. Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
e. Involved in an emergency;
f. On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence;
g. Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the village, a civic organization, or
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 25
another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop;
h. Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or
i. Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with law.
(2) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(3) that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
(d) Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in subsection (c) is present and complies with Wis. Stat. § 48.19(1)(d)(8).
(Code 1982, § 4.125; Ord. of 11-11-11) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 54.201. Harboring, aiding, assisting and abetting minor runaways.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Runaway means an unemancipated person under the age of 18 years who has been reported as a missing person runaway to any law enforcement agency and whose whereabouts is or was unknown to the parents, guardian or legal custodian.
(b) Harboring runaways prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly harbor, allow, board or otherwise permit any runaway in his residence or business or other property under his control where such person knows or should have known the minor to be a runaway from his parent, guardian or legal custodian.
(c) Assisting runaways prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly assist, aid or abet a runaway to escape apprehension or flee from his parents, guardian, legal custodian or public officials. This includes but is not limited to the following acts:
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 26
(1) Providing transportation to the runaway;
(2) Providing money, clothing or any other useful instrument to the runaway that would aid the runaway in escape;
(3) Obstructing by providing false or untrue information regarding the location or plan of the runaway;
(4) Refusing to provide information to law enforcement officers when questioned about the runaway, which information was known to them at the time and would assist in the apprehension of the runaway; or
(5) Assisting, aiding or abetting the runaway in any other way for the purpose of hindering law enforcement officers or the parents, guardian or legal custodian of the runaway from learning the whereabouts of the child.
(d) Exception. Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to persons who harbor runaways by virtue of a placement by the juvenile court intake staff or any court.
(e) Penalty.
(1) Any person violating this section shall upon conviction be subject to Sec. 1.111.
(2) Any person under the age of 18 who violates any of the provisions of this section shall upon conviction be subject to the penalties as provided in Wis. Stat. § 938.343.
(Ord. of 10-19-1989, § 1; Ord. of 11-11-11) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 54.202. Truancy.
(a) Definitions. For the purposes of this section:
(1) Acceptable excuse. Shall mean an acceptable excuse as defined in Wis. Stats. §§ 118.15, 118.16(4).
(2) Dropout. Shall mean a pupil who ceased to attend school, does not attend a public or private school, technical college or home-based private educational system on a full time basis, has not graduated from high school and does not have an acceptable excuse under Wis. Stats. §§ 118.15(1)(b) - (d), and 118.15(1), (3) and who is at least 16 years of age but less than 18 years of age.
(3) Habitual truant. Shall mean a pupil who is absent from school without an acceptable excuse for part or all of five or more days on which school is held during a school semester.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 27
(4) Truant. Shall mean a pupil who is absent from school without an acceptable excuse for part or all of any day on which school is held during a school semester.
(5) Truancy. Shall mean any absence of part or all of one or more days from school during which the school attendance officer, principal or teacher has not been notified of the legal cause of such absence by the parent or guardian of the absent pupil, and also means intermittent attendance carried on for the purpose of defeating the intent of the compulsory school attendance requirements set forth in Wis. Stat. § 118.15.
(6) Attendance at school. No parent, guardian or other person 18 years or older shall knowingly allow a child between the ages of six and less than 18, who is under his/her control to absent himself/herself from attendance at school without an "acceptable excuse."
(7) Contributing to truancy. No person 17 or older, by an act of omission, shall knowingly encourage or contribute to the truancy or habitual truancy of a child. An act or omission contributes to the truancy or habitual truancy of a child, whether or not the child is so adjudged, if the natural and probable consequences of that act of omission would be to cause the child to be truant.
(8) Allowing truancy. Any parent, guardian or other adult who knowingly allows a child to absent him/herself from attendance at school without an "acceptable excuse" shall be in violation of this section.
(b) Penalties.
(1) Truant. Any person who is deemed to be a "truant" may be subject to one or more of the following dispositions by the court.
a. An order for the person to attend school.
b. A forfeiture of not more than $50.00 plus costs for a first violation or a forfeiture of not more than $100.00 plus costs for any second or subsequent violation committed within 12 months of a previous violation, subject to Wis. Stat. § 938.37, and subject to a maximum cumulative forfeiture amount of not more than $500.00 for all violations committed during a school semester. All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be assessed against the truant, the parents or guardian of the truant of both.
(2) Habitual truant. Any person who is deemed to be an "habitual truant" may be subject to one or more of the following dispositions by court:
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 28
a. The suspension of the habitual truant's operating privilege for not less than 30 days nor more than one year. The court shall immediately take possession of the suspended license and forward it to the department of transportation of the State of Wisconsin, together with a notice stating the reason for and the duration of the suspension.
b. An order for the habitual truant to participate in counseling, or a supervised work program, or other community service work as described in Wis. Stat. § 938.34(5g). The cost of any such counseling, supervised work program or community service work may be assessed against the habitual truant, the parents or guardian of the habitual truant, or both.
c. An order for the habitual truant to remain at home except during the hours in which the habitual truant is attending religious worship or a school program, including travel time required to get to and from the school program or place of worship. The order may permit a habitual truant to leave his/her home if the habitual truant is accompanied by a parent or guardian.
d. An order for the habitual truant to attend an education program as described in Wis. Stat. § 938.342.
e. An order for the department of workforce development to revoke, under Wis. Stats. §§ 103.70, and 103.72, authorizing the employment of the habitual truant.
f. An order for the habitual truant to be placed in a teen court program as described in Wis. Stat. § 938.342(1g)(f).
g. An order for the habitual truant to attend school.
h. A forfeiture of not more than $500.00 plus costs, subject to Wis. Stat. § 938.37. All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be assessed against the habitual truant, the parents or guardians of the habitual truant or both.
i. Any other reasonable conditions consistent with this section, including curfew, restrictions as to going or to remaining on specified premises and/or restrictions on associating with other children and/or adults.
j. An order placing the habitual truant under formal or informal supervision, as described in Wis. Stat. § 938.34(2), for up to one year.
k. An order for the habitual truant's parent, guardian or legal custodian to participate in counseling at the parent's, guardian's, or legal custodian's own expense or to attend school with the habitual truant or both.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 29
(3) Dropout. Any person who is deemed to be a "dropout" may be subject to the court suspending the person's operating privileges until the person reaches the age of 18. The court shall immediately take possession of any suspended license and forward it to the Department of Transportation of the State of Wisconsin, together with a notice stating the reason for and the duration of the suspension.
a. The municipal court may order the DC Everest School District to provide to the court a list of all persons who are known to the school district to be dropouts and who reside within the jurisdiction of the Schofield-Weston Municipal Court.
(4) Allowing truancy. Any parent, guardian or other adult who knowingly allows a child to absent him/herself from attendance at school without an "acceptable excuse" may be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 plus costs nor more than $100.00 plus costs for the first offense; and not less than $100.00 plus costs nor more than $250.00 plus costs for any subsequent offense within a one year period.
(Ord. of 11-20-2000(2), § 1(54.114); Ord. of 11-11-11) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Editors Note--Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Nov. 11, 2000, added provisions designated as § 54.114. For better categorizing and indexing, said provisions have been redesignated as § 54.106.1, at the discretion of the editor. The original section designation has been retained in the history note at the end of the section.
ARTICLE III TOBACCO, SMOKING AND PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES
Sec. 54.300. Smoking or electronic delivery devices prohibited in certain areas.
(a) Definitions.
Bed and breakfast means establishment is an owner-occupied private home where the business of paying guests is secondary to its use as a private residence.
Childcare facility means any state licensed or county certified child care facility including, but not limited to, licensed family day care or licensed group day care centers, licensed day camps, certified school-age programs and pre-school programs.
Common areas of buildings means all areas not part of a tenant’s leased premises, including, but not limited to, lobbies, community rooms, hallways, laundry rooms, stairwells, elevators, enclosed parking facilities, pool areas and restrooms contiguous thereto.
Common areas of malls means those areas within a mall customarily accessible to patrons.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 30
Educational facility means any building used principally for educational purposes in which a school is located or a course of instruction or training program is offered that has been approved or licensed by a state agency or board.
Electronic delivery device means any product containing or delivering nicotine or other similar substance intended for human consumption that may be used by a person to simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor or aerosol from the product. Electronic delivery device includes any device manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah, or vape pen, or under any other product name or description, or any component part of such product whether or not sold separately. Electronic delivery device does not include any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product and is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose.
Employee means any person who is employed by any employer for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, including those full time, part time, temporary or contracted for from a third party; employee also means any person who serves as a volunteer for a business or nonprofit entity.
__________
* Cross References--Health and Sanitation, Chapter 38.
Employer means any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other entity, including a public or non-profit entity who employs the services of one (1) or more individual persons.
Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of door or passage ways) which extend from floor or ceiling, including all space therein screened by partitions which do not extend to the ceiling or are not solid, “other landscaping” or similar structures.
Entrance means a doorway and adjacent area which gives direct access to a building from a contiguous street, plaza, sidewalk or parking lot.
Health care facility has the meaning set forth in Wis.Stat. § 155.01(6).
Hotel and motel has the meaning set forth in the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 94 Sec. 94.4.05(16).
Incidental means so minor in significance and non-essential to the primary use, purpose or operation that if the incidental use is discontinued, the primary purpose would continue without harm.
Mall means an enclosed, indoor area containing common areas and discrete businesses primarily devoted to the retail sale of goods and services.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 31
Medical services has the meaning set forth in Wis. Stat. § 647.01(6).
Non-smoking means smoking is prohibited.
Outdoors smoking area means a cordoned off outside area of a restaurant or tavern, like a deck or patio, that is separate from the main entrance of the restaurant and tavern and allows public access only from the inside.
Person in charge means the person who ultimately controls, governs or directs the activities aboard a public conveyance or within or at a place where smoking is regulated under this section, regardless of the person’s status as owner or lessee.
Place of employment means an enclosed area controlled by the employer, which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges and restrooms, conference and classrooms, employee cafeterias and hallways. A private residence is not a ‘place of employment’ within the meaning of this ordinance unless used as a childcare facility.
Private residence means premises owned, rented or leased by temporary or permanent habitation.
Public Building means any structure, including exterior parts of such a building, such building, such as a porch, exterior platform, or steps providing means of ingress or egress, used in whole or in part as a place of resort, assemblage, lodging, trade, traffic, occupancy, or use by the public or by three or more tenants.
Restaurant means an establishment defined in the Village of Weston Municipal Code Sec. 94.4.05(10).
Retail tobacco store means a business whose primary purpose is the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental.
Room means a space within a building completely enclosed with walls, partitions, floor and ceiling, except for openings for light, ventilation, ingress and egress.
School board means the school board in charge of the public schools, grades K-12, of a school district.
School property means any property owned and/or titled in the D.C. Everest School District or property under the direct control and authority of the D.C. Everest School District.
Smokefree means absence from the ambient air of the smoke by-product from the burning, inhaling, exhaling, or carry of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, weed, or plant.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 32
Smoke or Smoking means burning, holding, inhaling, exhaling or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe or heated tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation, whether natural, or synthetic, in any manner or form. Smoking includes the use of an electronic delivery device which creates an aerosol or vapor, in any manner or form, or the use of any oral smoking device.
Sports arena means sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, swimming pools, roller and indoor ice rinks, and bowling centers.
Tavern means any establishment whose primary purpose is the sale of fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquors for consumption upon said premises and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental.
Tobacco product means a combustible cigarette, cigar, weed, plant or other combustible substance prepared in such a manner that is suitable for smoking. This section shall not include smoke-free tobacco products.
Village buildings means all Village-owned and operated buildings and those portions of buildings leased and operated by the Village.
(b) Intent and purpose.
(1) The Board of Trustees of the Village of Weston hereby finds that:
a. It is recognized that smoking of cigarettes and electronic cigarette devices containing nicotine and tobacco products is hazardous to an individual’s health and may affect the health of nonsmokers/smokers when they are involuntarily in the presence of smoking.
b. Numerous scientific studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor pollution.
c. Reliable scientific studies, including studies conducted by the Surgeon General of the United States, have shown that breathing sidestream or secondhand smoke is a significant health hazard to nonsmokers; particularly to children, elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease.
d. Health hazards inducted by breathing sidestream or secondhand smoke include lung cancer, respiratory infection, decreased respiratory function, decreased exercise tolerance, bronchoconstriction and bronchospasm.
e. Reliable scientific studies assessed by credible health officials have found that sidestream and secondhand tobacco smoke are a leading cause of premature death and disability among nonsmokers. Site specific local
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 33
studies in Marathon and Wood Counties conducted in the summer of 2008 identified unsafe levels of small particulate matter in establishments where smoking was allowed. Secondhand tobacco smoke is a primary source of small particulate matter.
f. Air pollution caused by smoking is an offensive annoyance and irritant. Smoking results in serious and significant physical discomfort to nonsmokers.
(2) This Ordinance is adopted for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the people of the Village of Weston , especially recognizing the rights of nonsmokers who constitute a majority of the population; educating citizens affected by this ordinance; and assisting owners, operators; and managers in maintaining compliance.
(3) This Ordinance is also adopted for the purpose of easing the potential economic loss and financial burden of Village restaurants and taverns where smoking is currently allowed (in 2008) through regulatory and economic relief as available for the construction of outdoors smoking areas.
(4) The Village of Weston Board of Trustees has twice endorsed the need for a state wide smoking ban to protect the public health and safety of its residents and to provide a level competitive playing field for all businesses especially those in the hospitality industry.
(c) Prohibition of smoking in indoor public places. Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to smoke tobacco products or electronic delivery devices in indoor public places as defined in subsection (a) and places of employment as defined in subsection (a), including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Elevators and enclosed stairwells, including those within Village buildings.
(2) Public forms of transportation, including, but not limited to, motor buses, taxicabs, or other public passenger vehicles.
(3) Theatres, libraries, museums, auditoriums, sports arenas, convention halls which are used by or open to the public.
(4) Any childcare facility. Incorporated herein by reference are the following Wisconsin statutory and administrative code sections and any amendments or renumbering thereof: Wis. Stat. § 101.123(1)(abm) and ; Wis. Stat. § 49.136 .
(5) Retail stores.
(6) Health care facilities.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 34
(7) Waiting rooms, hallways, rooms of health care laboratories.
(8) Waiting rooms, hallways, rooms in offices of any physician, dentist, psychologist, chiropractor, optometrist or optician, or other medical services provider.
(9) Meeting and conference rooms in which people gather for educational, business, professional, union, governmental, recreational, political or social purposes.
(10) Polling places.
(11) Services lobbies, waiting areas, and the common areas open to the public of financial institutions, business and professional offices, and multi-unit commercial facilities.
(12) Self-service laundry facilities.
(13) Enclosed, indoor areas of restaurants.
(14) Common areas of malls.
(15) Public bus and transfer point shelters.
(16) Common areas of building which contain three (3) or more rental units. Written Rental Agreements shall include reference to this subdivision.
(17) Village buildings.
(18) Village-owned or leased motor vehicles.
(19) Sports arenas & fieldhouses.
(20) Enclosed indoor areas of taverns.
(21) Enclosed areas in bed and breakfast establishments, hotels and motels.
(d) Prohibition of smoking in outdoor areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or use tobacco products or electronic delivery devices in the following outdoor areas.
(1) Within twenty (20) feet from all entry ways of Village-owned buildings and structures, including, but not limited to, parking ramps (if applicable) , park pavilions, etc., except open air facilities.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 35
(2) Outside of the Weston Public Safety Building, on the sidewalk between the main entrance and public parking lot, extending from Sternberg Avenue to Corozalla Street;
(3) Areas in Village parks as posted and so designated by the Parks and Recreation Department including the athletic field/ bleachers & dugouts, aquatic center, skateboard park, dog park, playground and swing set areas, and park restrooms;
(e) Smoking allowed outdoors. Restaurants & taverns may allow smoking outdoors if it is restricted to a designated area separate from the main entrance. Restaurants and taverns may serve alcohol in the outdoors smoking area if the area provides a barrier (fence or deck railing) that allows no access to public except from inside the restaurant or tavern and is constructed in compliance with Village building and zoning codes. Restaurants, taverns, hotels, and bed & breakfast facilities shall include an endorsement on their Village liquor license that outdoor alcohol use is permitted.
(1) The Village shall waive all building permit fees and plan review fees affiliated with the purpose of construction of an outdoor smoking area for restaurants, taverns, hotels and bed and breakfast facilities. This waiver is effective upon enactment and expires on 12/31/2009.
(2) The Village may waive certain property setbacks and zoning restrictions found under the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 94 for the purpose of construction of an outdoors smoking area, provide such waiver does not encroach on a private residence or create a nuisance. This waiver is effective upon enactment and expires on 12/31/2009.
(f) Prohibition of smoking in educational facilities. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke any cigarette or otherwise use any tobacco products or use any other smoking or electronic delivery devices:
(1) In all educational facilities and in or upon all other premises owned, rented by or under the control of a school board (see Sec. 54.300(a)).
(g) Prohibition of smoking in places of employment.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke any tobacco products in all places of employment.
(2) Every building which is a place of employment shall have at least one (1) entrance which is smokefree.
(3) Each employer, operator, manager, lessor or other person having control of the place of employment shall make reasonable efforts to ensure a smokefree workplace for all employees and frequenters.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 36
(4) Upon implementation, each employer having a place of employment located within the Village of Weston shall adopt, implement and communicate written notice of the provisions of this ordinance to each employee.
(h) Exceptions. There are no exceptions to this ordinance.
(i) Enforcement.
(1) The Zoning Administrator or designee and the Chief of Police or designee shall have the power, whenever they may deem it necessary, to enter upon the premises named in this section to ascertain whether the premises are in compliance with this ordinance. A compliance time of not less than one (1) week shall be granted. Enforcement may be by citation, as permitted by Sec. 1.111
(2) The proprietor, employer or other person in charge of premises regulated hereunder, upon either observing or being advised of a violation, shall make reasonable efforts to prevent smoking in prohibited areas by:
a. Approaching smokers who fail to voluntarily comply with this section and requesting that they extinguish their cigarette or tobacco product and refrain from smoking or
b. Refusing service to anyone smoking in a prohibited area.
(3) Any person who desires to register a complaint under this section may contact the Zoning Administrator or the Police Department.
(4) Ashtrays, cigarette vending machines and other smoking paraphernalia shall not be located in areas where smoking is prohibited.
(5) Marathon County Health Department will remind owners of this ordinance and monitor for signs of smoking during health inspection of licensed facilities. Any noted violation of this ordinance will be reported to the Zoning Administrator or the Police Department.
(j) Retaliation prohibited. No person shall discharge, refuse to hire, refuse to serve or in any other manner retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment, customer, service user, business patron or any other person because that person exercises any rights afforded by this section.
(k) Violations and penalties.
(1) General. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section may be subject to a forfeiture of no more than one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125) for the first offense and no more than ($250) for the second and ($500) for
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 37
subsequent offenses. Each day that a violation occurs shall be considered a separate offense.
(l) Clean indoor air.
(1) Intent and construction. The Village of Weston finds that it is in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the community to adopt by reference Wis. Stat. § 101.123, and subsequent amendments, additions and recodifications. It is the intent of the Village Board that where there may be conflict between Wis. Stat. § 101.123 and Sec. 54.300, that the most restrictive section shall apply. This ordinance shall not be construed to mean that progressive discipline of Village employees for violations of laws, rules and regulations is only authorized where explicitly provided by ordinance.
(2) Penalty. The penalties provided by Wis. Stat. § 101.123 shall be in addition to the penalties provided for violation of Sec. 54.300 when a person has violated both laws. In addition to the penalties provided by Sec. 54.300 and Wis. Stat. § 101.123, any Village employee who violates any provision of Sec. 54.107 or Wis. Stat. § 101.123 may also be subject to progressive discipline by his or her employer.
(m) Severability. The provisions of this section are severable. If any provisions of this section is held to be invalid or unconstitutional or if the application of any provisions of this section to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such holding shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this section which can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provisions or applications. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Village Board of Trustees that this section would have been adopted had any invalid or unconstitutional provision or applications not been included herein.
(n) The provisions of this ordinance shall become effective on July 5, 2010.
(Code 1982, § 4.02, § 101.123; Ord. of 1-6-2009; Ord. of 7-6-2009; Ord. of 11-11-11) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord No. 18-018 of 6/27/2018]
Sec. 54.301. Prohibition concerning children.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Nicotine product means a product that contains nicotine and is not any of the following:
1. A tobacco product
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 38
2. A cigarette
3. A product that has been approved by the U.S. food and drug administration for sale as a smoking cessation product or for another medical purpose and is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose, as defined in Wis Stat § 134.66.
Cigarette has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. § 139.30(1m).
Electronic delivery device means any product containing or delivering nicotine or other similar substance intended for human consumption that may be used by a person to simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor or aerosol from the product. Electronic delivery device includes any device manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah, or vape pen, or under any other product name or description, or any component part of such product whether or not sold separately. Electronic delivery device does not include any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product and is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose.
Law enforcement officer has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. § 30.50(4s).
Smoke or Smoking means burning, holding, inhaling, exhaling or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe or heated tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation, whether natural, or synthetic, in any manner or form. Smoking includes the use of an electronic delivery device which creates an aerosol or vapor, in any manner or form, or the use of any oral smoking device.
Tobacco products means cigars; cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed and other smoking tobacco; snuff, snuff flour, Cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or both for chewing and smoking; but “tobacco products” does not include cigarettes, as defined under Section 139.30(1) of the Wisconsin Statutes and has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. § 139.75(12).
(b) Prohibited acts. Except as provided in subsection (c), no child may do any of the following:
(1) Buy or attempt to buy any cigarette, nicotine products, tobacco product, or other smoking or electronic delivery device.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 39
(2) Falsely represent his/her age for the purpose of receiving any cigarette, nicotine products or tobacco product, or other smoking or electronic delivery device.
(3) Possess any cigarette or tobacco product, or other smoking or electronic delivery device, or nicotine product.
(c) Exception, children employed. A child may purchase or possess cigarettes, nicotine products, or tobacco products or other smoking or electronic delivery device for the sole purpose of resale in the course of employment during his working hours if employed by a retailer licensed under Wis. Stat. § 134.65(1).
(d) Confiscation by law enforcement officer. A law enforcement officer shall seize any cigarette, nicotine products, or tobacco product, or other smoking or electronic delivery device involved in any violation of subsection (b) committed in his presence.
Adopting Wis. Stat. § 254.92 (2)
(Ord. of 5-4-1992(1), § 1; Ord. of 11-11-11; Ord. of 12-20-13; Ord. of 06-15-15) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord No 18-018 of 06/27/18]
Sec. 54.302. Restrictions on sale or gift.
(a) Definitions. The definitions contained in Wis. Stat. § 134.66 are adopted by reference and made a part of this section as if fully set forth in this subsection.
(b) Restrictions.
(1) No retailer may sell or give cigarettes, electronic cigarette devices containing nicotine, tobacco products, electronic cigarette devices containing nicotine, or other nicotine products to any person under the age of 18 years, except as provided in Wis. Stat. § 48.983(3). A vending machine operator is not liable under this subsection for the purchase of cigarettes, tobacco products or nicotine products from his vending machine by a person under the age of 18 years if the vending machine operator was unaware of the purchase.
(2)
a. A retailer shall post a sign in areas within his premises where cigarettes, tobacco products, electronic cigarette devices containing nicotine, or nicotine products are sold to consumers stating that the sale of any cigarette, tobacco product, or nicotine product to a person under the age of 18 years is unlawful under this section and under Wis. Stat. § 254.92.
b. A vending machine operator shall attach a notice in a conspicuous place on the front of his vending machines stating that the purchase of any cigarette, tobacco product, electronic cigarette devices containing nicotine,
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 40
or nicotine product by a person under the age of 18 years is unlawful
under this section and under Wis. Stat. § 254.92 and that the purchaser is
subject to a forfeiture of not to exceed $25.00.
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (b)(4) of this section, no retailer may place a
vending machine within 500 feet of a school.
(4)
a. Except as provided in subsection (b)(3) of this section, no retailer may
keep a vending machine in any public place that is open to persons under
the age of 18 years unless all of the following apply:
1. The vending machine is in a place where it is ordinarily in the
immediate vicinity, plain view and control of an employee.
2. The vending machine is in a place where it is inaccessible to the
public when the premises are closed.
b. The person who ultimately controls, governs or directs the activities
within the premises where the vending machine is located shall ensure that
an employee of the retailer remains in the immediate vicinity, plain view
and control of the vending machine whenever the premises are open.
(c) Defense of retailer. Proof of all of the following facts by a retailer who sells
cigarettes or tobacco products to a person under the age of 18 years is a defense to
any prosecution for a violation of subsection (b)(1) of this section:
(1) That the purchaser falsely represented that he had attained the age of 18 years
and presented an identification card.
(2) That the appearance of the purchaser was such that an ordinary and prudent
person would believe that the purchaser had attained the age of 18 years.
(d) Penalties.
(1) Notwithstanding the penalty provisions contained in section 1.111, any person
who commits a violation of this section shall be subject to the following
penalties:
a. A forfeiture of not more than $500.00 if the person has not committed a
previous violation within 12 months of the violation; or
b. Not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00 if the person has committed
a previous violation within 12 months of the violation.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 41
(2) A court shall suspend any license or permit issued under Wis. Stats. §§ 134.65, 139.34 or 139.79 to a person for:
a. Not more than three days if the court finds that the person committed a violation within 12 months after committing one previous violation;
b. Not less than three days nor more than ten days if the court finds that the person committed the violation within 12 months after committing two other violations; or
c. Not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days if the court finds that the person committed the violation within 12 months after committing three or more other violations.
(Ord. of 5-4-1992(2), § 1; Ord. of 11-11-11 Ord. of 06-15-15) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord No 18-018 of 06/27/18]
Sec. 54.303. Synthetic Cannabinoid Prohibited.
(a) Possession, use and sale are illegal. It shall be illegal for any person to use, possess, purchase, attempt to purchase, sell, publically display for sale or attempt to sell, give or barter any one or more of the following chemicals whether under the common street or trade names of “Spice”, “K2”, “Genie”, “Yucatan Fire”, “fake” or “new” marijuana, or by any other name, label or description:
(1) (6aR, 10aR)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6dimethyl-3-(2methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-o1 some trade or other names: HU-210.
(2) 1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole-some trade or other names: JWH-018\spice.
(3) 1-Butyl-3-(1naphthoyl) indole-some trade or other names: JWH-073.
(4) 1-(3{trifluoromethylphenyl}) piperazine-some trade or other names: TFMPP.
(5) Any substance which is a cannabinoid receptor agonist (CRA). “Cannabinoid receptor agonist” means a substance that has an affinity for and stimulates physiological activity in a cannabinoid receptor within the human brain.
(6) Or any similar structural analogs.
(b) Medical or dental use allowed. Acts otherwise prohibited under subsection (a) shall not be unlawful if done by or under the direction or prescription of a licensed physician, dentist, or other medical health professional authorized to direct or prescribe such acts, provided that such use is permitted under state and federal laws.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 42
(c) Penalties. Any person violating this ordinance shall be subject to the following forfeitures:
(1) Possession/use. A forfeiture of $200.00 to $500.00, exclusive of costs.
(2) Sale. A forfeiture of $2,000.00 to $3,000.00, exclusive of costs.
(Ord. of 12-09-2010; Ord. of 11-11-11) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 43
ARTICLE IV PROPERTY
Sec. 54.400. Right of privacy regarding valuation of property for assessment purposes.
(a) Adoption. This section adopts by reference Wis. Stat. § 70.47(7)(af). Income and expense information provided by property owner to an assessor for the purposes of establishing the valuation for assessment purposes by the income method of valuation shall be confidential and not a public record open to inspection or copying under Wis. Stat. § 19.35(1).
(b) Exceptions.
(1) The assessor has access to such information in the performance of his/her duties;
(2) The board of review may review such information when needed, in its opinion, to decide upon a contested assessment.
(3) Another person or body has the right to review such information due to the intimate relationship to the duties of an office or as set by law.
(4) The officer is complying with a court order.
(5) The person providing the income and expense information has contested the assessment level at either the board of review or by filing a claim for excessive assessment under Wis. Stat. § 74.37, in which case the base records are open and public.
(Ord. of 8-21-2000, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 11-11-11) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 54.401. Disposal of abandoned property.
(a) Village custody of lost or abandoned property. Property which appears to be lost or abandoned, discovered by officers or employees of the village or turned in to the chief of police by citizens shall be disposed of in conformity with the requirements of this section.
(1) Lost or abandoned property will be examined by the chief of police or a member of the Everest Metro Police Force for identifying marks in an attempt to determine the owner. If there are no identifying marks and the owner cannot be located, the village will take custody of the property.
(2) No village employee shall keep for his or her own use property found by such employee while in the course of employment with the village, nor shall such
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 44
employee take possession of property during off-duty hours when the discovery thereof was made while on duty.
(3) The chief of police or a member of the Everest Metro Police Department shall permit persons to claim lost property provided they present sufficient proof they are the rightful owners.
(b) Methods of disposal. Any personal property which has been abandoned, or remained unclaimed for a period of 30 days after the taking of possession of the property by the village or by the chief of police or member of the Everest Metropolitan Police Department shall be disposed of in the following manner:
(1) The Village of Weston may retain and use any such unclaimed or abandoned property for village operations. The person in charge of each village department may select from a list of unclaimed or abandoned property those items of personal property that would be usable for department operations.
(2) Personal property not retained or selected by the village or any of its department heads for use in village operations may, with the consent of the village administrator, be donated to a charitable or nonprofit organization. Any such property deemed by the village or any of its department heads to not be usable may be discarded.
(3) All unclaimed or abandoned property not converted to village use, donated to charity or a nonprofit organization or discarded shall be disposed of in a sale open to the public either by public auction or sealed bid.
(c) Disposal by auction or sealed bid.
(1) Whenever any property under this section is sold by public auction or sale by sealed bid, such auction or the awarding of bids shall be preceded by a Class 2 notice describing the property and arranging the time and place for the auction or bid submission. The property auctioned or sold by sealed bid shall be sold in as-is condition to the highest bidder. No sale or auction shall occur until the chief of police or member of the Everest Metropolitan Police Department has determined that the property has no value to any probable investigation or legal proceeding. The department head responsible for the property shall determine the time in which the successful bidder shall remove the property. In the event the property is not removed within that time, the property shall revert to the village and the amount of the bid be forfeited to the village.
(2) In the event the property reverts to the village for failure of the bidder to remove the property within the time specified or the property after being exposed to public sale either by auction or sealed bid is not sold, the said property may be disposed of in any manner that is deemed commercially reasonable by the village administrator.
Chapter 54 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Page 45
(3) If the property is not disposed of in a sale open to the public, the village shall maintain an inventory of such property; a record of the date and method of disposal, including the consideration received for the property, if any; and the name and address of the person taking possession of the property. Such inventory shall be kept as a public record for a period of not less than two years from the date of disposal of the property.
(d) Disposal of abandoned bicycles. The police chief or his/her authorized representative may dispose of bicycles, play vehicles or similar devices which have been abandoned or remain unclaimed for a period of 30 days either through public auction, donation to charitable or nonprofit organization or said property shall be destroyed and junked.
A bicycle auction may be conducted by the police department at any time the surplus of bicycles dictates and the 30 day waiting period for abandonment has expired.
(e) Disposal of flammable, explosive, incendiary or unsafe substances. The village may immediately and safely dispose of any unclaimed or abandoned flammable, explosive, incendiary or unsafe devices or substances which pose a danger to life or property if stored, transported or used after taking possession and without sale at public auction or public bid. However, the village shall attempt to return to the rightful owner substances, materials or devices which have a commercial value in the normal business usage and do not pose an immediate threat to life or property. An attempt to return the substance, material or device to the rightful owner shall be made when it appears that such substance, material or device has been reported stolen.
(f) Disposal of seized property. The chief of police or his/her authorized representative may safely dispose of any seized property which poses a danger to life or other property in storage, transportation or use and which is not required for evidence or further investigation. Disposal procedures include, but are not limited to, return of the seized property to the rightful owner.
(g) Receipts from sale of abandoned property. All receipts from the sale of abandoned property, after deducting the necessary expenses of keeping the property and conducting the sale, shall be paid into the village treasury. Provided, however, the net proceeds from sales at any bicycle auction shall be paid over to the Everest Metropolitan Police Department and used by the said department in its community crime prevention activities.
(Ord. of 10-16-2000(1), § 1(54.112); Ord. of 11-11-11) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Editors Note--Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Oct. 16, 2000, added provisions designated as Sec. 54.112. For better categorizing and indexing, said provisions have been redesignated as Sec. 54.122, at the discretion of the editor. The original section designation has been retained in the history note at the end of the section.
Chapter 58 Parks and Recreation Page 1
Chapter 58
PARKS AND RECREATION*
Sec. 58.100. Public parks; closing hours.
Sec. 58.101. Sportsmanship--village parks, fields, diamonds or rinks.
Sec. 58.102. Prohibiting Dogs in Certain Public Parks.
Sec. 58.103. Damage (Vandalism) to Village Parkland and Recreational Property.
__________
* Cross References--Any ordinance naming public grounds and parks saved from repeal, § 1.110(17); Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places, Chapter 70.
State Law References--Authority regarding parks generally, Wis. Stats. § 27.13.
Chapter 58 Parks and Recreation Page 2
PARKS AND RECREATION
Sec. 58.100. Public parks; closing hours.
It shall be unlawful for any person, except registered campers, in or en route to designated campgrounds, to enter or to be in any public park in the village between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and the following 5:00 a.m. Nor shall any person during these hours park, stop or leave standing, whether attended or unattended, any vehicle or watercraft in any such public park in the village. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be penalized as provided in Sec. 1.111.
(Code 1982, § 4.157) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 15-032, 12/23/2015]
Sec. 58.101. Sportsmanship--village parks, fields, diamonds or rinks.
(1) Purpose. The Village of Weston has developed and continues to develop and maintain parks, playgrounds, fields, diamonds and skating rinks along with related facilities for the community's use, enjoyment, health and well-being. Ball diamonds, soccer fields, skating rinks, volley ball and similar facilities have been provided for public use as a means, among others, of encouraging and enabling coaches and teams to compete with one another in a spirit of friendship and good sportsmanship. However, it has been observed, that conduct by some coaches, players and/or spectators while using or observing team events at village parks, fields and/or playgrounds have been disruptive and wholly inimical to these purposes tending to cause or provoke disturbances. It has therefore become necessary for the village to enact this section setting forth a code of conduct which must be adhered to by coaches, players and spectators as a condition for the use and enjoyment of these facilities.
(2) Sportsmanship code of conduct. Those individuals, teams, sports clubs, school district teams or athletic associations choosing to use or attend any Village of Weston publicly owned and/or operated recreational facility, whether it be a park, ball diamond, soccer field, volley ball facility or skating rink must adhere to the following sportsmanship code of conduct:
(a) Coaches. Those involved in coaching in any team event shall:
1. Take pride in being a good example as a coach in appearance, conduct, language and sportsmanship.
2. Demonstrate and instill in players respect for and courtesy toward opposing players, coaches and officials.
Chapter 58 Parks and Recreation Page 3
3. Exhibit and develop in players the ability to accept defeat or victory gracefully.
4. Teach players to play within the spirit of the game and the letter of the rules.
5. Emphasize the ideals of sportsmanship and fair play in all competitive situations.
6. Encourage spectators to show respect for opponents and officials and to recognize good play and sportsmanship. When spectators behave inappropriately, the coach should assist in curtailing the crowd reaction.
7. Coaches are prohibited from using tobacco products or alcohol during all practices and competitive events.
(b) Players. Those involved as players in any team event shall:
1. Treat all players, officials and coaches with respect and courtesy. No taunting or badgering of opponents.
2. Graciously accept constructive criticism.
3. Abide by the spirit of the rules as well as the letter of the rules throughout all games and practices.
4. Recognize the value of each team member.
5. Players are prohibited from using tobacco products or alcohol during all practices and competitive events.
(c) Spectators. Those involved as spectators in any team event shall:
1. Recognize the official as a person of integrity and qualification, and all decisions he/she makes on the field of play without voicing loud, profane or discourteous criticism of any official.
2. Refrain from creating or causing to create a disturbance that would be detrimental to the flow of the game and/or the safety of the participants involved.
3. Show respect for all players, coaches, and officials regardless of their own team loyalty.
4. Refrain from taunting officials, coaches or opponents.
Chapter 58 Parks and Recreation Page 4
(3) Penalty. Any person violating this ordinance shall be subject to the penalties provided in the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 1 Sec. 1.111. In addition to such penalties and forfeitures, violators may be prohibited from using or entering upon a village park, field, ball diamond, soccer field, skating rink or volley ball facility for such period of time as shall be determined by the village park and recreation committee after review with the Everest Metro Police Department and the sanctioning athletic league, if any, sponsoring the event.
(Ord. of 3-18-2002, § 1) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Section 58.102. Prohibiting Dogs in Certain Public Parks.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person having immediate custody, care or control of a dog to enter any portion of the Yellowbanks Disc Golf Course, except assistance dogs or animals being used or trained to assist emergency services workers or as authorized by the Park Committee and Village Board. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be penalized as provided in the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 1 Sect. 1.111.
(1) Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
a. Assistance dog: Any dog that has been or is being trained as a guide dog, hearing dog, or service dog. Such terms are further defined as follows:
b. Guide dog: Any dog that has been or is being specially trained to aid a particular blind or visually impaired person.
c. Hearing dog: Any dog that has been or is being specially trained to aid a particular deaf or hard of hearing person.
d. Service dog: Any dog that has been or is being specially trained to aid a person with a disability other than sight or hearing.
(Ord. of 11-21-2013) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Section 58.103. Damage (Vandalism) to Village parkland and Recreational Property.
(a) Prohibited conduct/forfeiture/restitution. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully damage or assist in the damage of Village parkland property or equipment. Such person(s) shall be in violation of the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 54 Sec. 54.100 “Offenses against property”, specifically Wis. Stats.§§ 943.01(1), (3), and (4) Criminal Damage to Property, with a fine of no less than $100.00 and no greater than $1,000.00 based on the offense and ordered to pay full restitution for damages.
Chapter 58 Parks and Recreation Page 5
(b) Additional penalties/banning use of parkland/recreational property. Any person guilty of damaging Village parkland or parkland property shall be banned from all Village parks, trails, sports fields, ice rinks, or picnic areas for a period of five years. Any such banned person(s) who is found on Village parkland property shall be in violation of Wis. Stat. § 943.13 - the state’s criminal trespass law and fined accordingly per Wis. Stat. 778.26. After five years, a person(s) may petition for a hearing with the Weston Park and Recreation Committee for restored parkland use privileges.
(c)
(1) Parental liability/minor. The parent or guardian of a minor (16 years or younger) convicted of damage to Village parkland or parkland property may be fined under Wis. Stat. § 895.035 for no less than $100.00 and no greater than $5000.00 based on the severity of the offense. In addition, the Village of Weston is entitled to recovery of all damages under Wis. Stats. §§ 895.035(4), (5), (6), (7).
(2) Option to reduce fine. A parent and offending minor may be given the option of eliminating or reducing their fine by engaging in community service through the County’s Restorative Justice Program. Referrals to this program will be made by the Everest Metro Police Department to the Village of Weston Park and Recreation Committee. Referral to the Restorative Justice Program does not preclude payment for the restitution of damages.
(Ord. of 8-23-2007) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 15-032, 12/23/2015]
Chapter 62 Planning Commission Page 1
Chapter 62
PLANNING COMMISSION*
Sec. 62.100. Statutes adopted.
Sec. 62.101. Composition.
Sec. 62.102. Terms of office and appointment.
Sec. 62.103. Employment of experts and staff and payment of expenses.
Sec. 62.104. Functions.
__________
* Cross References--Administration, Chapter 2; Buildings and Building Regulations, Chapter 14; Mobile Homes, Chapter 46; Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places, Chapter 70; Subdivision Regulations, Chapter 74; Utilities, Chapter 86; Vegetation, Chapter 90; Zoning, Chapter 94.
Chapter 62 Planning Commission Page 2
PLANNING COMMISSION
Sec. 62.100. Statutes adopted.
Wis. Stat. § 62.23 is adopted by reference as if set forth in this chapter at length, and the planning commission shall have all the powers, authority, functions and duties enumerated by statute.
(Code 1982, § 11.01(6)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 62.101. Composition.
The planning commission shall consist of the persons required by Wis. Stat. § 62.23(1). The citizen members shall be persons of recognized experience and qualifications.
(Code 1982, § 11.01(2)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 62.102. Terms of office and appointment.
Annually during April one member of the planning commission shall be appointed for a term of three years by the president.
(Code 1982, § 11.01(3)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 62.103. Employment of experts and staff and payment of expenses.
The planning commission shall have power and authority to employ experts and a staff and to pay for their services and such other expenses as may be necessary and proper, not exceeding in all the appropriation that may be made for the commission and approval of the board upon recommendation or placed at its disposal through gift and subject to any ordinance or resolution enacted by the board.
(Code 1982, § 11.01(4)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 62.104. Functions.
It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to make and adopt a master plan for the physical development of the village, including the extraterritorial jurisdiction. The master plan with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive and explanatory matter shall show the commission's recommendations for such physical development and may include, among other things, without limitation because of enumeration, general location, character and
Chapter 62 Planning Commission Page 3
extent of streets, highways, freeways, street grades, roadways, walks, bridges, viaducts, parking areas, tunnels, public places and areas, parks, parkways, playgrounds, sites for public buildings and structures, airports, pierhead and bulkhead lines, waterways, routes for railroads, street railways and buses, and the general locations and extent of sewers, water conduits and other public utilities, whether privately or publicly owned, the acceptance, widening, narrowing, extension, relocation, removal, vacation, abandonment or change of use of any of the foregoing public ways, grounds, places, spaces, buildings, properties, utilities, routes or terminals, the general location, character and extent of community centers and neighborhood units, the general character, extent and layout of the replanning of blighted districts and slum areas and a comprehensive zoning plan. The commission may amend, extend or add to the master plan or carry any part or subject matter into greater detail. The commission may adopt rules for the transaction of business. It shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. The commission shall be further empowered to do and perform all of the functions set out in the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapters 74 and 94. The commission shall advise the board on policies for building inspection services and on revisions in the village’s building, health and safety codes. The commission shall also supervise the village inspection services and community development departments.
(Code 1982, § 11.01(5); Ord. of 4-22-2011) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 66 Solid Waste Page 1
Chapter 66
SOLID WASTE*
Sec. 66.100. Title.
Sec. 66.101. Purpose.
Sec. 66.102. Interpretation.
Sec. 66.103. Severability.
Sec. 66.104. Statutory Authority, Applicability and Administration.
Sec. 66.105. Definitions.
Sec. 66.106. Storage of Solid Waste.
Sec. 66.107. Separation of Recyclable Materials.
Sec. 66.108. Separation Requirements Exempted.
Sec. 66.109. Care of Separated Recyclable Materials.
Sec. 66.110. Management of Lead Acid, Nickle Cadmium, Lithium-ion Batteries, Major Appliances, Waste Oil, Used Oil Filters, Oil Absorbent Materials with Visible Free-Flowing Oil, Electronics and Yard Waste.
Sec. 66.111. Responsibilities of Residential Unit Owners and Occupants.
Sec. 66.112. Responsibilities of Owners or Designated Agents of Multiple-Family Dwellings.
Sec. 66.113. Responsibilities of Owners or Designated Agents of Non-Residential Facilities and Properties.
Sec. 66.114. Responsibilities of Occupants of Multi-Family Dwellings and Non-Residential Facilities and Properties.
Sec. 66.115. Exterior Storage Standards for Multiple-Family Dwellings and Non-Residential Facilities and Properties.
Sec. 66.116. Prohibitions on Disposal of Recyclable Materials Separated for Recycling.
Sec. 66.117. Dumping Garbage, Refuse and Waste.
Chapter 66 Solid Waste Page 2
Sec. 66.118. Disposal of Building Wastes.
Sec. 66.119. Right to Reject Materials.
Sec. 66.120. Scavengers Prohibited.
Sec. 66.121. Weston Yard Materials Recycling Center
Sec. 66.122. Residential Composting.
Sec. 66.123 Compliance Assurance Plan (CAP)
Sec. 66.124. Enforcement.
Chapter 66 Solid Waste Page 3
__________
* Cross References--Buildings and Building Regulations, Chapter 14; Health and Sanitation, Chapter 38; Vehicles giving offensive odor or noise or spilling loadsChapter 38, § 38.101; Mobile Homes, Chapter 46; Nuisances, Chapter 50; Rubbish on streets and sidewalks, Chapter 70 § 70.102; Utilities, Chapter 86.
State Law References--Solid waste facilities generally, Wis. Stats. § 289.01 et seq.
Chapter 66
SOLID WASTE
Sec. 66.100. Title.
Refuse and Recycling Ordinance for the Village of Weston.
(Ord. of 3-20-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 66.101. Purpose.
The purpose of this Ordinance is to regulate the accumulation, separation and disposal of solid waste within the Village and to promote recycling, composting, and resource recovery through the administration of an effective recycling program, as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 287.09 and 287.11 and Wisconsin Administrative Code NR Chapter 544.
(Ord. of 8-22-1994, § 1(1); Ord. of 3-20-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 66.102. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by Statute. Where any terms or requirements of this Ordinance may be inconsistent or conflicting, the more restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply. Where a provision of this Ordinance is required by Statute, or by a standard in Wisconsin Administrative Code NR Chapter 544 and where the Ordinance provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the Statutes and the Wisconsin Administrative Code NR Chapter 544 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of the Ordinance, or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this Ordinance.
(Ord. of 8-22-1994, § 1(17); Ord. of 3-20-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 66.103. Severability.
Should any portion of this Ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Ordinance shall not be affected.
Chapter 66 Solid Waste Page 4
(Ord. of 3-20-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 66 Solid Waste Page 5
Sec. 66.104. Statutory Authority, Applicability and Administration.
This Ordinance is adopted under Wis. Stat. § 287.09(2). It is intended to apply to all persons within the Village and its provisions shall be administered by the Board, and/or other Village officials designated by the Board.
(Ord. of 8-22-1994, § 1(2); Ord. of 3-20-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 66.105. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Ordinance, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
(1) “Automotive engine oil” has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. § 287.15(1)(a).
(2) “Bi-metal container” means a container for beverages that is made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum.
(3) “Collector” means a person, firm or corporation licensed to collect, dispose of and/or market recyclable and/or non-recyclable solid waste within the Village.
(4) “Composting” means biological degradation and transformation of organic solid waste under controlled conditions designed to promote aerobic decompositions and includes vermicomposting.
(5) “Container board” means corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of shipping containers and related products.
(6) “Foam polystyrene packaging” means packaging made primarily from foam polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria:
is designed for serving food or beverages;
consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the article in a shipping container;
consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged article in a shipping container.
(7) “Free liquids” means liquids which readily separate from the solid portion of waste under ambient temperature and pressure.
(8) “Glass container” means a glass bottle, jar or other packaging container used to contain a product that is the subject of a retail sale and does not include ceramic cups,
Chapter 66 Solid Waste Page 6
dishes, light bulbs, mason jars, oven ware, plate glass, safety and window glass, heat resistant glass such as Pyrex, lead based glass such as crystal, or TV tubes.
(9) “HDPE” means high density polyethylene. NOTE: Plastic containers made of HDPE and regulated under Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter ATCP 137 will have a triangular symbol with number “2.”
(10) “LDPE” means low density polyethylene. NOTE: Plastic containers made of LDPE and regulated under Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter ATCP 137 will have a triangular symbol with number “4.”
(11) “Magazines” means magazines and other materials printed on similar paper.
(12) “Major appliance” means a residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes washer, clothes dryer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven, stove, refrigerator, furnace, boiler, dehumidifier or water heater.
(13) “Multiple-family dwelling” means a property containing 5 or more residential units, including those which are occupied seasonally, and all residential facilities that do not meet the definition of “residential unit.”
(14) “Newspaper” means a newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint.
(15) “Non-recyclable post-consumer waste” means solid waste for which there exists no commercially demonstrated method of resource recovery. It does not include solid waste generated in the production of goods, hazardous waste as defined in Wis. Stat. § 291.01(7), waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap automobiles, or high-volume industrial waste as defined in Wis. Stat. § 289.01(17).
(16) “Non-residential facilities and properties” means commercial, retail, industrial, institutional and governmental facilities and properties. It includes any location at which goods or services are provided or manufactured, including locations under construction, demolition or remodeling, or used for special events such as, but not limited to, fairs, festivals, port venues, conferences and exhibits.
(17) “Office paper” means high grade printing and writing papers from offices in non-residential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer printout are examples or office paper generally accepted as high grade. This term does not include industrial process waste.
(18) “Oil filter” means a filter for automotive engine oil.
(19) “Oil absorbent materials” means materials that are used to absorb waste oil.
Chapter 66 Solid Waste Page 7
(20) “Other resins or multiple resins” means plastic resins regulated under Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter ATCP 137 and having a triangular symbol with number “7.”
(21) “Person” includes any individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, local governmental unit as defined in Wis. Stat. § 66.0131(1)(a), state agency or authority or federal agency.
(22) “PETE” or “PET” means polyethylene terephthalate. NOTE: Plastic containers made of PETE and regulated under Wissonsin Administrative Code Chapter ATCP 137 will have a triangular symbol with number “1.”
(23) “Plastic container” means an individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can, jar or carton, except for a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a product that is the subject of a retail sale. A plastic container includes those made of PETE (#1), HDPE (#2), PVC (#3), LDPE (#4), PP (#5), PS (#6), and other resins or multiple resins (#7).
(24) “Postconsumer waste” means solid waste other than solid waste generated in the production of goods, hazardous waste as defined in Wis. Stat. § 291.01(7), waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap automobiles or high-volume industrial waste as defined in Wis. Stat. § 289.01(17).
(25) “PP” means polyproplylene. NOTE: Plastic containers made of PP and regulated under Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter ATCP 137 will have a triangular symptom with number “5.”
(26) “PS” means polystyrene. NOTE: Plastic containers made of PS and regulated under Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter ATCP 137 will have a triangular symptom with number “6.”
(27) “PVC” means polyvinyl chloride. NOTE: Plastic containers made of PVC and regulated under Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter ATCP 137 will have a triangular symbol with number “3.”
(28) “Recyclable materials” or “recyclable solid waste” is defined by Wisconsin Administrative Code § ATCP 137.02(9) , and includes items that are banned from land disposal and incineration pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 287.07. These items include, but are not limited to, lead acid, nickel cadmium, and lithium-ion batteries, major appliances, waste oil, yard waste, waste tires, aluminum containers, corrugated paper or other container board, foam polystyrene packaging, glass containers, magazines, newspaper, office paper, plastic containers, steel containers, bi-metal containers, used oil filters, oil absorbent materials with visible signs of free-flowing oil and electronic devices listed in Wis. Stat. § 287.07(5).
(29) “Residential unit” means each single family residence and each two to four unit residence within the Village under one property tax parcel.
Chapter 66 Solid Waste Page 8
(30) “Solid waste” means any garbage, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility and other discarded or salvageable materials, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural operations, and from community activities, but does not include solids or dissolved material in domestic sewage, or solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges which are point sources subject to permits under Wis. Stat. Chapter 283, or source material as defined in Wis. Stat. § 254.31(10), special nuclear material as defined in Wis. Stat. § 254.31(11), or by-product material as defined in Wis. Stat. § 254.31.(1).
(31) “Solid waste facility” means a facility for solid waste treatment, solid waste storage or solid waste disposal, and includes commercial, industrial, municipal, state and federal establishments or operations such as, without limitation because of enumeration, sanitary landfills, dumps, land disposal sites, incinerators, transfer stations, storage facilities, collection and transportation services and processing, treatment and recovery facilities. This term includes the land where the facility is located. This term does not include a facility for the processing of scrap iron, steel or nonferrous metal using large machines to produce a principal product of scrap metal for sale or use for re-melting purposes. This term does not include a facility which uses large machines to sort, grade, compact or bale clean wastepaper, fibers or plastics, not mixed with other solid waste, for sale or use for recycling purposes. This term does not include an auto junk yard or scrap metal salvage yard.
(32) “Solid waste treatment” means any method, technique or process which is designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or composition of solid waste. “Treatment” includes incineration.
(33) “Village’s contracted collector” means a person, firm or corporation specifically contracted by the Village to collect, dispose of and/or market certain recyclable materials and/or post-consumer waste from residential units.
(34) “Waste oil” means any petroleum-derived or synthetic oil that has been used or spilled.
(35) “Waste tire” means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose because of wear, damage or defect.
(36) “Yard waste” means leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush, including clean woody vegetative material no greater than 6 inches in diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact root balls.
(Ord. of 8-29-1988, § 1; Ord. of 8-22-1994, § 1 (3); Ord. of 5-2-1997, § 1(a); Ord. of 3-20-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Cross References--Definitions generally, § 1.101.
Chapter 66 Solid Waste Page 9
Sec. 66.106. Storing of Solid Waste.
Any accumulation of solid waste on any premises in the Village is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. The owner is responsible for the timely removal and proper disposal of solid waste from the owner’s premises. Upon failure to remove the nuisance after written notice to the owner, the Village may cause the nuisance to be removed and disposed of at the owner’s expense. The Village shall collect from the owner all costs associated with removal and disposal of the nuisance. All unpaid charges and fines will be placed on the tax roll.
(Code 1982 §6.07(8); Ord. of 1-24-2013; Ord. of 3-20-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 66.107. Separation of Recyclable Materials.
All persons who generate or dispose of solid waste within the Village shall separate the following recyclable materials from non-recyclable solid waste:
(1) Aluminum containers;
(2) Bi-metal containers;
(3) Corrugated paper or other container board;
(4) Foam polystyrene packaging;
(5) Glass containers;
(6) Magazines (and other materials printed on similar paper);
(7) Newspaper (and other materials printed on similar paper);
(8) Office paper;
(9) Plastic containers;
(10) Steel containers;
(11) Electronic devices listed in Wis. Stat. § 287.07(5);
(12) Lead acid batteries;
(13) Major appliances;
(14) Yard waste;
Chapter 66 Solid Waste Page 10
(15) Waste tires;
(16) Used oil filters;
(17) Waste oil;
(18) Oil absorbent materials with visible signs of free-flowing oil.
(Ord. of 8-22-1994, § 1(4); Ord. of 3-20-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 66.108. Separation Requirements Exempted.
The separation requirements of Sec. 66.107 do not apply to the following:
(a) Persons who send their postconsumer waste to a processing facility licensed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources that recovers the materials specified in Sec. 66.107 from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
(b) Solid waste burned as a supplemental fuel at a facility if less than 30 percent of the heat input to the facility is derived from the solid waste burned as supplemental fuel.
(c) A recyclable material specified in Sec. 66.107 for which a variance has been granted by the Department of Natural Resources under Wis. Stat. § 287.11(2m) or Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter ATCP 137.02(9).
(Ord. of 8-22-1994, § 1(5); Ord. of 3-20-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 66.109. Care of Separated Recyclable Materials.
To the greatest extent practicable, recyclable materials separated in accordance with Sec. 66.107 shall be clean and kept free from contaminants such as food or product residue, oil or grease, or other non-recyclable materials, including but not limited to: household hazardous waste, medical waste, and agricultural chemical containers. Recyclable materials shall be stored in a manner that protects them from wind, rain and other inclement weather conditions.
(Ord. of 8-22-1994, § 1(6); Ord. of 3-20-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 66.110. Management of Lead Acid, Nickel Cadmium, and Lithium-Ion Batteries, Major Appliances, Waste Oil, Used Oil Filters, Oil Absorbent Materials with Visible Free-Flowing Oil, Electronics and Yard Waste.
Occupants of residential units, multiple-family dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties shall arrange for the proper collection and disposal of lead acid, nickel cadmium, and
Chapter 66 Solid Waste Page 11
lithium-ion batteries, major appliances, waste oil, used oil filters, oil absorbent materials with visible free-flowing oil and electronics with a collector at the occupant’s request and expense, except occupants of residential units may contact the Village’s contracted collector for curbside removal and disposal of lead-acid batteries and containerized waste oil at no additional expense. Yard waste may be disposed of at the Weston Municipal Yard Materials site, removed by a collector at the occupant’s request and expense, or composted pursuant to Sec. 66.121.
(Ord. of 8-22-1994, § 1(7); Ord. 3-20-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 66.111. Responsibilities of Residential Unit Owners and Occupants.
(a) Except as otherwise directed by the Village, owners and occupants of residential units shall follow the preparation and collection of recycling materials as adopted by Board resolution to meet vendor and market conditions.
(b) All residential units shall be provided a wheeled recycling cart and a wheeled non-recyclable post-consumer waste cart by the Village’s contracted collector. Provided carts are to be maintained by the residential unit owners and occupants in a good, clean and sanitary condition and shall not be removed from the premises by the residential unit owner or occupant. These carts shall be water tight and fly-proof at all times. Covers shall be kept tightly on the carts to prevent materials from blowing or spilling. The carts will be rented to each residential unit and paid for in accordance with Wis. Stat. § 287.093. A service fee shall be placed on the tax roll, as a special charge, per dwelling unit.
(c) Properly prepared bi-metal containers, container board, foam polystyrene packaging, glass containers, HDPE, LDPE, magazines, newspaper, other resins or multiple resins, PETE, plastic containers, PP, PS, PVC and aluminum cans within the recycling cart shall be collected at curbside according to a schedule set by the Village. The recycling cart shall not be placed at the curbside collection point sooner than the night before the day of collection, and no later than 6:00 a.m. on the day of collection. The cart shall be removed from the collection point within 12 hours after collection. In order to prevent carts from being an obstruction to snowplows, carts are prohibited from being placed within the roadway. The Village will not be responsible for carts that are damaged due to being struck by Village snowplows.
(d) Non-recyclable post-consumer waste contained within a non-recyclable cart shall be collected at curbside according to a schedule set by the Village. Overflow refuse bags containing non-recyclable post-consumer waste shall be collected at curbside if the bag weighs less than 50 pounds and an overflow sticker is attached to the bag. Overflow stickers may be purchased from the Village. The non-recyclable cart and any overflow bags shall not be placed at the curbside collection point sooner than the night before the day of collection, and no later than 6:00 a.m. on the day of collection. The cart and any uncollected solid waste shall be removed from the collection point within 12 hours after collection. In order to prevent carts from being an obstruction to
Chapter 66 Solid Waste Page 12
snowplows, carts are prohibited from being placed within the roadway. The Village will not be responsible for carts that are damaged due to being struck by Village snowplows.
(e) No person shall place the following materials at the curbside collection point for collection by the Village’s contracted collector unless the person has made separate arrangements for the collection at the person’s own expense:
(1) Non-separated recyclable and non-recyclable post-consumer waste;
(2) Hazardous waste as defined in Wis. Stat. § 291.01(7);
(3) Paint or stain (latex-based paint cans can go in the trash, as long as contents in can are dried out);
(4) Flammable liquid;
(5) Explosives;
(6) Chemicals;
(7) Carcasses;
(8) Home generated sharps unless they are deposited in an FDA approved sharps collection container;
(9) Infectious waste as defined by Wis. Stat. § 287.07(7)(c)1.c, and other waste that contains or may be mixed with infectious waste;
(10) Automotive parts or accessories;
(11) Metal;
(12) Yard waste;
(13) Tires;
(14) Major appliances;
(15) Lead acid, nickel cadmium, and lithium-ion batteries unless prior arrangements are made with the Village’s collector;
(16) Used oil filters;
(17) Oil absorbent materials with visible signs of free-flowing oil;
Chapter 66 Solid Waste Page 13
(18) Waste oil unless prior arrangements are made with the Village’s collector;
(19) Electronic devices listed in Wis. Stat. § 287.07(5);
(20) Items that do not fit within the provided cart unless the items are placed in overflow refuse bags that weigh less than 50 pounds and an overflow sticker purchased from the Village is attached to each bag.
(Ord. of 8-29-1988, § 2; Ord. of 8-22-1994, § 1(8); Ord. of 1-24-2013; Ord. 3-20-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Amended via Ord. No. 18-015, 6/23/2018]
Sec. 66.112. Responsibilities of Owners or Designated Agents of Multiple-Family Dwellings.
(a) The owner of a multi-family dwelling shall arrange for the removal of non-recyclable post-consumer waste and recyclable materials specified in Sec. 66.107(1) through (10) from the multi-family dwelling at the owner’s expense. The owner or designated agent of a multi-family dwelling shall provide adequate separate containers for the disposal of both non-recyclable post-consumer waste and those recyclable materials specified in Sec. 66.107(1) through (10). A non-recyclable post-consumer waste container of at least 95 gallons shall be provided per dwelling unit. Dumpsters may be provided using this size equivalency, such that an eight-unit dwelling would require at least a four-yard dumpster, a ten-unit dwelling would require at least a six-yard dumpster, etc. The owner or designated agent of a multi-family dwelling shall also provide recyclable material containers of at least the same size as the non-recyclable post-consumer waste containers. Non-recyclable post-consumer waste shall be removed and disposed of by a collector at the owner’s expense at least once each week. Recyclable materials specified in Sec. 66.107(1) through (10) shall be removed by a collector at the owner’s expense at least once every other week. To ensure compliance, the owner of a multi-family dwelling shall provide the Village with a copy of its current collection contract within five (5) business days of a written request from the Village.
The owner or designated agent may apply in writing for a special exception from the Village’s Planning and Development Department regarding the minimum size of containers. The Village may grant a special exception if the applicant clearly shows that the ordinance requirement creates an unnecessary hardship and granting the special exception will not harm the public interest or undermine the purpose of this ordinance. The Village reserves the right to revoke the special exception at any time, for any reason.
(b) The owner or designated agent of a multi-family dwelling shall do all of the following:
Chapter 66 Solid Waste Page 14
(1) Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials specified in Sec. 66.107(1) through (10);
(2) Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the dwelling and at least semi-annually thereafter about the established on-premises recycling program, which materials are collected, and how to prepare the materials in order to meet the processing requirements and collection methods;
(3) Provide educational materials to tenants with resources on proper disposal options for recyclable materials described in Sec. 66.111(e);
(4) Provide for the collection of the recyclable materials specified in Sec. 66.107(1) through (10), separated from the non-recyclable post-consumer waste, and the delivery of the recyclable materials to a recycling facility; and
(5) Notify tenants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which materials are collected, how to prepare the materials in order to meet the processing requirements, collection methods, or sites, location and hours of operation, and a contact person or company, including a name, address and telephone number.
(c) The requirements specified in (a) do not apply to the owner or designated agent of a multi-family dwelling if the post-consumer waste generated within the dwelling is treated at a processing facility licensed by the Department of Natural Resources that recovers for recycling the materials specified in Sec. 66.107 from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
(Ord. of 8-22-1994, § 1(11); Ord. of 3-20-2014; Ord. of 10-24-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 66.113. Responsibilities of Owners or Designated Agents of Non-Residential Facilities and Properties.
(a) The owner of non-residential facilities and properties shall arrange for the removal of solid waste and collection of separated recyclable materials specified in Sec. 66.107 (1) through (10) from their property at their expense. The owner or designated agent of non-residential facilities and properties shall provide adequate separate containers for the disposal of non-recyclable post-consumer waste and recyclable materials specified in Sec. 66.107(1) through (10), and shall provide resource information on how and where to dispose materials specified in Sec. 66.111(e). Non-recyclable post-consumer waste shall be removed and disposed of by a collector at the owner’s expense at least once each week. Recyclable materials specified in Sec. 66.107(1)
Chapter 66 Solid Waste Page 15
through (10) shall be removed by a collector at the owner’s expense at least once every other week. To ensure compliance, the owner of non-residential facilities and properties shall provide the Village with a copy of its current collection contract(s) within five (5) business days of a written request from the Village.
The owner or designated agent may apply in writing for a special exception from the Village’s Planning and Development Department regarding the minimum size of containers. The Village may grant a special exception if the applicant clearly shows that the ordinance requirement creates an unnecessary hardship and granting the special exception will not harm the public interest or undermine the purpose of this ordinance. The Village reserves the right to revoke the special exception at any time, for any reason.
(b) The owner(s) or designated agent(s) of non-residential facilities and properties shall do all of the following:
(1) Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable solid waste specified in Sec. 66.107(1) through (10);
(2) Notify in writing, at least semi-annually, all users, tenants and occupants of the properties about the established on-site recycling program, which materials are collected, and how to prepare the materials in order to meet the processing requirements and collection methods;
(3) Provide educational materials to all users, tenants and occupants of the properties with resources on proper disposal options for recyclable materials described in Sec. 66.111(e).
(4) Provide for the collection of the materials specified in Sec. 66.107 (1) through (10), separated from the solid waste by the users, tenants and occupants, and the delivery of the materials to a recycling facility; and
(5) Notify users, tenants and occupants of reasons to reduce and recycle, which materials are collected, how to prepare the materials in order to meet the processing requirements, collection methods, or sites, location and hours of operation, and a contact person or company, including a name, address and telephone number.
(c) The requirements specified in (a) do not apply to the owners or designated agents of non-residential facilities and properties if the postconsumer waste generated within the facility or property is treated at a processing facility licensed by the Department of
Chapter 66 Solid Waste Page 16
Natural Resources that recovers for recycling materials specified in Sec. 66.107 from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
(Ord. of 8-22-1994, § 1(12); Ord. of 3-20-2014; Ord. of 10-24-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 66.114. Responsibilities of Occupants of Multi-Family Dwellings and Non-Residential Facilities and Properties.
In addition to the responsibilities set forth in Sec. 66.107, 66.109 and 66.110, occupants of multi-family dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties shall, at their expense, arrange for the proper collection and disposal of their solid waste that is not post-consumer waste, such as hazardous waste, paint, stain, flammable liquid, explosives, chemicals, carcasses, home generated sharps, infectious waste, automotive parts or accessories, etc. This obligation does not relieve the owner of said premises from liability under Sec. 66.106 for the accumulation of solid waste on the owner’s premises. The owner is responsible for the timely removal and proper disposal if the occupant fails to do so. The Village shall collect from the owner all costs associated with removal and disposal of the nuisance. All unpaid charges and fines will be placed on the tax roll. The owner’s recourse, if any, will be against the occupant.
(Ord. of 3-20-2014; Ord. of 10-24-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 66.115. Exterior Storage Standards for Multiple-Family Dwellings and Non-Residential Facilities and Properties.
(a) All exterior storage of recyclable and non-recyclable containers, within multiple-family dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties, shall be placed and maintained within a three-sided enclosure and enclosed on the fourth side with a gate to contain garbage, refuse, waste, recycling and other debris. The enclosure shall further meet all of the requirements as specified in Section 94.12.06(2).
(Ord. of 3-20-2014; Ord. of 10-24-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-011, 4/19/2017]
Sec. 66.116. Prohibitions on Disposal of Recyclable Materials Separated for Recycling.
No person may dispose of any recyclable materials as defined by Sec. 66.105(28), in a solid waste disposal facility.
(Ord. of 3-20-2014; Ord. of 10-24-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 66 Solid Waste Page 17
Sec. 66.117. Dumping Garbage, Refuse and Waste.
(a) No person may deposit, throw, discard, place or abandon any solid waste upon any street, court, lane, alley, business square, public enclosure, vacant lot, house yard, body of water, or any place, except in a container intended for that purpose. No person shall disturb the contents of any recyclable or non-recyclable waste container. No person shall remove any item from recyclable or non-recyclable carts or other waste containers located on private premises without the consent of the occupant of the premises.
(b) No person shall deposit or leave any recyclable or non-recyclable solid waste in any garbage container belonging to another person without first securing permission to use such container for disposal purposes.
(c) Recyclable and non-recyclable containers placed at public waste sites, public parks and other public areas within the Village are intended to be used for the disposal of recyclable and non-recyclable post-consumer waste generated at, and associated with, the use of the public facility being served by those containers. No person shall deposit or leave any recyclable or non-recyclable post-consumer waste at any public wayside or park within the Village unless the recyclable or non-recyclable post-consumer waste was generated upon the premises being served by that container and in connection with the use of the public facility.
(Ord. of 3-20-2014; Ord. of 10-24-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 66.118. Disposal of Building Wastes.
All solid waste resulting from the remodeling, construction or reconstruction of a building or structure, roadway or sidewalk shall be disposed of by the owner at the owner’s expense.
(Ord. of 3-20-2014; Ord. of 10-24-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 66.119. Right to Reject Materials.
The Village’s contracted collector may reject any recyclable material or non-recyclable post-consumer waste that is not prepared according to this Ordinance or the policies adopted by the Board.
(Ord. of 3-20-2014; Ord. of 10-24-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 66 Solid Waste Page 18
Sec. 66.120. Scavengers Prohibited.
All recyclable materials and non-recyclable post-consumer waste placed at the roadside for collection by the collector shall be deemed the property of the Village and no person may disturb or remove any such items.
(Ord. of 3-20-2014; Ord. of 10-24-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 66.121. Weston Yard Materials Recycling Center.
Depositing of items by commercial business and/or non-residents of the Village of Weston is prohibited.
(a) Brush and tree limb deposit site. No dumping of rocks, dirt, stumps, treated lumber, building materials and landscaping materials (such as landscaping timbers, concrete blocks, etc.).
(b) Grass, plant, and leaf deposit site. No dumping of plastic or other non-biodegradable bags or containers.
[Amended via Ord. No 20-002, 2/20/2020]
Sec. 66.122. Residential Composting.
(a) Composting in all residential zoning districts shall be conducted within an enclosed container not to exceed five-feet by five-feet by five-feet for lots less than forty-thousand (40,000) square feet and two (2) five-foot by five-foot by five-foot containers for lots forty thousand (40,000) square feet to one hundred twenty thousand (120,000) square feet. Containers shall be of a durable material including, but not limited to, rot-resistant wood or a commercially purchased composting unit which will provide for adequate aeration. Containers shall be constructed and maintained in a structurally sound manner.
(b) The compost container(s) shall be located in the rear yard no closer than ten (10) feet to any rear or side property line nor closer than twenty(20) feet to any habitable building, other than the resident(s)’ own home.
(c) Only grass clippings, leaves, weeds that have not gone to seed, non-diseased plants, trimmings less than one-fourth inch in diameter, straw, sawdust, wood ashes, fruit or vegetable scraps, coffee grounds, egg shells, paper, and commercially available compost ingredients may be placed in the compost container(s). Meat, bones, fat oils, grease, dairy products, feces, plastics or synthetic fibers shall not be placed in the compost container(s).
Chapter 66 Solid Waste Page 19
(d) Compost materials shall be layered, aerated, moistened, turned, managed and covered during inclement weather to promote effective decomposition of the materials in a safe, secure and sanitary manner.
(e) All compost containers and/or compost materials not in compliance with this section shall be declared a public nuisance and are subject to enforcement and abatement as provided in Sec. 66.122 of this Ordinance.
(Ord. of 3-20-2014; Ord. of 10-24-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 20-002, 2/20/2020]
Sec. 66.123. Compliance Assurance Plan (CAP).
Purpose: This policy will establish standard guidelines that will lead to compliance with the Village of Weston’s Recycling Ordinance.
The Planning & Development Department is responsible for enforcing the Village of Weston’s recycling ordinance. Village of Weston’s staff and personnel shall follow the guidelines identified in this Compliance Assurance Plan (CAP) in response to issues associated with recycling and solid waste. This plan is intended to meet the requirements of s. NR 544.04 (9g), Wis. Adm. Code, as well as Village of Weston’s recycling ordinance.
Example 1:
Problem: Property found to have no methods for recycling in place.
Compliance Strategy:
1st Response: Recycling coordinator shall send a letter to property owner reminding them of the requirement to comply with local recycling ordinances. Other educational materials will also be provided as needed.
2nd Response: Recycling coordinator shall send a letter to property owner giving them 30 days to comply with local recycling ordinances. Copy of letter shall be sent to citation officer.
After 30 days has passed, recycling coordinator shall inspect property to determine if property is in compliance with ordinance. If found to be non-compliant, citation officer shall issue the property owner a citation per code.
Example 2:
Problem: Unacceptable materials found mixed with recyclables.
Compliance Strategy: Recycling route driver shall notify resident by tagging the recycling cart and leave at curb.
Continued occurrences shall result in letter issued by the recycling coordinator. If compliance is not achieved, citation officer shall issue a citation per code.
Chapter 66 Solid Waste Page 20
Example 3:
Problem: Recyclable materials found in trash.
Compliance Strategy: Garbage route driver shall collect material and leave current recycling educational materials.
Continued occurrences shall result in letter issued by the Recycling coordinator. If compliance is not achieved, citation officer shall issue a citation per code.
[Created via Ord. No 20-002, 2/20/2020]
Sec. 66.124. Enforcement.
(a) For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, any authorized officer, employee or representative of the Village or the Everest Metro Police Department may inspect recyclable materials separated for recycling, post-consumer waste intended for disposal, recycling collection sites and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of multiple-family dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties, and any records relating to recycling activities, which shall be kept confidential when necessary to protect proprietary information. No person may refuse access to any authorized officer, employee or authorized representative of the Village or the Everest Metro Police Department who requests access for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. No person may obstruct, hamper or interfere with such an inspection.
(b) Any person who violates a provision of this Ordinance may be issued a citation by the Village or the Everest Metro Police Department to collect forfeitures. The issuance of a citation shall not preclude proceeding under any other ordinance of law relating to the same or any other matter. Proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter shall not preclude the issuance of a citation under this section.
(c) Penalties for violating this Ordinance may be assessed as follows:
(1) Any person who violates a provision of this Ordinance, except Section 66.116, may be required to forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each violation.
(2) Any person who violates Section 66.116 may be required to forfeit $50.00 for a first violation, $200.00 for a second violation, and not more than $2,000.00 for a third or subsequent violation;
(3) The forfeiture and penalties provided in this section shall not be construed as
Chapter 66 Solid Waste Page 21
prohibiting other methods of enforcing this Ordinance, including, but not limited to, penalties provided for in Sec. 1.111, injunctions and other forms of relief available to the Village.
(Ord. of 8-29-1988, § 6.075(6); Ord. of 8-22-1994, § 1(15); Ord. of 3-20-2014; Ord. of 10-24-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 67 Special Events on Public Property Page 1
Chapter 67
REGULATION OF SPECIAL EVENTS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY*
Sec. 67.100. Definitions.
Sec. 67.101. Applications and permit procedure.
Sec. 67.102. Permit regulations.
Sec. 67.103. No discrimination.
Sec. 67.104. Obstruction of ordinance.
__________
* Cross References--
Chapter 67 Special Events on Public Property Page 2
REGULATION OF SPECIAL EVENTS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
Sec. 67.100. Definitions.
(a) Special event means any planned extraordinary occurrence on the public right-of-way or public premises including, but not limited to, parades, processions, bicycle or foot races, or festivals.
(Ord. of 7/19/2012) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 67.101. Application and permit procedures.
No person may hold a special event on the public right-of-way or public premises without obtaining a special event permit. Applications and copies of this ordinance are available from the Village Clerk. All applications must be submitted 30 working days prior to the event.
Completed applications shall be filed with the Village Clerk, who will forward a copy to the Village Administrator. The Village Administrator shall refer copies of the application to the Everest Metro Police Department, the S.A.F.E.R. Fire Department, the Department of Public Works, the Department of Parks, and the Zoning Administrator. The Everest Metro Police Department will determine the amount of hours of service the event will need and will make recommendations regarding approval, denial, or modification. The Department of Public Works Director will determine the amount of equipment and possible labor costs and will make recommendations regarding approval, denial or modification. The Zoning Administrator will determine compliance with the Zoning Code. The determinations and recommendations shall be forwarded to the Village Administrator for his approval, denial, or modification.
Upon approval by the Village Administrator, payment of the permit fee, and the filing or completion of all additional requirements, the Village Clerk shall issue a Special Events Permit.
(a) Mapped routes. All permit applications for special events, including foot or bicycle races, runs, rides, walks, or parades, shall include a detailed map of the proposed route. Routes for annual events must be submitted with the application regardless of whether previously submitted. Recommendations for alteration of routes may be made by the Police Department or the Department of Public Works and may be altered by the Village Administrator. In the event that the organizers or sponsors of any special event deviate from the route submitted without approval from the Village, the organizers or sponsors of such special events may be denied a permit for the following calendar year.
(b) Appeal of permit denials. Any applicant who has been denied a special event permit or has had an application modified may, upon written request to the Village Clerk, have the denial reviewed by the Village Board which shall either affirm, reverse, or
Chapter 67 Special Events on Public Property Page 3
modify the initial action on the application. Such determination by the Board shall constitute final action.
(c) Fees. The applicant for the special event shall pay a permit fee within five (5) working days of the approval by the Village Administrator. The permit fee for all special events shall be estimated costs of the event to the Village, including salary and benefits for police officers and DPW workers, as determined by the Village Administrator plus an administrative fee which shall be provided for in the Village Fee Schedule. The permit fees may be waived by the Village Administrator for events occurring solely within the Village which are conducted by charitable nonprofit organizations or are of a civic nature.
(d) Refunds. Permit fee payments may be refunded if notification of cancellation of a permitted special event by the applicant is received by the Village Administrator at least 10 working days prior to the scheduled event.
(e) Waivers. The Village Board of Trustees reserves the exclusive right to modify, amend, or waive these requirements on a case-by-case basis, subject to written request from the permit holder, and hearing before the Trustees.
(Ord. of 7/19/2012) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 67.102. Permit regulations.
(a) Village not liable. The Special Event Permit Application shall contain a statement that: "The applicant agrees to indemnify and save the Village harmless from and against all liabilities, claims, demands, judgments, losses, and all suits of law or in equity, costs, and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees, for injury or death of any person, or damage to any property arising from the holding of such special event". No permit may be issued unless the applicant has agreed to the terms of this statement on the written application.
(b) Insurance.
(1) Each applicant of a special event shall furnish the Village Administrator with a certificate of insurance written by a company licensed in the State of Wisconsin, approved by the Village Administrator, and covering any and all liability or obligations which may result from the operations by the applicant, the applicant's employees, agents, contractors, or subcontractors, and including worker's compensation coverage in accordance with Wis. Stats. Chapter 101. This certificate shall provide that the company will furnish the Village a 10 day written notice of cancellation, nonrenewal, or material change thereof. This insurance shall be written in comprehensive form and shall protect the applicant and Village against all claims arising out of any act or omission of the applicant, its employees, agents, contractors, or subcontractors.
Chapter 67 Special Events on Public Property Page 4
(2) The policy of insurance shall provide minimum combined single limits for bodily injury and property damage of $1,000,000 or such other insurance limits as deemed adequate by the Village Administrator.
(3) The certificate of insurance must be submitted to the Village Clerk within 10 days of the approval of the permit by the Village Administrator.
(c) Cleanup. It will be the responsibility of the applicant to remove any signs they have posted and remove all equipment, materials, and debris left as a result of the event. This must be done within 4 hours of the termination of the event. The applicant will be responsible for reimbursing the Village for cleanup costs is this section is not adhered to.
(Ord. of 7/19/2012) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 67.103. No discrimination.
The special event permit application shall contain a statement: "The applicant agrees that during the use of the public area the sponsoring organization will not exclude any person from participation in, deny anyone the benefits of, or otherwise subject anyone to discrimination because of race, color, national origin, handicap, or sexual orientation." No permit may be issued unless the applicant has agreed to the terms of this statement on the written application.
(Ord. of 7/19/2012) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 67.104. Obstruction of ordinance.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay the enforcement of any order, rule, regulation or plan issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do any act forbidden by any order, rule regulation or plan issued pursuant to the authority contained in this section.
(b) Any person violating a provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to forfeiture as designated in the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 1 Sec. 1.111 (General Penalty).
(Ord. of 7/19/2012) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 70 Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places Page 1
Chapter 70
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PLACES*
ARTICLE I IN GENERAL*
Sec. 70.100. Streets and alleys.
Sec. 70.101. Licenses and fees.
Sec. 70.102. Rubbish.
Sec. 70.103. Removal of obstructions.
Sec. 70.104. Depositing snow removal.
Sec. 70.105. Building material.
Sec. 70.106. Providing roadways, subdividing acre lots.
Sec. 70.107. Assignment of road names.
Sec. 70.108. Street and sidewalk grades.
Sec. 70.109. Width of highways or streets.
Sec. 70.110. Responsibility for the expense and costs or sidewalk construction, repair, or replacement.
Sec. 70.111. Compulsory repair of sidewalks due to modifications or negligence of abutting property.
Sec. 70.112. Cleaning of Sidewalks.
_________
* Cross References--Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, etc., any street, alley or public way in the village saved from repeal, § 1.110(4); any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the village saved from repeal, § 1.110(9); any ordinance providing for local improvements saved from repeal, § 1.110(11); any ordinance establishing grades, curblines and with of sidewalks in public streets and alleys saved from repeal, § 1.110(15); any ordinance regarding the lighting of streets and alleys saved from repeal, § 1.110(16); any ordinance regarding construction of public works saved from repeal, § 1.110(21); Buildings and Building Regulations, Chapter 14; House and Building Numbering, §14.129 et. seq.; Hawkers, Peddlers, Transient Merchants, § 18.125 et seq.; Mobile Homes Chapter 46; Parks and Recreation, Chapter 58; Planning Commission, Chapter 62; Subdivision Regulations, Chapter 74; Required Subdivision Improvements, § 74.112 et seq.; Design Standards for Subdivisions, § 74.126 et seq.; Taxation and Special Assessments, Chapter 78; Traffic and Vehicles, Chapter 82; Utilities, Chapter 86; Vegetation, Chapter 90; Zoning, Chapter 94.
State Law References—Authority regarding streets generally, Wis. Stats. § 61.34; sidewalks. Wis. Stats. § 66.0907.
Chapter 70 Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places Page 2
Sec. 70.113. Driveways.
Sec. 70.114. Regulation of rural mailboxes.
ARTICLE II EXCAVATIONS
Sec. 70.115. Permit required.
Sec. 70.116. Form of application.
Sec. 70.117. No opening in frozen ground.
Sec. 70.118. Notification of excavation.
Sec. 70.119. Traffic control.
Sec. 70.120. Report of utility pipes required.
Sec. 70.121. Surety bond required.
Sec. 70.122. Bond proceeds.
Sec. 70.123. Barricades.
Sec. 70.124. Trench backfilling.
Sec. 70.125. Compaction control tests.
Sec. 70.126. Permanent pavement repair costs.
Chapter 70 Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places Page 3
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 70.100. Streets and alleys.
The provisions of Wis. Stat. § 62.16 relating to the construction, improvement and repair of streets and alleys, so far as applicable to the village, are adopted by reference in this section as if fully set forth.
(Code 1982, § 8.08) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 70.101. Licenses and fees.
No person shall engage in any excavation or construction in, on, under, above, or across any street, sidewalk or public property without first obtaining a permit established in the village schedule of licenses and fees and payment of any required fees.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 70.102. Rubbish.
No person shall deposit or place or cause or permit to be deposited or placed in, upon or over any sidewalk, street, alley, roadway or other public grounds within the limits of the village and brush, fence, wood, dirt, stone, rubbish, glass, bottles, crockery, nails, tacks, pieces of metal, wire, briars, thorns or other articles or obstructions that would in any way interfere with the convenient or intended use of the sidewalk, street, alley, roadway or other public ground by the public or would be liable to injure or damage any person or animal or the wheels or tires of bicycles or any vehicles that have wheels with rubber or pneumatic tires.
(Code 1982, § 8.10(1)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Cross References—Solid waste, Chapter 66.
Sec. 70.103. Removal of obstructions.
Whenever there shall be any fence, barrier or any such items of rubbish, etc. upon or over any sidewalk, street, alley or roadway or other public grounds in the village, the board may make and order directing the owner of the person having or claiming to have the care, custody or control of the material, or the person who placed or caused same to be placed upon or over any such sidewalk, street, alley, roadway or other public grounds, to remove the material by a certain day (to be not less than five nor more than 30 days from the date of service of such order). It shall be the duty of the chief of police, or person authorized to perform his duties, to serve a copy of the order upon the person against whom the order is directed, by delivering to him a copy of the
Chapter 70 Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places Page 4
order, and shall be the duty of such person to remove such material, or cause to be removed, at his own expense within the time limited in such order.
(Code 1982, § 8.10(3)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 70.104. Depositing snow removal.
It shall be unlawful for any person to push or deposit snow, or cause snow to be pushed or deposited from his own personal driveway or parking area into the public streets and/or right-of-way so as to cause a nuisance or obstruction. The village may cause such deposits of snow to be removed from the street, and the cost of such removal shall be charged to the property owner,
(Code 1982, § 8.10(4)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 70.105. Building material.
No person shall place or cause to be placed any job trailer, dirt, coal, stone, timber, planks, boards or other materials for building or otherwise in or upon any sidewalk, street, alley, right-of-way or public square without first securing a Street Privilege for Construction Materials permit from the village. The area shall be barricaded per Sec. 70.123 of this code. Permit and review fees for Street Privilege for Construction Materials permit is provided for in the Village fee schedule. A double permit fee shall be charged by the Building Inspector if any of the above materials are placed in or upon any sidewalk, street, alley, right-of-way or public square before a permit is applied for and issued. Such double fee shall not release the applicant from full compliance with this chapter. Failure to obtain a permit and remove the above materials shall be punished by a minimum fine of $75.00, not to exceed $500.00, Each say the condition exists shall constitute a new and separate offense.
(Code 1982, § 8.10(1); Ord. of 3-21-2008) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Cross Reference--Buildings and Building Regulations, Chapter 14.
Sec. 70.106. Providing roadways; subdividing acre lots.
(a) Dimensions and house number required. No planned lot, subdivided as such, shall be redivided in the village unless the owner of the lot shall provide the board with a surveyor’s plat showing such redivision, the surveyor’s plat to show the dimensions of all parcels contained in the plat, and unless the surveyor’s plat shall also have provided for and contained the correct street house number of the respective parcels, which street and house numbers shall have been secured from the proper authorities in the village, or the director of public works.
(b) Conveyance to village before construction of roadway or highway. If any street, roadway or highway is laid out, provided for or constructed, either adjoining or
Chapter 70 Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places Page 5
running through any land in the village, the owner shall install the street, utility improvements and other improvements to the village specifications prior to any such land being donated, dedicated or quitclaimed to the village.
(Code 1982, § 8.11) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Cross References—Required Improvements, § 74.112 et seq.
Sec. 70.107. Assignment of road names.
In accordance with Wis. Stat. § 82.03(7), which requires the assignment of names for each road under the village's jurisdiction, the road names as shown on the official village map are assigned. The board shall annually approve the official village map.
(Code 1982, § 8.15) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 70.108. Street and sidewalk grades.
(a) Establishment. The grade of all streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be established by the board by resolution; and such grades shall be kept on file in the office of the director of public works. No street or alley shall be worked until its grade is established.
(b) Altering grade prohibited. No person shall alter the grade of any street, alley, ditch, sidewalk or public ground unless authorized or instructed so to do by the board or the director of public works.
(Code 1982, § 8.01) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 70.109. Width of highways or streets.
All streets, highways and roads within the village shall be established, constructed and laid out having a width of 66 feet unless written approval to do otherwise is first obtained from the board.
(Code 1982, § 8.02) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 70.110. Responsibility for the expenses and costs of sidewalk construction, repair, or replacement.
(a) The cost of original sidewalk construction and repaired or replaced sidewalks shall be borne by the Village when included as part of a Village-initiated project (as delineated on the current “Sidewalk and Trail Areas” map), except as described in paragraphs (b) and (c) below.
Chapter 70 Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places Page 6
(b) The cost of original sidewalk construction included as part of the public improvements in a new subdivision or other privately initiated project shall be borne entirely by the developer or person(s) responsible for initiating the project.
(c) The cost of repaired or replaced sidewalks shall be borne by the owner of the premises upon which the sidewalk abuts where said repairs or replacements are required as a direct result of modifications to the abutting property or negligence of the abutting property owner. (See Sec. 70.112 for property owner responsibilities.)
(Code 1982, § 8.06; Ord. of 5-6-2002; Ord. 3-7-2009) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 70.111. Compulsory repair of sidewalks due to modifications or negligence of abutting property.
(a) Board may order. The board may order any sidewalk that is unsafe, defective or insufficient to be repaired or removed or replaced with a sidewalk in accordance with the standards fixed by the board.
(b) Notice to property owner. A copy of the ordinance, resolution or order directing such laying, removal, replacement or repair shall be served upon the owner of each lot or parcel of land in front of which such work shall have been ordered by the board by personally delivering the same to the owner or their agent or pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.0907(3)(c) or by publishing as a class 1 notice per Wis. Stats. Chapter 985.
(c) Default of owner. Whenever any such owner shall neglect for a period of 20 days after such service to lay, remove, replace or repair any such sidewalk, the village may cause such work to be done at the expense of such owner. All work for the construction of sidewalks shall be let by contract to the lowest responsible bidder, unless otherwise provided by the board, pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 62.15.
(Code 1982, § 8.07; Ord. of 3-7-2009) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 70.112. Cleaning of sidewalks.
The owner of property or the party in possession of the property abutting on any sidewalk shall, without notice and at all times, keep such abutting sidewalk clean and free from debris, dirt, sweepings, obstructions and clear of snow and ice and shall not deposit or place any sweepings or debris or other foreign matter upon the sidewalk, or in the street. Snow and ice shall be removed within 48 hours. If any owner shall fail or neglect to keep any sidewalk free of debris, dirt, sweepings, obstructions, snow or ice, the Village may proceed to clear such sidewalk and shall charge the expense, as defined by the Village Board in the village schedule of fees, thereof as a special tax against the premises to be collected as other taxes on real estate. The Village
Chapter 70 Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places Page 7
may, but shall not be required to, give notice to the owners of the property before providing for the Village to clear such walks.
(Code 1982, § 8.05, Ord. of 5-24-2007) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 70.113. Driveways.
(a) Permit required. Any person installing a driveway shall obtain an installation permit from the building inspector. Upon issuance of the permit, the engineer shall prescribe the grades acceptable for satisfactory drainage. The permit fee shall be as set under the schedule of licenses and permit fees.
(b) Application. Application for a permit to construct a driveway shall be made in writing to the building inspector and shall describe the property and the street where the driveway will be constructed.
(Code 1982, § 8.03) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 70.114. Regulation of rural mailboxes.
(a) Must conform to regulations of postal and village authorities. No rural mailbox shall be set, established or maintained unless it shall conform in all respects to the regulations of the United States postal authorities and the department of public works.
(1) Roadside receptacles shall be located on the mail route side of the road.
(2) Boxes shall be built and erected in accordance with the United States Postal Department recommendations for mailbox mounting, support and location.
(3) The use of heavy metal posts, concrete posts, milk cans, plows, etc., are strictly forbidden because when struck by a vehicle they can cause serious damage to the vehicle and its occupant(s). The ideal support is an assembly which, if struck, bends or falls away from the striking vehicle. Receptacles must be so constructed and attached to the proper support as to withstand flying snow and ice from snow plows. The use of a semi-arch or extended arm type support is suggested to allow snow plows to sweep under the box and remove the snow without damage to the support and provide easy access to the box by carriers and owners.
(b) Installation dimensions. Standards, posts or other devices for the placement of a rural mailbox shall be set with the following dimensions dependent on the type of existing street surface at a specific location.
Chapter 70 Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places Page 8
(1) The front edge of all roadside receptacles shall be measured on a line perpendicular to the outside edge of the road surface(s). The outside edge of the road surface(s) for various situations is as follows:
a. Pavement, curb and gutter. The top of the back of the curb for vertical and horizontal measurement.
b. Pavement with gravel shoulder. The edge of pavement for horizontal measurements and the outside edge of the shoulder for vertical measurements.
c. Gravel. The outside edge of the shoulder for vertical and horizontal measurements.
(2) Minimum measurements from outside edge of road surface.
Type of Road Surfaces
Pavement, Curb and Gutter
Pavement and General Shoulder
Gravel
Horizontal measurements
Front of receptacle
6”
3’0”
1’0”
Nearest face of support
2’2”
4’4”
3’3”
Type of Road Surfaces
Pavement, Curb and Gutter
Pavement and General Shoulder
Gravel
Vertical measurements
Bottom of receptacle
38”
44”
44”
(3) Receptacle supports shall be buried no less than 3'0" in depth measured from the ground surface.
(4) The department of public works shall provide standard drawings to clarify the requirements of this section.
(c) Grouping.
(1) Roadside receptacles shall be grouped as the Village of Weston Street Department shall from time to time determine and order. In making such determination, the Village of Weston Street Department shall require the location of newspaper tube and other receptacles which are designated or used for the receipt of newspapers, pamphlets, literature, packages, or other similar material to be located on or as near as possible to the mail boxes.
(2) Upon any determination of the Village of Weston Street Department that certain roadside receptacles should be grouped in a particular location, the Village of
Chapter 70 Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places Page 9
Weston Street Department shall order any person affected by such determination in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address, to comply with the determination of the Village of Weston Street Department within 30 days from the date of notice. Such order shall specify the number of receptacles to be grouped, the name(s) of the person(s) whose receptacles are being grouped, and the precise location of such grouped receptacles.
(3) Receptacles [are the] responsibility of the appurtenant landowner. Roadside receptacles are permitted to be constructed as a matter of convenience to the appurtenant landowners or occupants, not as a right. It is the obligation of the owner of the appurtenant landowner to construct the receptacle as specified by this section. Further, it is the appurtenant landowner's obligation to repair or replace roadside receptacles in the event they are damaged due to maintenance of the roadway for activities such as, but not limited to, snow plowing, grading, and street cleaning, by village personnel. Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 86.04, an appurtenant landowner may be required to remove a receptacle for failure to comply with this section.
(d) Penalty. Any person violating any portion of this section shall be subject to section 1.111.
(Code 1982, § 13.03; Ord. of 5-15-2000, § 1) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
ARTICLE II. EXCAVATIONS
Sec. 70.115. Permit required.
An excavation permit shall be obtained from the operations manager before any applicant shall excavate, dig upon or in, or remove any tree or material from any public street, alley, boulevard, sidewalk or right-of-way within the village. The excavation permit shall be obtained for each property owner for whom the work is to be performed and for each village road involved. All excavation permits expire 30 days from the date of issuance. An application fee provided in the village schedule of licenses and permit fees per application is required and shall accompany each application for permit.
(Code 1982, § 8.09(1)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 70.116. Form of application.
(a) The application required in Sec. 70.115 shall provide for such information as shall be required, including but not limited to:
Chapter 70 Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places Page 10
(1) The purpose of the proposed excavation.
(2) Location (legal description or street number) of the premises where the excavation is to be made.
(3) The name and residence of the owner of the premises.
(4) The type of surfacing on the street in which the excavation is proposed to be made.
(5) The maximum depth of the proposed excavation.
(6) The name and address of the applicant.
(7) The signature of the applicant.
(8) Starting and completion dates.
(b) If permission to excavate is granted to the applicant, he shall be bound and agreed to the following:
(1) Place or cause to be placed suitable and adequate warning and safety devices, barricades and lights, in such places, in such quantity and of such kind or nature as stipulated in Sec. 70.123, so long as such excavation is unsurfaced or remains a hazard.
(2) Open the excavation by neat saw joints through the asphalt surface course.
(3) Close and backfill each excavation and replace the surface of the street in accordance with Sec. 70.124.
(4) Indemnify and hold harmless the village from all costs, damages and liabilities of every kind, including all expenses and costs of defending any suit for damages, on account of any claims, valid or otherwise, as to which it is claimed or alleged by any claimant that the excavation was the sole or a contributing cause.
(5) Upon demand by the board, procure and keep in effect, until all hazards to traffic caused by such excavation have been removed and terminated, a policy of insurance against liability to third persons for any damages growing out of negligence in the making, guarding, backfilling or resurfacing of the excavation with limits set by the board from time to time.
(Code 1982, § 8.09(2)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 70 Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places Page 11
Sec. 70.117. No opening in frozen ground.
Where an excavation is done by others than the village, no openings in the streets will be permitted when the ground is frozen except for an emergency, such necessity to be determined by the director of public works and the board.
(Code 1982, § 8.09(3)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 70.118. Notification of excavation.
An applicant who has been authorized to excavate or dig in accordance with the terms of this article shall notify the public works department of the date on which he will begin excavation, and the time required to complete the work. No excavation authorized under this article may be initiated until such notification has been made.
(Code 1982, § 8.09(4)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 70.119. Traffic control.
If the excavation requires the rerouting or detour of traffic, the contractor shall provide all signs, barricades, lights and traffic control. All detours shall be approved by the director of public works.
(Code 1982, § 8.09(5)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Cross References--Traffic and Vehicles, Chapter 82.
Sec. 70.120. Report of utility pipes required.
While excavating, any person who shall uncover, strike, disturb or discover any pipe, conduit casing or other object used to transmit gas, water, sewage, telephone, electrical current or cable television shall immediately report that fact to the appropriate utility before progressing further with the excavation or removal. Where there may be damage to life or property, the report shall also be made to the local police and fire departments.
(Code 1982, § 8.09(6)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 70.121. Surety bond required.
The contractor shall execute and file with the clerk and keep in effect a corporate surety bond in a sum set by the board from time to time, conditioned upon the timely and faithful performance of all conditions prescribed by law and all laws and ordinances applicable with respect to all permits issued to the applicant.
Chapter 70 Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places Page 12
(Code 1982, § 8.09(7)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 70.122. Bond proceeds.
The contractor shall immediately, after verbal or written notification by village officials, correct violations of this article. If there is a failure to correct such violations within a reasonable amount of time, particularly where a violation may endanger public safety, the village shall cause the violation to be corrected and shall bill the contractor for the actual cost, plus a penalty as provided by the board.
(Code 1982, § 8.09(8)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 70.123. Barricades.
All barricades shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Barricades and construction warning signs shall be constructed, marked and reflectorized in conformance with the state manual of uniform traffic control devices, latest edition and revisions.
(2) All barricades used at night shall be lighted with a minimum of one flasher for each barricade.
(3) A construction warning sign, illuminated with at least one light or flasher, shall be placed adjacent to the roadway approximately 200 feet in advance of the barricaded area.
(4) Each barricade shall have the contractor's name, address and telephone number marked prominently on the barricade. The telephone number shall be such that the contractor or his authorized representative can be reached 24 hours per day.
(Code 1982, § 8.09(9)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 70.124. Trench backfilling.
The trench backfilling shall be accomplished as follows:
(1) The backfill from the bottom of the conduit to an elevation one foot above the conduit shall be fine granular material carefully placed by hand and well tamped to fill completely all the spaces under and adjacent to the conduit so as to form a bed that will preclude subsequent settlement. Compaction shall achieve at least 95 percent of maximum dry density at optimum moisture as determined in accordance with the
Chapter 70 Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places Page 13
Standard Method of Test for the Moisture Density Relations of Soils, AASHTO
Designation T 180-74.
(2)
a. The remainder of the backfilling may consist of suitable native soils with proper
moisture content for maximum compaction. The contractor shall have a
vibratory type compactor approved by the director of public works before
starting to backfill. The backfill shall be uniformly compacted to at least 90
percent of maximum dry density, except for the upper three feet, which shall be
compacted to at least 95 percent of maximum dry density at optimum moisture
as determined by the Standard Method of Test for Moisture-Density Relations
of Soils, AASHTO Designation T 180-74.
b. All roots, debris, rocks greater than six inches in diameter, frozen material or
other unsuitable materials that in the opinion of the director of public works
may cause interference with the compaction requirements shall not be used in
the backfill and shall be disposed of elsewhere by the contractor; and unsuitable
materials shall be replaced with suitable granular materials approved by the
director of public works.
c. This backfilling shall be made immediately after placing the hand backfill and
shall be accomplished by placing and compacting in layers, not to exceed eight
inches in depth.
(3) All who excavate in the public right-of-way, except those included under subsection
(4) of this section, shall be responsible for trench backfilling and the placement of the
two-inch temporary asphalt patch as described in subsections a.--c. of this subsection;
in addition, they shall remit in advance of receiving the excavation permit, the cost of
the permanent pavement repairs as described in Sec. 70.126.
a. The contractor shall complete the compacted backfill to an elevation six inches
below the finished street grade and immediately place six inches of compacted
gravel surface course equal in quality to that which is existing.
b. The contractor shall complete the compacted backfill to an elevation two inches
below the finished street grade and immediately place a minimum of two inches
of compacted asphalt surface course on the street.
c. Immediately after placement of the surface course, the area shall be cleaned and
left in a safe and satisfactory manner and the street opened to traffic.
(4)
a. Major utility companies, including but not limited to Wisconsin Fuel and Light
Company, General Telephone Company, and Wisconsin Public Service
Chapter 70 Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places Page 14
Corporation and their subcontractors, shall be responsible for the backfilling of the trench and the permanent pavement repair.
b. Major utility companies responsible for the permanent pavement repair shall compact the trench backfill as described in subsections (1) and (2) of this section; and in addition, the compacted backfill shall be completed to an elevation where a minimum of six inches of state-graded base course shall be placed and compacted, followed by a placement of a minimum two-inch hot mixed asphalt pavement or a thickness equal to the existing pavement.
(5) The permanent repair shall be to the satisfaction of the director of public works or his designee. Settling of the permanent patch (regardless of who installed the permanent pavement) within one year from the date of trench backfilling shall be construed as evidence of poor compaction, and the contractor who backfilled the trench and his surety shall be responsible for the cost and satisfactory performance of a replacement patch. If after notification by the village the contractor fails to recompact the backfill and replace the pavement patch, the village shall perform the work and bill the contractor or his surety for the actual cost plus a penalty set by the board. Each successive replacement patch by the contractor shall be subject to satisfactory performance for a period of one year.
(6) The contractor shall not begin any excavation on any arterial street in travel lanes within the village before 9:00 a.m. and shall have such excavation backfilled and complete with the asphaltic interim pavement before 4:00 p.m., and barricades removed. If underground work cannot be completed by 4:00 p.m., the contractor shall make provisions to place a temporary bridge over the excavation that will allow traffic to utilize the travel lane, unless specific permission is granted by the director of public works to allow barricades to remain.
(Code 1982, § 8.09(10)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 70.125. Compaction control tests.
The village shall perform compaction control tests at such frequency and at such depths as the director of public works deems necessary to verify compliance with the compaction requirements. The contractor shall furnish such materials, labor and equipment deemed necessary by the director of public works in order to obtain the necessary compaction test soil samples.
(Code 1982, § 8.09(11)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 70 Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places Page 15
Sec. 70.126. Permanent pavement repair costs.
(a) The village will accomplish the permanent pavement repairs necessary except as provided in Sec. 70.124(4)a. and will charge the applicant in advance for such repairs according to a schedule prepared by the director of public works and filed in his and the village clerk/treasurer's office.
(b) Such charges shall be paid at the time of application for the excavation permit. There will be no further charges to the contractor upon payment of the permanent pavement repair fee except for the later repairs made necessary by failure of the contractor to properly compact the excavations.
(Code 1982, § 8.09(12)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 71 Street Access Control Page 1
Chapter 71
STREET ACCESS CONTROL*
ARTICLE I INTRODUCTION
Sec. 71.1.01. Title
Sec. 71.1.02. Authority
Sec. 71.1.03. Implementation
Sec. 71.1.04. Definitions
ARTICLE II ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 71.2.01. Obtaining permit
Sec. 71.2.02. Fees
Sec. 71.2.03. Variance
Sec. 71.2.04. Construction of access
Sec. 71.2.05. Final inspection
Sec. 71.2.06. Location of utilities
Sec. 71.2.07. Change in use
Sec. 71.2.08. Existing access
Sec. 71.2.09. Illegal encroachment
Sec. 71.2.10. Conformance of subdivision
ARTICLE III ACCESS CONTROL STANDARDS for DRIVEWAYS
Sec. 71.3.01. Driveway access control
__________
*(Created via Ord. 15-004, 4/22/2015)
Chapter 71 Street Access Control Page 2
ARTICLE IV SPACING STANDARDS for STREETS
Sec. 71.4.01. Street intersection Spacing
ARTICLE V ACCESS DESIGN STANDARDS and SPECIFICATIONS for DRIVEWAYS
Sec. 71.5.01. Driveway access design
ARTICLE VI ACCESS DESIGN STANDARDS and SPECIFICATIONS for STREETS
Sec. 71.6.01. Street access design
Chapter 71 Street Access Control Page 3
ARTICLE I INTRODUCTION
Sec. 71.1.01. Title
The Chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as the Village of Weston Street Access Control ordinance, except as referred to herein, where is shall be known as “this Chapter”.
[Created via Ord. 15-004, 4/22/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 71.1.02. Authority
These policy regulations are adopted under the general authority granted to the Village of Weston pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 61.34(1), 83.027(10), 86.04, 86.07(2).
[Created via Ord. 15-004, 4/22/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 71.1.03. Implementation
(1) Upon the effective date of this Chapter, no person shall construct, reconstruct, improve, or expand any access providing direct movement to or from any street operated and maintained within the Village, without possession of a permit approved and issued by the Village and other public authorities having jurisdiction.
(a) No verbal or other informal approval shall be considered valid.
(b) In no event shall access be allowed or permitted if it is determined to compromise public health or safety.
(c) Vehicular access to or from any property adjoining any street within the Village of Weston shall be achieved only through an approved access point, designed and constructed in accordance with Village standards and standards of other public authorities having jurisdiction.
(d) Upon issuance of a permit, the owner shall perform all work in compliance with the terms of the permit and associated design and construction standards defined in this Chapter.
[Created via Ord. 15-004, 4/22/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 71.1.04. Definitions
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated.
AASHTO The American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
Chapter 71 Street Access Control Page 4
Access A means of providing vehicular egress or ingress to a property, from a street.
Agricultural and Recreational Driveway Access An access to agricultural fields, forested land, or other land used solely for agricultural or private recreational purposes.
Approach The portion of a private driveway in the public right-of-way between the street surface and the private property boundary.
Corner Lot A lot situated at the junction of and abutting two or more intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed 135 degrees.
Director of Public Works The Director of Public Works for the Village of Weston.
Driveway A paved or unpaved pathway upon a property and intended to provide vehicular access to and from a street.
Driveway Access Permit The Village of Weston Driveway Access Permit.
Functional Classification A system used to group public streets into classes according to their purpose of vehicular movement and providing land access. Functional classification of the public streets in the Village are defined in the Transportation Chapter of the Conditions and Issues Volume of the Village Comprehensive Plan.
Illegal Encroachment An access that was installed or created without following the regulations or permitting process in place at the time of the installation or creation.
Paved or Pavement An artificial impervious surface such as asphalt or concrete used for the final or surface construction layer on streets, sidewalks, driveways, multiuse paths and parking lots.
Public Way Any public sidewalk, road, alley, highway, or other public thoroughfare.
Standard AASHTO WB-67 Design Vehicle “WB” refers to semitrailers and the number indicates the wheel base length as measured from the front wheel of the truck to the rear-most wheel of the trailer.
Street A public or private right-of-way that affords a primary means of vehicular access to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane, throughway, or however otherwise designated, but excerpting driveways to buildings.
Street, Arterial A street that serves longer intra-urban trips and traffic traveling through the Village, has limited to no direct access for abutting land uses, and has measured or projected traffic volumes of over 6,00 vehicles per day; or as otherwise may be designated as an arterial street within the Comprehensive Plan or by the Village Board.
Chapter 71 Street Access Control Page 5
Private access may be permitted with limitations imposed by the Village, Marathon County, the Wisconsin Department of Transportation and/or the Federal Highway Administration. The Functional Classification System includes designation as principle and minor arterials.
Street, Collector A street that collects and distributes internal traffic within the Village (such as within a residential neighborhood), provides connections between local and arterial streets and limited restrictions on access for abutting land uses, and has a measured or projected traffic volume of between 1,500 and 8,000 vehicles per day; or as otherwise may be designated as a collector street within the Comprehensive Plan by the Village Board. The Functional Classification System includes designations as major and minor collectors.
Street, Local A street designed to provide access to abutting land uses and leading into a collector or occasionally into and arterial street, but which is not designed to carry through traffic from outside the neighborhood where it is locate. Not an arterial street or a collector street.
Village The Village of Weston, Marathon County, Wisconsin.
Village Board The Village of Weston Board of Trustees.
Village Staff Any official employed by the Village of Weston.
Zoning Administrator Zoning Administrator of the Village of Weston.
[Created via Ord. 15-004, 4/22/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
ARTICLE II ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 71.2.01. Obtaining permit
(1) Persons wishing to apply for direct access to a street right-of-way within the Village must submit an application for a Driveway Access Permit issued by the Zoning Administrator. Attached with the Driveway Access Permit shall be any of the following items, if determined necessary by the Village staff:
(a) Street access approach plan and profile;
(b) Access location sketch, completed by the property owner;
(c) Complete drainage plan of the site showing impact to the street right-of-way;
(d) Site map detailing utility locations before and after development in and along the street;
(e) A subdivision development plan;
Chapter 71 Street Access Control Page 6
(f) Property identifying any other access or abutting streets;
(g) A copy of an approval from all other public authorities having jurisdiction over the access.
1. The Marathon County Highway Department issues driveway permits and implements access restrictions on all properties fronting a lettered county street. The County Trunk Highway Access-Driveway Policy may govern the issues that arise with driveway installation. The most restrictive regulations will apply.
2. The Wisconsin Department of Transportation requires a permit for any development that abuts a state trunk highway, enforced under a variety of statutory and administrative regulations. Access control can extend to connecting streets in the vicinity of interchanges. The Federal Highway Commission prohibits any driveways of the federal interstate system. The most restrictive regulations will apply.
(2) As a condition of issuance of the Driveway Access Permit, the owner shall certify that he or she has read and agrees to the terms and conditions of the Driveway Access Permit and Village Code. All new access construction, alteration or manipulation of existing accesses, and all new development served by an existing nonconforming driveway that has been previously permitted are subject to the Driveway Access Permit requirement.
(3) A Driveway Access Permit does not require an additional excavation permit, however all provisions of Chapter 70, Streets, Sidewalks, and Other Public Place; Article II. Excavations, shall apply to work within the roadway.
[Created via Ord. 15-004, 4/22/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 71.2.02. Fees
Fees for Driveway Access Permits shall be set by the Village Board.
[Created via Ord. 15-004, 4/22/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 71.2.03. Variance
(1) If there is a practical difficulty or particular hardship in carrying out the provisions of this Chapter, the applicant may obtain a variance through application. A variance shall require approval of both the Zoning Administrator and the Director of Public Works, and may only be granted when the applicant can successfully demonstrate that:
(a) The additional access would not compromise the safety of street users or the operation of the street.
Chapter 71 Street Access Control Page 7
(b) Limiting access points to the maximum number normally allowed for the parcel would conflict with established local safety regulations.
(c) The additional access would not be detrimental to the public health and safety.
(d) The purpose of the variance is not base exclusively upon a desire to make more money from the property.
(e) The conditions upon which a petition for a variance is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought, and are not applicable, generally, to other property within the same vicinity or zoning classification.
(f) The alleged difficulty or hardships is caused by this Chapter and has not been created by any persons presently having an interest in the property.
(2) Any variance denied by Village staff may be appealed to the Village Plan Commission.
[Created via Ord. 15-004, 4/22/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 71.2.04. Construction of access
(1) The anticipated date of construction shall be included in the application. The owner shall notify the Village at least 48 hours prior to any activity within the street right-of-way. The access shall be completed in a timely and safe manner, within the time schedule identified in the Driveway Access Permit. The Village will perform inspection of the construction process, and of the completed access, to ensure that all Driveway Access Permit terms and conditions are met.
(2) The construction of the access and its appurtenances, as required by the terms and conditions of the Driveway Access Permit shall be completed at the expense of the owner.
(3) The Village may order a halt to any unauthorized access construction or use. A copy of the Driveway Access Permit shall be available for on-site review at all time. The Village may order minor adjustments to address site-specific conditions. Any ordered amendments may be appealed to the Village Plan Commission.
(4) Permits issued under this Chapter shall be deemed expired and void of the construction of the access has not been completed before the expiration date identified in the Driveway Access Permit. The owner may request an extension from the Village prior to the Driveway Access Permit expiration date.
[Created via Ord. 15-004, 4/22/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 71 Street Access Control Page 8
Sec. 71.2.05. Final Inspection
(1) Upon the completion of any authorized access construction, the owner shall request from the Village a final inspection of the inspection.
(2) The owner shall perform, at the owner’s expense any correction or modification determined necessary by the Village.
(3) Failure to complete construction and request final inspection within one year of the date of application shall be considered abandonment of the access and shall result in termination of the Driveway Access Permit.
The owner shall reimburse the Village for any costs and expenses incurred by the Village to remove the access and to restore the public right-of-way to its original condition if an access construction is not completed in a timely fashion pursuant to the terms and conditions of a properly obtained Driveway Access Permit issued pursuant to this Chapter. Such costs and expenses shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge.
[Created via Ord. 15-004, 4/22/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 71.2.06. Location of utilities
Locating and protecting all existing utility installations on or near the proposed driveway will be the sole responsibility of the owner. It is the owner’s responsibility to coordinate the relocation, adjustment, and/or repair of utility facilities which are in conflict with construction. The owner will also be responsible to any costs associated with such work. The owner is also encouraged to anticipate future utility service needs to the property under the “Dig Once” policy described in the Village Comprehensive Plan.
[Created via Ord. 15-004, 4/22/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 71.2.07. Change in use
It is the responsibility of the owner to ensure that the use of the access remains in accordance with the permitted uses allowed in the duly issued Driveway Access Permit. Any change in the use difference from the original permitted intent shall render the permit void. The terms and conditions of the Driveway Access Permit are binding upon all owner, assigns, successors-in-interest and heirs.
[Created via Ord. 15-004, 4/22/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 71.2.08. Existing access
(1) It is the intent, and shall be the practice, to apply the provisions of this policy to new access into streets rights-of-way and to existing access only as defined herein.
Chapter 71 Street Access Control Page 9
(2) An access to a street right-of-way within the Village that was appropriately established (in compliance with the regulations in place at the time of construction) prior to the adoption of this Chapter will be grandfathered and allowed to remain as is, provided that:
(a) The access is operated and maintained as to not bring the access into further nonconformance with this Chapter.
(b) The access provides the same function and capacity as exists at the time of the adoption of this Chapter.
(c) The access does not compromise the safety of roadway users.
(3) When any change occurs which brings the access into noncompliance with Sec. 71.2.08(2) the reconstruction or relocation of the access shall be required. The owner shall be responsible for all costs associated with reconstruction or other modification of the access and shall apply for a Driveway Access Permit, in advance of those activities.
[Created via Ord. 15-004, 4/22/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 71.2.09. Illegal encroachment
(1) The Village shall remove or cause the removal of any illegal encroachment not specifically permitted under the provisions of this Chapter. The owner shall be sent a written notice of any illegal encroachment, access location, or use and given ten days to remove the illegal encroachment and restore the public right-of-way to its original conditions, after which the Village may install barriers across or remove any access not in compliance with this Chapter.
(2) In the event the illegal encroachment presents an immediate hazard to the general public, the Village has the authority to remove the illegal encroachment without any notification.
(3) The owner shall reimburse the Village for any costs and expenses incurred by the Village to remove the illegal encroachment and restore the public right-of-way to its original condition. Such costs and expenses shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge.
[Created via Ord. 15-004, 4/22/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 71.2.10. Conformance of subdivisions
Upon the effective date of this Chapter, no person(s) may submit an application for the division of property abutting a street unless the associated subdivision plat or certified survey map provides that all the parcels created by the subdivision will have access to the street in conformance with this Chapter and the Village of Weston Subdivision Regulations Chapter 74.
Chapter 71 Street Access Control Page 10
[Created via Ord. 15-004, 4/22/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
ARTICLE III ACCESS CONTROL STANDARDS for DRIVEWAYS
Sec. 71.3.01. Driveway access control
By enforcing standards on access point to private property, the following standards establish levels of access control based on the functional classification of the abutting street. The functional classification accounts for use levels, potential conflicts, urban and rural landscapes, amongst other elements. In general, it is intended to separate driveways from each other as much as possible. Consideration may be given to access locations where site specific restrictions, both environmental and built, may limit compliance with these standards. Corner lots and lots that adjoin multiple streets shall only be granted access to the street with the lower function classification. When a dimension is provided, the separation of access points is measure from the centerline of the approach.
(1) Standard for all access.
(a) These requirements intend that with posted speeds, access points will align or offset at the suggested distance or greater from all existing or proposed access points.
(b) Restrictions based on street functional classification.
1. Arterial street access. Private access may be controlled and may even be prohibited on an arterial street and any street that intersects with an arterial street by the Village, the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, Marathon Count Highway Department or the Federal Highway Administration. When access is allowed to an arterial street:
a. No more than one access shall be permitted or provided to an individual parcel, or contiguous parcels under the same ownership.
b. All private access and other directed access to an arterial street shall be separated to the extent practical based on lot dimensions and existing or proposed development plans.
c. All accesses must comply with off-street parking and traffic circulation design standards surfacing requirements in the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 94 Sec. 94.12.09(6)(a).
d. Subdivisions, land divisions, and condominium developments shall be designed in such as manner that there shall be not direct access to an arterial street for newly created lots.
Chapter 71 Street Access Control Page 11
2. Collector street access.
a. No more than one access shall be permitted or provided to an individual parcel of contiguous parcels under the same ownership.
b. All private access and other direct access to a collector street shall be separated to the extent practical based on lot dimensions and existing or proposed development plans.
c. All accesses must comply with off-street parking and traffic circulation design standards surfacing requirements in the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 94 Sec. 94.12.09(6)(a).
d. Subdivisions, land divisions, and condominium developments shall be designed in such a manner to discourage direct access to a collector street from newly created lots.
3. Local street access.
a. No more than one direct access to a local street will be permitted or provided to each individual parcel, or tow contiguous parcels under the same ownership.
b. All private access and other direct access to any local street shall be separated to the extent practical based on lot dimensions and existing or proposed development plans.
c. All private accesses off a paved road must comply with off-street parking and traffic circulation design standard surfacing requirements in the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 94 Sec. 94.12.09(6)(a).
(c) Additional requirements for commercial/industrial access.
1. The appropriate separation distance is dependent upon several criteria, including:
a. The posted speed limit and design speed of the street.
b. The design vehicle anticipated to use the approach.
c. Daily use levels; and
d. The width and turning radius of the access.
Chapter 71 Street Access Control Page 12
2. Commercial and industrial access points shall be limited to access points necessary to serve the property and shall be reviewed by the appropriate authority under the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 94 through the site plan review process.
3. Commercial and industrial access points shall be constructed to support Standard AASHTO WB-67 design vehicle. Interconnected driveways and parking lots are encouraged in commercial and industrial developments.
4. One direct access point to a street will be permitted for each commercial or industrial property.
a. Contingent upon the site plan approval, a multi-access, looping route may be permitted where seen fit in supporting the needs of the establishment.
b. Increased separation distances may be allowed or required by the exercise of reasonable judgment of the Zoning Administrator and Director of Public Works.
(d) Additional requirements for agricultural and recreational driveway access.
1. Access to agricultural and private outdoor recreational land where oversized vehicles may enter the street right-of-way shall be considered in this classification. The owner shall provide an access design consistent with adopted street design standards. The access shall be designed for the largest vehicle anticipated to use the access. All agricultural and recreational driveway access off a paved street must provide a minimum of a gravel approach extending from the existing street surface to the right-of-way line.
2. The driveway access must comply with the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 70 Sec. 70.102 in regards to depositing debris onto the public street.
[Created via Ord. 15-004, 4/22/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
ARTICLE IV SPACING STANDARDS for STREETS
Sec. 71.4.01. Street intersection spacing.
By enforcing standards on street intersection spacing, the following standards establish levels of access control based on the functional classification of the Village streets. The functional classification accounts for use levels, potential conflicts, urban and rural landscapes, amongst other elements. In general, it is intended to separate access points from each other as much as
Chapter 71 Street Access Control Page 13
possible. These are considered to be minimum standards. Consideration may be given to locations where site specific restrictions, both environmental and built, may limit compliance with these standards. The separation of intersections is measured from the center line of the street.
(1) Arterial street. All intersections involving one or more arterial streets shall be separated by a minimum of 1,320 feet.
(2) Collector street. All intersections involving collector streets or a combination of collector and local streets, shall be separated by a minimum of 750 feet.
(3) Local street. All intersections involving only local streets shall be separated by a minimum of 250 feet.
[Created via Ord. 15-004, 4/22/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
ARTICLE V:
ACCESS DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR DRIVEWAYS
Sec. 71.5.01. Driveway access design.
All access onto streets shall be designed and located in accordance with the standards established in this Chapter. The design of all accesses shall be consistent with the adopted street design standards or the standards established by the Village Board.
(1) Width of access.
Use
Width at Property Line
Width at Street
Single-family residential with one access drive and Two-family residential with two access drives.
12 feet to 24 feet
18 feet to 30 feet
Two-family residential with common drive
24 feet to 36 feet
30 feet to 42 feet
Multi-family Residential & Commercial
24 feet to 48 feet*
Based on largest vehicle anticipated to use access*
Industrial
24 feet to 60 feet*
Based on largest vehicle anticipated to use access*
Agriculture/Recreation
Based on largest vehicle anticipated to use access*
*Based on type of vehicle, traffic pattern, street classification, posted speed, or other factors as determined by the Department of Public Works
(2) Grade. The maximum acceptable grade shall not exceed 10%. Under certain circumstances, which must be defined and presented to the Village Board by the
Chapter 71 Street Access Control Page 14
Director of Public Works or Zoning Administrator prior to the meeting/hearing on the proposal, the Village may require that the access point grade shall not exceed 6%.
(3) Clearance. All driveways shall provide a driveway corridor at least 12 feet wide with no tree branches or brush extending into the driveway corridor to a height of 15 feet.
(4) Bridges. All driveways that utilize bridges shall construct all bridges to support a gross vehicle weight of 50,000 pounds with a minimum twelve-foot wide clear travel surface.
(5) Driveway approach construction standards.
(a) Standards for gravel. Require a minimum six inches of three-quarter-inch crushed aggregate base course.
(b) Standards for asphalt. Minimum of two-and-one-half-inch compacted depth of surface mix over six-inch compacted three-quarter-inch crushed aggregate base course; no pea gravel allowed.
(c) Standards for concrete.
1. Forms in the approach are to be a minimum of six inches in depth.
2. Concrete to be a minimum six-bag mix.
3. Expansion joints six inches by 1/2 inch required between curb and driveway approach, or as directed.
4. Concrete approaches are required where there is existing curb and gutter and sidewalk or where sidewalk is proposed in the future.
5. Driveway approaches require a minimum concrete thickness of six inches and four-inch compacted three-quarter-inch crushed aggregate base course (no pea gravel allowed).
6. In the absence of curb and gutter, concrete approaches are prohibited.
(6) Brick pavers and decorative concrete in driveway approach.
(a) If the driveway constructed in the public right-of-way is of brick paver/decorative concrete/embossed or colored asphalt it will be the owner’s sole responsibility to maintain, repair, and replace if necessary, due to any damage by the Village or other public agencies, or due to normal wear.
(7) Alignment. All driveways shall be constructed within 10° of perpendicular to the accessed street center line for the first 20 feet of the access.
Chapter 71 Street Access Control Page 15
(a) Where possible, driveways should align on opposite sides of the street.
(b) A variance is required for unique or site-specific limitations that may exist which restrict the applicant from complying with these dimensional requirements. A variance may not be granted for any driveway that intersects the street at less than 60° under any circumstances.
(8) Vision triangle.
(a) No visual obstruction shall be located within a vision triangle, or the space formed by two existing or proposed right-of-way lines and/or a right-of-way to a private driveway. No structure or sign may be placed in the clear area of a vision triangle. The clear area extends from 18 inches to 10 feet above from the average height of the right-of-way elevation of the adjoining streets and/or an existing or proposed access/driveway. These constraints are depicted by Figure 71.5.01A.
(b) Vision triangle clearance distance measured from the edge of Right-Of-Way of the intersecting street and the edge of the paved or aggregate driveway surface. Figure 71.5.01B depicts the vision triangle and distances based on the functional classification of streets being accessed.
Figure 71.5.01A.
Vertical Clear Sight Area
Chapter 71 Street Access Control Page 16
Figure 71.5.01B.
Vision Triangle Diagram
(9) Sight distance. Permits shall not be issued for access that allows any turning movement where the sight distance is not sufficient to provide for the safe and efficient traffic flow entering or exiting a street, or encountering the access while upon the street.
Distance ‘X’ Varies by Street Type:
a. 10’ for Local Urban and Rural Streets (All Non-residential uses)
b. 15’ for Collector Streets
c. 20’ for Arterial Streets
Chapter 71 Street Access Control Page 17
(a) These sight distance standards make assumptions based on observed tendencies among motorists: a driver’s eye height being 3.5 feet above the access surface and the object to be seen being 3.5 feet above the intersecting street surface.
(b) The standards are defined for a two-lane street that is maintained all four seasons.
(10) Corner clearance.
(a) Functional area. The intersection of two streets contains a functional area beyond the physical intersection that contains decision and maneuvering distance. To reduce conflict and promote safety, driveways must be located outside of this functional intersection area. Locate all driveways and access points as far as practical from the intersection of two intersecting rights-of-way. Driveway access is restricted in turning lanes, which are also located in the functional area of an intersection.
Figure 71.5.01C.
Setback Distance From Intersection
Street Functional Type
Setback from Intersection (feet)
Signalized intersection
Local (rural/urban)
75
Collector
150
Arterial
200
Non-signalized Intersection
Local (rural/urban)
90
Collector
200
Arterial
300
(b) Sight distance. Intersection sight distance, as determined by the Director of Public Works, using the vision triangle shall be required in conjunction with intersection setbacks to ensure safety and functionality on streets. The intersection sight distance figures are defined for both uncontrolled intersections along with those where vehicles approach the intersection from a stop or yield.
(11) Common driveways. Common driveways are an effective way to control the number of access points on to collector and arterial streets. When a common driveway is utilized the following apply:
(a) A common driveway easement of at least 30 feet in width shall be located on the common boundary between the two lots.
(b) If located off a paved street in the AR, or Rural Residential Zoning districts and not required to be completely paved, the owner must meet the requirements for
Chapter 71 Street Access Control Page 18
surfacing defined in the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 94 (Zoning) Sec. 94.12.09(6)(a).
[Created via Ord. 15-004, 4/22/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-013, 4/19/2017]
ARTICLE VI:
ACCESS DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR STREETS
Sec. 71.6.01. Street access design.
All streets shall be designed and located in accordance with the standards established in this Chapter. The design of all accesses shall be consistent with the adopted street design standards or the standards established by the Village Board.
(1) Alignment. New streets shall abut other streets within 2° of perpendicular to the accessed street centerline for the first 60 feet of the street.
(a) Where possible, streets shall align on opposite sides of the street. Where offset access is needed due to certain site limitations, the same spacing criteria should be followed to ensure reduced conflict and safe left turning onto the street.
(b) A variance is required for site-specific limitations that may exist which restrict the applicant from complying with these dimensional requirements.
(2) Vision triangle.
(a) No visual obstruction shall be located within a vision triangle, or the space formed by two existing or proposed right-of-way lines and/or a right-of-way to a private driveway. No structure or sign may be placed in the clear area of a vision triangle. The clear area extends from 18 inches to 10 feet above from the average height of the right-of-way elevation of the adjoining streets and/or an existing or proposed access/driveway. These constraints are depicted by Figure 71.6.01A.
(b) Vision triangle clearance distance measured from the edge of the Right-Of-Way of the intersecting streets. Figure 71.6.01B depicts the vision triangle and distances based on the functional classification of streets being accessed.
Figure 71.6.01A
Vertical Clear Sight Area
Chapter 71 Street Access Control Page 19
Figure 71.6.01B. Vision Triangle Diagram
Distance ‘X’ = 20 feet for all Street Classifications
Chapter 71 Street Access Control Page 20
(3) Sight distance.
(a) Permits shall not be issued for streets that allow any turning movement when the sight distance is not sufficient to provide for the safe and efficient traffic flow entering or exiting a street, or encountering the access while upon the street.
1. These sight distance standards make assumptions based on observed tendencies among motorists: a driver's eye height being 3.5 feet above the access surface and that the object to be seen being 3.5 feet above the intersecting street surface.
2. The standards are defined for a two-lane street that is maintained all four seasons.
(b). The owner shall be responsible for clearly demonstrating that the proposed street location conforms to the sight distance standards set forth in this Chapter.
1. In the event that it is impractical to remove, alter, or relocate an object affecting the sight distance, the Village Board may require the installation of traffic control devices or design features to remedy the issue.
2. At the discretion of the Village Board, a proposed street with site-specific sight distance issues may be further reviewed by Village staff, at the expense of the owner. It may be to the benefit of the owner that a licensed engineer should provide a sight distance design of the access proposal.
Table 71.6.01C. Minimum Sight Distance for Uncontrolled Intersections
Posted Speed (miles per hour)
Minimum Sight Distances (feet)
30 and under
140
35
165
40
195
45
220
50
245
55
285
Chapter 71 Street Access Control Page 21
Table 71.6.01D. Minimum Sight Distance Based on Vehicle Maneuver
Vehicle Speed
(miles per hour)
Stopping Sight Distance for Left-Turn Maneuver (feet)
Stopping Sight Distance for Crossover and Right-Turn Maneuvers (feet)
25
280
240
30
335
290
35
390
335
40
445
385
45
500
430
50
555
480
55
610
530
Figure 71.6.01 E. Sight Distance Diagram
(c) Sight distance. Intersection sight distance, as determined by the Director of Public Works, using the vision triangle shall be required in conjunction with intersection setbacks to ensure safety and functionality on streets. The intersection sight distance figures are defined for both uncontrolled intersections along with those where vehicles approach the intersection from a stop or yield.
[Created via Ord. 15-004, 4/22/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS VILLAGE OF WESTON, WI
ADOPTED: May 18, 2016
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Table of Contents ARTICLE 1: INTRODUCTION 2
ARTICLE 1: INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................................................................... 5
Section 74.1.01: Title ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5
Section 74.1.02: Authority .................................................................................................................................................................. 5
Section 74.1.03: Purpose ..................................................................................................................................................................... 5
Section 74.1.04: Jurisdiction and Applicability ................................................................................................................................ 6
Section 74.1.05: Abrogation and Greater Restrictions .................................................................................................................. 7
Section 74.1.06: Effective Date ......................................................................................................................................................... 8
ARTICLE 2: INITIAL SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS ................................................................................................................... 9
Section 74.2.01: Initial Submittal Documents ................................................................................................................................. 9
Section 74.2.02: Review of Initial Submittal Documents .............................................................................................................. 9
Section 74.2.03: Site Assessment Checklist .................................................................................................................................. 10
Section 74.2.04: Concept Plan ........................................................................................................................................................ 10
Section 74.3.05: Subdivider’s Statement........................................................................................................................................ 11
ARTICLE 3: PRELIMINARY PLATS FOR SUBDIVISIONS; CONDOMINIUM PLATS .............................................. 12
Section 74.3.01: Applicability .......................................................................................................................................................... 12
Section 74.3.02: Preliminary Plat Review Procedure................................................................................................................... 12
Section 74.3.03: Coverage of Preliminary Plat ............................................................................................................................. 13
Section 74.3.04: Required Preliminary Plat Submittal Materials ............................................................................................... 13
ARTICLE 4: FINAL PLATS ASSOCIATED WITH SUBDIVISIONS ................................................................................... 17
Section 74.4.01: Applicability .......................................................................................................................................................... 17
Section 74.4.02: Final Plat Review Procedure .............................................................................................................................. 17
Section 74.4.03: Coverage of Final Plat ........................................................................................................................................ 18
Section 74.4.04: Required Final Plat Submittal Materials ........................................................................................................... 18
ARTICLE 5: CERTIFIED SURVEY MAPS ASSOCIATED WITH LAND DIVISIONS ................................................. 21
Section 74.5.01: Applicability .......................................................................................................................................................... 21
Section 74.5.02: Certified Survey Map (CSM) Review Procedure ............................................................................................ 21
Section 74.5.03: Coverage of CSM ................................................................................................................................................. 23
Section 74.5.04: Required CSM Submittal Materials ................................................................................................................... 23
ARTICLE 6: DESIGN STANDARDS ............................................................................................................................................ 25
Section 74.6.01: Applicability .......................................................................................................................................................... 25
Section 74.6.02: Street Function, Arrangement, and Classification ........................................................................................... 25
Section 74.6.03: Street Extensions ................................................................................................................................................. 26
Section 74.6.04: Street Names ........................................................................................................................................................ 26
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Table of Contents ARTICLE 1: INTRODUCTION 3
Section 74.6.05: Design Standards Adjacent to Arterial Streets, Collector Streets, Railroads .............................................. 26
Section 74.6.06: Street Dimensional Standards ............................................................................................................................ 27
Section 74.6.07: Street Grades ........................................................................................................................................................ 28
Section 74.6.08: Street Radii of Curvature .................................................................................................................................... 28
Section 74.6.09: Half-Streets and Reserve Strips ......................................................................................................................... 29
Section 74.6.10: Street Intersections .............................................................................................................................................. 29
Section 74.6.11: Sidewalks, Walkways, and Multiuse Paths ....................................................................................................... 29
Section 74.6.12: Blocks .................................................................................................................................................................... 30
Section 74.6.13: Lots ........................................................................................................................................................................ 30
Section 74.6.14: Easements. ............................................................................................................................................................ 31
ARTICLE 7: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS ............................................................................................................................. 32
Section 74.7.01: Applicability .......................................................................................................................................................... 32
Section 74.7.02: Determination of Adequacy of Public Facilities and Services ...................................................................... 32
Section 74.7.03: Development Agreement ................................................................................................................................... 33
Section 74.7.04: Required Public and Private Improvements ................................................................................................... 35
ARTICLE 8: CONSTRUCTION ...................................................................................................................................................... 38
Section 74.8.01: Applicability .......................................................................................................................................................... 38
Section 74.8.02: Commencement ................................................................................................................................................... 38
Section 74.8.03: Relationship to Building Permits ...................................................................................................................... 38
Section 74.8.04: Engineering Plans ................................................................................................................................................ 38
Section 74.8.05: Inspection ............................................................................................................................................................. 39
Section 74.8.06: Submittal of Record Drawings .......................................................................................................................... 39
ARTICLE 9: PARKS AND RECREATION ................................................................................................................................. 40
Section 74.9.01: General Provisions .............................................................................................................................................. 40
Section 74.9.02: Park and Recreational Site Dedication ............................................................................................................. 40
Section 74.9.03: Improvement of Dedicated Park and Recreational Sites .............................................................................. 41
Section 74.9.04: Fee in Lieu of Park Dedication and Recreation Fees ...................................................................................... 42
Section 74.9.05: Potential Credit for Private Open Space and Improvements ....................................................................... 42
Section 74.9.06: Access to Waterways ........................................................................................................................................... 43
ARTICLE 10: FEES............................................................................................................................................................................. 44
Section 74.10.01: Fees for Procedures Requested by the Village or Town of Weston ......................................................... 44
Section 74.10.02: Fees for Procedures Requested by Any Other Party ................................................................................... 44
Section 74.10.03: Payment of Fees for Procedures Requested by Any Other Party ............................................................. 44
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Table of Contents ARTICLE 1: INTRODUCTION 4
Section 74.10.04: Reimbursable Costs ........................................................................................................................................... 44
ARTICLE 11: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES ...................................................................................................................... 45
Section 74.11.01: Violations ............................................................................................................................................................ 45
Section 74.11.02: Penalties .............................................................................................................................................................. 45
Section 74.11.03: Matters Concerning Violations........................................................................................................................ 45
ARTICLE 12: EXCEPTIONS AND WAIVERS .......................................................................................................................... 47
Section 74.12.01: Generally ............................................................................................................................................................. 47
Section 74.12.02: Criteria and Conditions for Exception or Waiver ........................................................................................ 47
Section 74.12.02: Procedure for Exception or Waiver ............................................................................................................... 47
ARTICLE 13: DEFINITIONS .......................................................................................................................................................... 47
Section 74.13.01: Introduction to Word Usage, Abbreviations and Definitions ................................................................... 48
Section 74.13.02: Word Usage ........................................................................................................................................................ 48
Section 74.13.04: Definitions .......................................................................................................................................................... 48
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.1.01: Title through Section 74.1.03: Purpose
ARTICLE 1: INTRODUCTION 5
ARTICLE 1: INTRODUCTION
Section 74.1.01: Title
This Chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as the VILLAGE OF WESTON SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE, except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as “this Chapter”.
Section 74.1.02: Authority
This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Wisconsin Statutes, including but not limited to Chapters 61, 62.23, 80.08, 236, and 703. Specific statutory references are provided within the body of this Chapter solely as a means of assisting the reader. Such references are not to be considered as all inclusive, may not always be up to date, and shall in no manner be construed so as to limit the application or interpretation of this Chapter.
Section 74.1.03: Purpose
The purposes of this Chapter are to:
(1) Regulate and control the division of land within the Village and its extraterritorial area.
(2) Protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community.
(3) Guide the orderly and beneficial development of the community, in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan.
(4) Provide for adequate light, air, and privacy and the undue pollution of land, air, and water.
(5) Secure safety from fire, flood, and other danger.
(6) Protect the character and the social and economic stability of the community.
(7) Protect environmentally sensitive areas, farmland, open space, natural beauty, topography, and areas that are premature or unsuited for urban development or division.
(8) Protect and conserve the value of land and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the conflicts among land and buildings.
(9) Provide adequate and efficient public facilities, such as roads, sidewalks, trails, water, sanitary sewerage, stormwater management, schools, and parks.
(10)Ensure that public facilities and services are available concurrent with development, and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed land division, subdivision, or condominium development, generally at the expense of the subdivider.
(11)Provide for adequate circulation of motor vehicle, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic, having particular regard to avoiding congestion, ensuring safe and efficient movement, and providing for an interconnected transportation network within and between developments.
(12)Establish design standards and review procedures for land divisions, subdivisions, and condominium developments to further the orderly layout and use of land, allow for community involvement, and ensure that land is divided in a technically correct manner.
(13)Avoid problems associated with inappropriately divided lands, including premature subdivision, excess subdivision, partial or incomplete subdivision, and scattered and low-grade subdivision.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.1.04: Jurisdiction and Applicability through Section 74.1.04: Jurisdiction and Applicability
ARTICLE 1: INTRODUCTION 6
Section 74.1.04: Jurisdiction and Applicability
(1) Jurisdiction.
(a) No person, firm, or corporation shall divide or develop any land located within the corporate limits of the Village of Weston or within its extraterritorial area which shall result in subdivision, land division, or condominium development, as these terms are defined in this Chapter, without first filing and receiving Village approval of a subdivision plat, certified survey map, or condominium plat respectively, and subsequently recording said plat or map with the county register of deeds, all as provided in this Chapter.
(b) This Chapter shall not apply to condominium developments that existed as of May 18, 2016, except to the extent that such condominium developments are expandable pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 703.26, and except that the provisions in subsection (5) to all condominium developments regardless of when they were first established.
(2) Compliance. No subdivision, land division, replat, or condominium development within the jurisdiction of this Chapter shall be entitled to be approved or recorded without compliance with all requirements of this Chapter that are in effect when a subdivider submits a preliminary plat, certified survey map, or condominium plat, and the following:
(a) The provisions of Wis. Stats. Chapters 703, 80.08, and 236, including §236.45(2)(ac)
(b) All other Village ordinances that are in effect when a subdivider submits a preliminary plat, certified survey map, or condominium plat, including but not limited to the zoning ordinance and any official map ordinance.
(c) The Comprehensive Plan in place when a subdivider submits a preliminary plat, certified survey map, or condominium plat.
(d) All other master plans, comprehensive plans, and components of such plans prepared by state, regional, county or municipal agencies, when such plans have been duly adopted by the Village Board when a subdivider submits a preliminary plat, certified survey map, or condominium plat.
(e) The provisions of Wis. Admin. Code Chapter SPS 385 for subdivisions, land divisions, or replats not served by public sanitary sewer.
(f) All other applicable state statutes, state administrative rules, and county ordinances.
(3) Exemptions. Unless the subdivider elects to prepare a certified survey map, the provisions of this Chapter as it applies to divisions, combinations, or lot line adjustments of tracts of land resulting in fewer than 5 lots shall not apply to:
(a) Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court orders.
(b) Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages, or easements.
(c) Combinations of two or more lots into fewer lots, or sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property, if a Plat of Survey showing the parcel to be transferred has been submitted to the Zoning Administrator, including a signature certificate and indicating the location for monuments placed at all new lot corners, and the Zoning Administrator approves such Plat of Survey based on the following criteria:
1. Additional lots are not created.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.1.05: Abrogation and Greater Restrictions through Section 74.1.05: Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
ARTICLE 1: INTRODUCTION 7
2. Lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum dimensions and area required by these regulations, the zoning ordinance, and other applicable laws or ordinances.
3. Such lot combination or parcel exchange is not contrary to any prior Village approval over the land, either under this Chapter, Section 94.15.02 of the zoning ordinance, or otherwise.
4. The submitter of the Plat of Survey provides reasonable assurance that the Plat of Survey will be recorded with the county register of deeds, and provides the Zoning Administrator a recorded copy.
Use of a Plat of Survey or Certified Survey Map are the only acceptable means of describing combinations of two or more lots into fewer lots, or the sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property. Metes and bounds descriptions are not acceptable.
(4) Replats, Vacations, and Corrections of Previously Platted Land.
(a) When it is proposed to replat a recorded subdivision, or part thereof, so as to change the boundaries of a recorded subdivision, or part thereof, the subdivider shall vacate and alter the recorded plat as specified in Wis. Stats. §§ 236.36 through 236.44. The subdivider shall also complete the platting process as specified in Articles 3 and 4 of this Chapter, and meet other applicable standards in this Chapter.
(b) Vacations of an approved plat or certified survey map that do not also involve a replat shall be made in accordance with Wis. Stats. §§ 236.40 through 236.44.
(c) Corrections to an approved plat or certified survey map shall be done in accordance with and subject to the limitations of Wis. Stat. § 236.295.
(5) Additional Requirements Applicable to Condominium Developments. All condominium developments shall include the following provisions within condominium documents, which such provisions shall include Village Board consent prior to modification or termination:
(a) A mechanism for dispute resolution among unit members concerning the upkeep, repair, maintenance, and replacement of common elements and limited common elements.
(b) Establishment of a mandatory escrow account with sufficient funding for the upkeep, repair, maintenance, and replacement of common elements and limited common elements.
(c) A voluntary termination provision.
(d) A Declaration of Easements, Restrictions, Covenants and Conditions for the operation and maintenance of the condominium development and its units, which shall be subject to Village Board approval and subsequently recorded by the condominium developer.
Section 74.1.05: Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
(1) Abrogation. It is not intended that this Chapter abrogate or interfere with any constitutionally protected vested right or abrogate, repeal, annul, impair or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, where this Chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Chapter shall govern.
(2) Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and welfare; shall be
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.1.06: Effective Date through Section 74.1.06: Effective Date
ARTICLE 1: INTRODUCTION 8
liberally construed in favor of the Village; and shall not be construed to be a limitation or repeal of any other power now possessed by the Village.
(3) Greater Restrictions. Where property is affected by the regulations imposed by any provision of this Chapter and by other governmental regulations, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail. Where there are conflicts between or among regulations within this Chapter, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail.
(4) Additional Covenants or Restrictions. In its actions authorized by this Chapter, the designated Village approval authority may require placement of covenants or deed restrictions that are deemed necessary and appropriate to protect the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan and Village ordinances, in conjunction with any Plat or Certified Survey Map approval under this Chapter. The violation of any covenant or restriction required as a condition of plat or CSM approval shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter.
(5) Land Suitability Assessment. No land shall be divided in a manner that would create any lot intended for development that is held unsuitable for development by the Village Plan Commission (or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee where applicable) for reason of flooding; inadequate current or proposed drainage; adverse soil or rock formations, composition or conditions; negative impact on wetlands, waterways, or other sensitive natural resources; unfavorable topography; or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of the future residents of the proposed subdivision, land division, condominium development, or community. The Plan Commission or Committee, in applying the provisions of this subsection, shall as part of its minutes or a resolution, recite the particular facts upon which it bases its conclusion that the land is not suitable for residential use and afford the subdivider an opportunity to present evidence regarding such unsuitability if desired. Thereafter, the Commission or Committee may affirm, modify, or withdraw its determination of unsuitability.
(6) Savings Clause. In the event of a conflict between the terms and provisions of this Chapter 74 and any provision of applicable Wisconsin Statutes, the Statutes shall control; except where the applicable Statute allows the Village to impose more stringent standards or requirements. In the latter event, this Chapter 74 shall apply.
Section 74.1.06: Effective Date
This Chapter became effective upon passage and publication according to law on May 18, 2016. All plats and certified survey maps approved under the previous Chapter 74 shall be valid for periods defined in that previous chapter, associated development agreements, and Wis. Stat. Chapter 236.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.2.01: Initial Submittal Documents through Section 74.2.02: Review of Initial Submittal Documents
ARTICLE 2: INITIAL SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS 9
ARTICLE 2: INITIAL SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS
Section 74.2.01: Initial Submittal Documents
The subdivider shall prepare and submit to the Zoning Administrator the items in subsections (1) through (3), except where indicated. Such items shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator before he or she will accept and process an application for approval of a subdivision plat, condominium plat, or certified survey map, except that for divisions that will require a certified survey map, the site assessment checklist and subdivider’s statement may accompany the application for certified survey map approval.
(1) Site Assessment Checklist. Per the provisions of Section 74.2.03, except where at least one of the following circumstances is present:
(a) The land area covered by said division is 5 acres or fewer.
(b) The division will result in 2 or fewer new lots.
(c) The division would not result in any land development in the foreseeable future.
(d) The division would divide land that has been subdivided in the last ten years where a still-applicable site assessment checklist or similar analysis is on file with the Village.
(2) Concept Plan. Per the provisions of Section 74.2.04, except where at least one of the following circumstances is present:
(a) The division can be accomplished by certified survey map, except that the Zoning Administrator may require a concept plan if he or she believes that the certified survey map would have a significant impact on public improvements or the Comprehensive Plan.
(b) The division is exempted from the site assessment checklist requirement in subsection (1).
(c) The remainder of the area owned or controlled by the subdivider is included in a detailed neighborhood development plan adopted as a component of the Comprehensive Plan, and the subdivider demonstrates intent to develop according to that neighborhood development plan.
(d) A preliminary plat or a general development plan for an N Neighborhood development enabled under the zoning ordinance had been previously submitted for the same area, and the subdivider demonstrates intent to develop according to such plat or plan.
(3) Subdivider’s Statement. Per the provisions of Section 74.2.05, except for land divisions and subdivisions within the extraterritorial area.
Section 74.2.02: Review of Initial Submittal Documents
(1) Format for Submittal. The prospective subdivider shall submit the required initial submittal documents for Zoning Administrator review in digital PDF format.
(2) Zoning Administrator Review. Upon the submittal of the initial documents required under Section 74.2.01, the Zoning Administrator shall review the documents and may require a conference with the prospective subdivider. The purpose of such review and potential conference is to understand the proposed development; identify any concerns that the documents or division raises including the suitability of the land for division under Section 74.1.05(5); and assist the subdivider in understanding the objectives of this Chapter, the Comprehensive Plan, and any other pertinent ordinances and plans.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.2.03: Site Assessment Checklist through Section 74.2.04: Concept Plan
ARTICLE 2: INITIAL SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS 10
(3) Possible Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee Review. In the event the Zoning Administrator believes that such review is required, he or she shall notify the subdivider and the subdivider shall submit copies of the documents in a quantity and format determined sufficient by the Zoning Administrator.
Section 74.2.03: Site Assessment Checklist
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the site assessment checklist is to provide the basis for an orderly, systematic review of the effects of new subdivisions, larger land divisions, and condominium developments upon the community and environment, in accordance with the principles and procedures of Wis. Stat. § 236.45, and against the land suitability requirements in Section 74.1.05(5).
(2) Site Assessment Checklist Form and Scale Map. The subdivider shall complete a site assessment checklist on a form provided by the Zoning Administrator. The checklist form shall include questions to the subdivider that are intended to discern information about the presence of, and impacts on, land, water, biological, historical and archaeological, energy, transportation, and communications resources on the property. Issues identified on the completed site assessment checklist shall be explained in detail by attaching maps and supportive documentation on the type, location, and extent of the identified feature and the expected impact of the proposed division on that feature and of that feature on the developability of the land. The subdivider shall submit a scale map of the area proposed for division along with the completed form.
(3) Determination of Need for Further Information. Upon receipt of a completed site assessment checklist, the Zoning Administrator may, for reasons stated in written correspondence setting forth specific questions on which it requires research, data, and input from the subdivider and other persons, require that the subdivider submit further information to explain concerns raised from information included in or absent from the site assessment checklist. Failure to submit such additional information in a timeframe specified in the Zoning Administrator’s request shall be grounds for denial of the associated plat or certified survey map.
(4) Use of Completed Site Assessment Checklist and Further Information. The completed site assessment checklist and any attached or further information, along with the Zoning Administrator’s assessment of those materials, will be considered in the determination of the suitability of the land for division under Section 74.1.05(5) and compliance with other Village ordinance standards. If determined unsuitable or non-compliant, the subdivider shall have the opportunity to remedy the reasons before a certified survey map, preliminary plat, or condominium plat is filed or rejected.
Section 74.2.04: Concept Plan
(1) Purpose. Where required under Section 74.2.01(2), the purpose of the concept plan is to depict the general intent of the subdivider or condominium developer in terms of general layout of the subdivision or condominium development and its relationship to nearby properties, roads, utilities and other public facilities. In conjunction with the site assessment checklist, the concept plan provides an opportunity to review the general intent and impact of the proposed division or condominium development without the need for detailed engineering, surveying, and other time consuming and costly processes associated with preparation of a plat or certified survey map.
(2) Required Coverage and Contents. The concept plan shall be a map that includes all contiguous land owned or controlled by the subdivider. A complete concept plan shall depict the general layout of the proposed subdivision or condominium development, including existing and proposed building sites,
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.3.05: Subdivider’s Statement through Section 74.3.05: Subdivider’s Statement
ARTICLE 2: INITIAL SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS 11
roads, major public utilities, parks, open spaces, and general proposed land use patterns; and represent relationships to nearby properties and land uses. The concept plan may rely on and refer to a detailed neighborhood development plan prepared by or for the Village to provide direction on proposed layout. For a development within the N Neighborhood zoning district, the required general development plan may serve as the concept plan.
(3) Review of Concept Plan. The Zoning Administrator shall review the concept plan against the requirements of the Comprehensive Plan and Village ordinances. The Zoning Administrator shall refer the concept plan to the Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee, and may refer the concept plan to the Parks & Recreation Committee and/or Village Board, for review within 30 days of a complete concept plan submittal.
Section 74.3.05: Subdivider’s Statement
(1) Required Contents. Where applicable under Section 72.2.01(3), the subdivider shall submit to the Zoning Administrator a signed statement listing all development projects for which the subdivider has sought or received Village approval during the previous 10 years. The statement shall indicate whether the subdivider has any outstanding obligations to perform on any such projects, via either contract or conditions of approval.
(2) Relationship to Proposal for New Division. If the subdivider’s statement is found to contain false or misleading information pertaining to past projects or contractual obligations, the Village will not accept an application for approval of a plat until the subdivider’s statement is corrected, or consider an associated application for certified survey map approval complete. If the subdivider’s statement or Zoning Administrator review thereof indicates outstanding obligations, the Village will not accept an application for approval of a plat, or consider an associated application for certified survey map approval complete, until the obligations have been fulfilled.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.3.01: Applicability through Section 74.3.02: Preliminary Plat Review Procedure
ARTICLE 3: PRELIMINARY PLATS FOR SUBDIVISIONS; CONDOMINIUM
PLATS 12
ARTICLE 3: PRELIMINARY PLATS FOR SUBDIVISIONS; CONDOMINIUM PLATS
Section 74.3.01: Applicability
The provisions of this Article apply to subdivisions as defined in Article 13 and to condominium developments. In the case of condominium developments, a condominium plat that conforms to Wis. Stat. § 703.11 shall substitute for a preliminary plat, the review procedure and submittal shall meet the requirements in this Article to the extent the Zoning Administrator determines practical, and the preliminary plat and final plat review stages shall be combined.
Section 74.3.02: Preliminary Plat Review Procedure
(1) Preliminary Plat Submittal to Village. Following submittal and Village review of the initial submittal documents required under Article 2, the subdivider shall submit an application to the Zoning Administrator for preliminary plat approval. The submittal shall include hard copies in quantities specified on the application form and a digital PDF copy of the completed application, the CSM, and all supplemental materials under Section 74.3.04. A complete preliminary plat application shall be required at least 4 weeks prior to the date of the Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee meeting at which a recommendation is expected, except under circumstances deemed exceptional by the Zoning Administrator.
(2) Preliminary Plat Submittal to Other Agencies. The subdivider shall be responsible for providing each preliminary plat to State, County, Town, and other agencies as may be required by Wis. Stat. Chapter 236 and other applicable law. Before submitting the final plat, the subdivider shall provide a copy of the preliminary plat and preliminary engineering plans to all local utility providers, including natural gas, telephone, cable television, other telecommunications, and electric utilities, so that they may identify appropriate locations for facilities and easements to be indicated on the final plat.
(3) Staff Review of Preliminary Plat. The Zoning Administrator shall provide copies of the preliminary plat and supplemental materials to applicable staff within the Planning & Development; Public Works & Utilities; Parks, Forestry, and Recreation; Police and Fire Departments for their comments and recommendations. Any such comments and recommendations shall be provided in a timeframe to allow their consideration by the Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee. The Zoning Administrator or designee shall provide required review bodies with his or her opinion on whether the preliminary plat conforms to applicable Village ordinances and to statutes, and shall provide a recommendation for action on the plat.
(4) Parks & Recreation Committee Recommendation. The Parks & Recreation Committee shall review the plat for conformance with applicable park and recreation plans and needs, and shall forward its recommendation on such matters to the subdivider, Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee, and Village Board.
(5) Village Plan Commission Recommendation. Except as provided under subsection (6), the Plan Commission shall review the plat for conformance with applicable plans, ordinances, and statutes and shall forward its recommendation on the preliminary plat to the Village Board. The Commission's recommendation shall be to approve, approve with conditions, or reject the plat and shall include the reasons for rejection if that is the recommended action.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.3.03: Coverage of Preliminary Plat through Section 74.3.04: Required Preliminary Plat Submittal
Materials
ARTICLE 3: PRELIMINARY PLATS FOR SUBDIVISIONS; CONDOMINIUM
PLATS 13
(6) Preliminary Plat Review in Extraterritorial Area. The Extraterritorial Zoning Committee shall function in lieu of the Plan Commission under subsection (5) with respect to preliminary plats within the Town of Weston ETZ Area.
(7) Village Board Action. The Village Board shall, within 90 days of the date of the filing of a complete preliminary plat application, approve, approve conditionally or reject the preliminary plat by resolution, unless the time is extended by mutual agreement with the subdivider. The resolution shall include the conditions of approval or reasons for rejection. The Village Clerk shall then return one copy of the adopted resolution and the plat to the subdivider with the date and action endorsed thereon, and place the plat and resolution in the permanent files of the Village. Failure of the Village Board to act within 90 days of a complete application shall constitute an approval, unless the time is extended by mutual agreement with the subdivider.
(8) Effect of Preliminary Plat Approval. Approval or conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute automatic approval of the final plat, but instead shall be deemed an expression of approval or conditional approval of the layout submitted as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. Approval of a preliminary plat shall expire 36 months after the date of approval or conditional approval by the Village Board, unless within such period a complete application for final plat approval for the preliminary plat area is filed or the Village Board extends the timeframe for submittal of one or more final plats within the preliminary plat area. If the final plat is submitted within such timeframe and conforms substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, including any conditions of that approval, and to local plans and ordinances adopted as authorized by law, it is entitled to approval.
Section 74.3.03: Coverage of Preliminary Plat
The preliminary plat shall include the entire contiguous area owned or controlled by the subdivider, except where:
(1) The remainder of the area owned or controlled by the subdivider is included in a detailed neighborhood development plan adopted as a component of the Comprehensive Plan or a general development plan in an N Neighborhood area, and the subdivider demonstrates an intent to develop according to that plan; or
(2) The previously submitted concept plan included all contiguous lands owned or controlled by the subdivider, and was of sufficient detail for the Village to clearly discern the subdivider’s intent and the relationship of the proposed subdivision to surrounding properties.
Section 74.3.04: Required Preliminary Plat Submittal Materials
(1) Generally. A complete preliminary plat application shall include all the contents and materials described in this section. The Zoning Administrator may waive or modify one or more of the requirements in this section upon written request from the subdivider, and for condominium developments. The request shall state the reasons for the waiver or modification. The Zoning Administrator shall make a determination on the request against the exception and waiver criteria in Section 74.12.02.
(2) Technical Requirements for Preliminary Plat. The preliminary plat itself shall include all required contents under Wis. Stat. Chapter 236, and the following information:
(a) Description.
1. Name of the proposed subdivision or condominium development.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.3.04: Required Preliminary Plat Submittal
Materials
through Section 74.3.04: Required Preliminary Plat Submittal
Materials
ARTICLE 3: PRELIMINARY PLATS FOR SUBDIVISIONS; CONDOMINIUM
PLATS 14
2. Name, address, telephone number, and email address of the owner, subdivider, engineer, land surveyor, and land planner.
3. Date, graphic scale (not more than 100 feet to one inch), and north arrow.
4. Location of the proposed subdivision or condominium development by government lot, quarter section, township, range, municipality, and county.
5. Proposed number of lots, number of dwelling units if different, and land use types.
6. A vicinity sketch or small scale drawing of the section and government subdivision in which the subdivision or condominium development lies, with its approximate location indicated.
(b) Existing Conditions.
1. Municipal and county boundaries.
2. Existing contours at verticals of not more than one foot, with two foot contours acceptable only if approved in advance by the Director of Public Works.
3. A scaled drawing of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision or condominium development referenced to a corner established by the U.S. Public Land Survey, and the total acreage encompassed thereby.
4. Location of existing property lines, buildings, drives, paths, mature trees, streams and watercourses, drainageways, dry runs, lakes, ponds, wetlands, floodplains (by type), shoreland zoning areas and setbacks, rock outcrops, environmental corridors per the Comprehensive Plan, historical structures, and other similar significant features within the parcel being subdivided. The location and boundaries of all wetlands on the property shall be delineated by a licensed professional and certified by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and/or the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
5. Location, right-of-way width and names of any easements or rights-of-way for existing streets, alleys or other public ways, railroads, and utilities within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision or condominium development.
6. Type, width, and established centerline elevations of any adjacent existing street pavements.
7. Locations and ordinary high water marks of adjoining or encompassed navigable waterway and drainageways.
8. Subsurface soil, rock and water conditions including depth to bedrock and average depth to ground water table, based on the Marathon County Soil Survey or more detailed sources where available. Where the Marathon County Soil Survey indicates potential for groundwater less than 5 feet from the existing ground surface, the subdivider or condominium developer shall so note on the face of the preliminary plat and indicate the lots affected.
9. Location, size and invert elevation of any existing sanitary and storm sewers, culverts or drain pipes and the location and size of any existing water and gas mains on or adjacent to the plat and proposed for use. If sewers and water mains are not present on or adjacent to the preliminary plat, the distance to, and the size of those nearest and the invert elevations of sewers shall be indicated.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.3.04: Required Preliminary Plat Submittal
Materials
through Section 74.3.04: Required Preliminary Plat Submittal
Materials
ARTICLE 3: PRELIMINARY PLATS FOR SUBDIVISIONS; CONDOMINIUM
PLATS 15
10. Locations and names of adjacent subdivisions and condominium developments, parks, and cemeteries, and existing land use, zoning, and owner names/addresses of all adjacent properties.
11. Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements affecting the property and existing covenants on the property, if any.
(c) Proposed Improvements.
1. Layout and scale dimensions of all lots and proposed lot and block numbers.
2. Location, approximate dimensions, and proposed future ownership of any sites to be reserved or dedicated for parks, drainageways, environmental corridors, or other public and/or permanent open space uses.
3. Location and approximate dimensions of any sites reserved for the private use of future residents.
4. Location and approximate dimensions of any sites that are to be used for group housing, shopping centers, church sites, or other non-public uses.
5. Proposed locations, dimensions, and names (as applicable) for streets, paths, utilities, drainageways, and associated easements, including extensions for reasonable distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision or condominium development when requested.
6. Any proposed building setback lines, buildable areas, or “build-to” lines under the zoning ordinance or otherwise, and in consideration of proposed zoning if different.
7. Vision clearance triangles per Section 71.6.01(2) of the Weston Municipal Code.
8. Highway access control limitations per Chapter 71 of the Weston Municipal Code.
(3) Preliminary Engineering Plans. The subdivider shall submit preliminary engineering plans with the preliminary plat application, including the following, except where the Director of Public Works determines that the associated public improvements are not required:
(a) Preliminary street profiles showing existing and proposed centerline elevations. Profiles shall be shown for a minimum distance of 300 feet beyond the plat boundaries where future street extensions may be planned.
(b) Preliminary utility layouts, including sanitary sewer, water main, and storm sewer, and indication of any expected need for improvements to existing facilities to provide for such utility needs.
(c) Proposed locations and dimensions of sidewalks and paths.
(d) Proposed street tree type and general locations.
(e) Preliminary stormwater calculations, in order to demonstrate that adequately sized and positioned areas have been reserved for stormwater management on the preliminary plat, per Chapter 86, Article 5 of the Weston Municipal Code.
(f) A preliminary engineering plan map at least covering the area of the preliminary plat and showing the features described in this subsection, along with property lines, contours, and applicable environmental features such as wetlands and floodplains.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.3.04: Required Preliminary Plat Submittal
Materials
through Section 74.3.04: Required Preliminary Plat Submittal
Materials
ARTICLE 3: PRELIMINARY PLATS FOR SUBDIVISIONS; CONDOMINIUM
PLATS 16
(g) Any other data deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works to determine the adequacy of public facilities and services required under Section 74.9.01.
(4) Preliminary Covenants. The subdivider shall submit a draft of protective covenants to be recorded against the affected land with the preliminary plat application, including the following provisions:
(a) Methods for the proper maintenance and management of any common open space, stormwater management facility, drainageway, private road, or other required improvement intended for private ownership, maintenance, and/or protection. A separate stormwater management maintenance agreement may substitute for including such provisions in the general protective covenants for the subdivision, if approved or required by the Director of Public Works.
(b) A method to effectively minimize monotony in the design of single-family and two-family residences, as required under Section 94.10.02(2) of the zoning ordinance.
(c) Methods to ensure the construction and maintenance of any noise mitigation measures if the subdivision is adjacent to an arterial street.
(d) In all cases where the Village requires that provisions of this Chapter or other Village ordinance shall be satisfied or guaranteed by private covenants or restrictions, provisions making such covenants enforceable by the Village and prohibiting the repeal or amendment of such covenants or restrictions without the written approval of the Village Board. In all other cases, it is not the Village’s responsibility to enforce protective covenants.
(e) In any other case as determined necessary by the Village to satisfy the requirements of this Chapter.
(5) Other Required Information. The subdivider shall submit the following additional information with the preliminary plat application:
(a) The required preliminary plat application fee as indicated in the Village’s Fee Schedule.
(b) A signed agreement to reimburse the Village for any required consultant expenses in the review of the plat, if included with the application form.
(c) Any amendments to the initial submittal documents required under Article 2 to reflect changes to the subdivision.
(d) Whenever a subdivider proposes that any common open space, stormwater management facility, drainageway, private road or other required development component is to be privately managed by a property owners’ association, a draft of the legal instruments and rules for the proposed property owners’ association.
(e) For residential subdivisions adjacent to an arterial street, a preliminary plan to mitigate noise from such street. Such plan may involve landscaping, berms, fencing, and/or extra lot depths adjacent to the arterial street, and/or configuration of the division in such a manner to minimize noise impacts on residences.
(f) In any case where the Director of Public Works determines that the proposed subdivision is likely to cause a significant impact on traffic on streets or highways beyond the proposed subdivision, the applicant shall pay the fees of a traffic engineer to be retained by the Village to complete and present a Traffic Impact Analysis following Wisconsin Department of Transportation guidelines. Where the report of the analysis concludes that the proposed subdivision will cause off-site public roads, intersections, or interchanges to function below Level of Service C, as defined by the Institute of
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.4.01: Applicability through Section 74.4.02: Final Plat Review Procedure
ARTICLE 4: FINAL PLATS ASSOCIATED WITH
SUBDIVISIONS 17
Transportation Engineers, the Village may deny the application, require a size reduction in the proposed subdivision, or require that the developer construct and/or pay for required off-site improvements.
(g) Other information required by the Zoning Administrator, Plan Commission, or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee that is reasonably related to a determination of compliance with the provisions of this Chapter or other applicable ordinance.
ARTICLE 4: FINAL PLATS ASSOCIATED WITH SUBDIVISIONS
Section 74.4.01: Applicability
The provisions of this Article apply to subdivisions as defined in Article 13.
Section 74.4.02: Final Plat Review Procedure
(1) Final Plat Submittal to Village. Following the submittal of the preliminary plat, the subdivider may submit to the Zoning Administrator an application for final plat approval. The submittal shall include hard copies in quantities specified on the application form and a digital PDF copy of the completed application, the final plat, and all supplemental materials under Section 74.4.04. A complete final plat application shall be required at least 14 days prior to the date of the Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee meeting at which a recommendation is expected. Upon the submittal of a final plat for lands within the Village or requiring Village infrastructure, the subdivider and Village shall begin negotiations on a development agreement specifying responsibilities of both parties, as described in greater detail in Section 74.7.03.
(2) Final Plat Submittal to Other Agencies. The subdivider shall be responsible for providing each final plat to State, County, Town, and other agencies as may be required by Wis. Stat. Chapter 236 and other applicable law.
(3) Staff Review of Final Plat. The Zoning Administrator shall provide copies of the final plat and supplemental materials to applicable staff within the Planning & Development; Public Works & Utilities; Parks, Forestry, and Recreation; Police and Fire Departments for comment and recommendation. Such recommendations shall be provided in a timeframe to allow consideration by the Plan Commission or Joint Extraterritorial Committee. The Zoning Administrator or designee shall provide required review bodies with his or her opinion whether the final plat conforms to the preliminary plat, applicable Village ordinances, and to Statutes, and shall provide a recommendation for action on the plat. The opinion and recommendation shall be part of the record of the final plat review proceedings.
(3) Village Plan Commission Recommendation. Except as provided under subsection (4), the Plan Commission shall review the final plat for conformance with the approved preliminary plat, conditions of its approval, and all applicable ordinances and statutes, and shall forward its recommendation to the Village Board. The Commission’s recommendation shall be to approve, approve with conditions, or reject the plat and shall include the reasons for rejection or conditions associated with any recommendation for approval.
(4) Final Plat Review Within Extraterritorial Area. The Extraterritorial Zoning Committee shall function in lieu of the Plan Commission under subsection (3) with respect to final plats within parts of the Town of Weston ETZ Area.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.4.03: Coverage of Final Plat through Section 74.4.04: Required Final Plat Submittal Materials
ARTICLE 4: FINAL PLATS ASSOCIATED WITH
SUBDIVISIONS 18
(5) Village Board Action. The Village Board shall, within 60 days of a complete final plat submittal, approve, conditionally approve, or reject such plat, unless the time is extended by mutual agreement with the subdivider. Village Board approval of the final plat shall be conditioned upon the execution of the development agreement under Section 74.7.03, if the plat is in the Village or is to be served by Village infrastructure. If the plat is rejected, the reasons shall be stated in the minutes of the meeting and a written statement of the reasons forwarded to the subdivider. Upon failure of the Village Board to act within 60 days, the time having not been extended and no unsatisfied objections having been filed, the plat shall be deemed approved.
(6) Recordation of Final Plat. The plat shall be submitted for recording with the county Register of Deeds within 12 months from the date of the last approval and within 36 months from the date of the first approval, or the Village approval shall be deemed void. No plat shall be submitted for recording until the Village Clerk has inscribed his or her certification of Village approval on the plat. The Village Clerk shall cause the certificate inscribed upon the plat attesting to such approval to be duly executed and the plat returned to the subdivider for recording, upon verification of the following:
(a) Final plat approval by the Village Board.
(b) Satisfaction of all conditions imposed by that approval to the extent possible.
(c) Director of Public Works approval of final engineering plans.
(d) A development agreement under Section 74.7.03 has been signed by the subdivider and Village, if the plat area is within the Village or served by Village infrastructure.
(e) Payment of all required fees under this Chapter and other chapters of the Weston Municipal Code.
(7) Recordation of Other Documents. All required deed restrictions, protective covenants, property owners’ association organizational documents, and development agreement shall be recorded prior to, or concurrently with, the final plat.
(8) Copies of Recorded Plat and Other Documents. Within one month of the final plat being recorded by the county Register of Deeds, the subdivider shall provide a hard copy of the plat and a digital version of the plat referenced to the Marathon County Coordinate System in an AutoCAD compatible format, to the Zoning Administrator and Director of Public Works. The subdivider shall also provide verification of recordation of the plat and the other documents required under subsection (7) before the Village will issue building permits or zoning permits within the plat area.
Section 74.4.03: Coverage of Final Plat
The final plat shall include the entire area owned or controlled by the subdivider, within the phase of development for which final approval is sought.
Section 74.4.04: Required Final Plat Submittal Materials
(1) Generally. A complete final plat application shall include all the contents and materials described in this section. The Zoning Administrator may waive or modify one or more of the requirements in this section upon written request from the subdivider. The request shall state the reasons for the waiver or modification. The Zoning Administrator shall make a determination on the request against the exception and waiver criteria in Section 74.12.02.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.4.04: Required Final Plat Submittal Materials through Section 74.4.04: Required Final Plat Submittal Materials
ARTICLE 4: FINAL PLATS ASSOCIATED WITH
SUBDIVISIONS 19
(2) Technical Requirements for Final Plat. The final plat itself shall include all required contents under Wis. Stat. Chapter 236, and the following information:
(a) All the certificates required by Wis. Stat. § 236.21; and certification that the plat fully complies with all of the provisions of this Chapter.
(b) Location of existing property lines, buildings, drives, paths, streams and watercourses, dry runs, lakes, ponds, wetlands, floodplains (by type), shoreland zoning areas and setbacks, rock outcrops, environmental corridors per the Comprehensive Plan, and other similar significant features within the parcel being subdivided.
(c) Location, approximate dimensions, and proposed ownership of any sites to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds, drainageways, environmental corridors, or other public and/or permanent open space uses.
(d) Any unique building setback lines, buildable areas, “build-to” lines, or similar areas, not including those generally applicable in the associated zoning district.
(e) Vision clearance triangles per Section 71.6.01(2) of the Weston Municipal Code.
(f) Highway access control limitations per Chapter 71 of the Weston Municipal Code.
(g) All required access, drainage/stormwater, utility, and other easements. All utility and drainage/stormwater easements for plats within the Village shall be indicated as being provided to the Village of Weston and its assigns, except where otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works.
(h) If the final plat or condominium plat contains private road(s), the following note: “Notice of Possible Limitation of Public Services: This plat contains private roads. Certain public services including but not limited to road maintenance (including plowing) and garbage collection may be limited.”
(3) Other Required Information. The subdivider shall submit the following additional information with the final plat application:
(a) The required final plat application fee as indicated in the Village’s Fee Schedule.
(b) A signed agreement to reimburse the Village for any required consultant expenses in the review of the plat, if included with the application form.
(c) Any amendments to the initial submittal documents required under Article 2 or any amendments to the approved preliminary plat layout to reflect changes to the subdivision.
(d) Confirmation that the subdivider submitted the preliminary plat to utility providers as required under Section 74.3.02(2), their comments, and the subdivider’s efforts to address their comments.
(e) Final engineering plans meeting the requirements of Section 74.8.04, and including the public improvements required under Section 74.7.04.
(f) Revised covenants addressing matters covered in Section 74.3.04(4).
(g) Whenever a subdivider proposes that any common open space, stormwater management facility, drainageway, private road or other required development component is to be privately managed by a property owners’ association, revised legal instruments and rules for the property owners’ association.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.4.04: Required Final Plat Submittal Materials through Section 74.4.04: Required Final Plat Submittal Materials
ARTICLE 4: FINAL PLATS ASSOCIATED WITH
SUBDIVISIONS 20
(h) Where required, a park master plan for improvements within proposed public park, recreation, and open space within the subdivision, per Section 74.9.03.
(i) For residential land divisions adjacent to an arterial street, detailed plans to mitigate noise from such street. Such detailed plans should include locations and specifications for landscaping (including street trees), berms, fencing, and/or extra lot depths adjacent to the arterial street, and/or configuration of the division in such a manner to minimize noise impacts on residences.
(j) Other information required by the Zoning Administrator, Plan Commission, or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee that is reasonably related to a determination of compliance with the provisions of this Chapter or other applicable ordinance.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.5.01: Applicability through Section 74.5.02: Certified Survey Map (CSM) Review
Procedure
ARTICLE 5: CERTIFIED SURVEY MAPS ASSOCIATED WITH LAND
DIVISIONS 21
ARTICLE 5: CERTIFIED SURVEY MAPS ASSOCIATED WITH LAND DIVISIONS
Section 74.5.01: Applicability
The provisions of this Article apply to land divisions as defined in Article 13.
Section 74.5.02: Certified Survey Map (CSM) Review Procedure
(1) CSM Submittal to Village. A subdivider of a proposed land division shall submit with the Zoning Administrator an application for CSM approval. The submittal shall include hard copies in quantities specified on the application form and a digital PDF copy of the completed application, the CSM, and all supplemental materials under Section 74.5.04. A complete CSM application shall be required at least 14 days prior to the date of the Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee meeting at which a recommendation is expected, if required under this Section. Upon the submittal of a CSM served by new or extended Village infrastructure, the Village may require that the subdivider and Village begin negotiations on a development agreement specifying responsibilities of both parties, as described in Section 74.9.03.
(2) CSM Submittal to Other Agencies. The subdivider shall be responsible for providing each CSM to State, County, Town, and other agencies as may be required by Chapter 236, Wis. Stats., and by other applicable law.
(3) Staff Review of CSM.
(a) The Zoning Administrator may within 20 days from the date of a complete CSM submittal associated with a Minor Land Division, as defined in Article 13, approve, conditionally approve or reject said map. The Zoning Administrator shall use the requirements included and referenced in this Chapter as the sole basis for such action. The action of the Zoning Administrator is final, and the procedures in subsection (4) or (5) shall not apply to such CSM, except in the following circumstances:
1. The Zoning Administrator, rather than taking action, within 20 days of a complete submittal, instead refers the CSM to the Plan Commission, or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee; or
2. The subdivider, within 5 days of Zoning Administrator action, appeals such action to the Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee, as applicable.
(b) For land divisions not defined as Minor Land Divisions in Article 13, the Zoning Administrator shall provide copies of the CSM and supplemental materials to applicable staff within the Planning & Development; Public Works & Utilities; Parks, Forestry, and Recreation; Police and Fire Departments for comment and recommendation. Any such comments and recommendations shall be provided in a timeframe to allow consideration by the Plan Commission or Joint Extraterritorial Committee. The Zoning Administrator or designee shall provide required review bodies with his or her opinion on whether the CSM conforms to applicable Village ordinances and statutes, and shall provide a recommendation for action of the CSM. The opinion and recommendation shall be part of the record of the proceedings at which the CSM is being considered.
(4) Village Plan Commission Action. Except as provided under subsections (3)(a) or (5), the Plan Commission shall review the CSM for conformance with this Chapter and all other applicable ordinances and statutes, and shall, within 45 days from the date of a complete application submittal, recommend Village Board approval, conditional approval, or rejection of the CSM. The Commission shall transmit
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.5.02: Certified Survey Map (CSM) Review
Procedure
through Section 74.5.02: Certified Survey Map (CSM) Review
Procedure
ARTICLE 5: CERTIFIED SURVEY MAPS ASSOCIATED WITH LAND
DIVISIONS 22
such map along with its recommendations to the Village Board, including reasons for a recommended rejection or any conditions on a recommended approval.
(5) CSM Review Within Extraterritorial Area. The Extraterritorial Zoning Committee shall function in lieu of the Plan Commission under subsection (4) with respect to CSMs within the Town of Weston ETZ Area.
(6) Village Board Action. For CSMs governed by subsections (4)(b) or (5), the Village Board shall within 60 days from the date of a complete submittal, approve, conditionally approve, or reject the CSM. Village Board approval of the CSM may be conditioned upon the execution of the development agreement under Section 74.7.03.
(7) Review Periods and Notice of Action. The time periods within which action on a CSM is required under subsections (3) through (6) shall not commence until the Village has received a complete application. Such time periods may be extended by written agreement of the subdivider. If the approval authority designated under subsections (3) through (6) fails to act on such CSM within the indicated time period, the period of time has not been extended by agreement, and no unsatisfied objections have been filed within that period, the CSM shall be deemed approved. If the map is rejected or conditionally approved, the reasons for rejection or conditions of approval shall be stated in the minutes of the meeting, and a written statement shall be forwarded to the subdivider.
(8) Recordation of CSM. The CSM shall be submitted for recording with the county Register of Deeds within 6 months from the date of the last approval and within 12 months from the date of the first approval, or the Village approval shall be deemed void. No CSM shall be submitted for recording until the Village Clerk has inscribed his or her certification of Village approval on the CSM. The Village Clerk shall cause the certificate inscribed upon the CSM attesting to such approval to be duly executed and the plat returned to the subdivider for recording, upon verification of the following:
(a) CSM approval under this Section.
(b) Satisfaction of all conditions imposed by that approval to the extent possible.
(c) Director of Public Works approval of final engineering plans, if any.
(d) A development agreement under Section 74.7.03 has been signed by the subdivider and Village, if such an agreement was required.
(e) Payment of all required fees under this Chapter and other chapters of the Weston Municipal Code.
(9) Recordation of Other Documents. All required deed restrictions, protective covenants, property owners’ association organizational documents, any easements, and development agreement shall be recorded prior to, or concurrently with, the CSM.
(10)Copies of Recorded CSM and Other Documents. Within one month of the CSM being recorded by the County Register of Deeds, the subdivider shall provide 2 hard copies of the CSM and a digital version of the plat referenced to the Marathon County Coordinate System in an AutoCAD compatible format, to the Zoning Administrator and Director of Public Works. The subdivider shall also provide verification of recordation of the CSM and the other documents required under subsection (9) before the Village will issue building permits or zoning permits within the CSM area.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.5.03: Coverage of CSM through Section 74.5.04: Required CSM Submittal Materials
ARTICLE 5: CERTIFIED SURVEY MAPS ASSOCIATED WITH LAND
DIVISIONS 23
Section 74.5.03: Coverage of CSM
The CSM shall include all lots proposed for division by the subdivider, including all remainder parcels that are less than 35 acres in area.
Section 74.5.04: Required CSM Submittal Materials
(1) Generally. A complete CSM application shall include all the contents and materials described in this section. The Zoning Administrator may waive or modify one or more of the requirements in this section upon written request from the subdivider. The request shall state the reasons for the waiver or modification. The Zoning Administrator shall make a determination on the request against the exception and waiver criteria in Section 74.12.02.
(2) Technical Requirements for CSM. The CSM shall include all required contents under Wis. Stat. Chapter 236 and the following information:
(a) All the certificates required by Wis. Stat. § 236.21; and certification that the CSM fully complies with all of the provisions of this Chapter.
(b) Location of existing property lines, buildings, drives, paths, streams and watercourses, dry runs, lakes, ponds, wetlands, floodplains (by type), shoreland zoning areas and setbacks, rock outcrops, environmental corridors per the Comprehensive Plan, and other similar significant features within the parcel being subdivided.
(c) Location, approximate dimensions, and proposed ownership of any sites to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds, drainageways, environmental corridors, or other public and/or permanent open space uses.
(d) Location of all required access, stormwater, utility, and other easements, which shall be described in separate recorded document(s) referenced on the face of the CSM. All utility and stormwater/drainage easements within the Village shall be indicated as being provided to the Village of Weston and its assigns, except where otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works.
(e) Any unique building setback lines, buildable areas, “build-to” lines, or similar areas, not including those required by zoning.
(f) Vision clearance triangles per Section 71.6.01(2) of the Weston Municipal Code.
(g) Highway access limitations per Chapter 71 of the Weston Municipal Code
(h) If the CSM contains private road(s), the following note: “Notice of Possible Limitation of Public Services: This CSM contains private roads. As a result, certain public services including but not limited to road maintenance, snow plowing, and garbage collection may be limited.”
(3) Other Required Information. The subdivider shall submit the following additional information with the CSM application:
(a) The required CSM application fee as indicated in the Village’s Fee Schedule.
(b) A signed agreement to reimburse the Village for any consultant expenses in the review of the CSM, if included as part of the application form.
(c) Any amendments to the initial submittal documents required under Article 2.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.5.04: Required CSM Submittal Materials through Section 74.5.04: Required CSM Submittal Materials
ARTICLE 5: CERTIFIED SURVEY MAPS ASSOCIATED WITH LAND
DIVISIONS 24
(d) Preliminary engineering plans meeting the requirements of Section 74.3.04(3), if the CSM requires new or extended Village infrastructure or stormwater management improvements required under Chapter 86, Article 5 of the Weston Municipal Code.
(e) Covenants addressing matters covered in Section 74.3.04(4), if applicable.
(f) Whenever a subdivider proposes that any common open space, stormwater management facility, drainageway, private road or other required development component is to be privately managed by a property owners’ association, legal instruments and rules for the proposed property owners’ association.
(g) Where required under Section 74.2.01(1), a completed site assessment checklist on a form provided by the Village, meeting the requirements of Section 74.2.03.
(h) If within the Village, a subdivider’s statement per Section 74.2.05.
(i) For residential land divisions adjacent to an arterial street, a plan to mitigate noise from such street. Such plan may involve landscaping, berms, fencing, and/or extra lot depths adjacent to the arterial street, and/or configuration of the division in such a manner to minimize noise impacts on residences.
(j) Other information required by the Zoning Administrator, Plan Commission, or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee that is reasonably related to a determination of compliance with the provisions of this Chapter or other applicable ordinance.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.6.01: Applicability through Section 74.6.02: Street Function, Arrangement, and
Classification
ARTICLE 6: DESIGN STANDARDS 25
ARTICLE 6: DESIGN STANDARDS
Section 74.6.01: Applicability
The provisions of this Article apply to all subdivisions and land divisions as defined in Article 13, except where limited by law within the extraterritorial area and elsewhere by this Chapter, other Village ordinances, and applicable statute and case law. Where the application of this Article is limited by law in the extraterritorial area, streets shall meet or exceed town road improvement standards in Wis. Stat. § 86.26 or applicable town or county standards.
Section 74.6.02: Street Function, Arrangement, and Classification
(1) Complete Streets. Any roadway in the Village of Weston which is to be newly constructed or completely reconstructed must be designed and constructed to:
(a) Provide for the safety and convenience of all users of all ages and of all abilities: pedestrians, bicyclists, transit users, and motorists; and
(b) Address the needs of all users both along roadway corridors and crossing the corridors.
(2) Conformance with Village Plans and Ordinances. In any new subdivision, land division, or condominium development, the layout of public streets, bikeways, and pedestrian paths shall substantially conform to the arrangement and location indicated on the official map and Comprehensive Plan, including any neighborhood development plan components, as well as the standards established in Chapter 94 (Zoning), Chapter 71 (Street Access Controls), and Chapter 70 (Streets, Sidewalks, and Other Public Places) of the Weston Municipal Code.
(3) General Arrangement Criteria. The street layout shall recognize the functional classification of the various types of streets and shall be developed and located in proper relation to existing and proposed streets, the topography, such natural features as streams, the future land to be served by such streets, the most advantageous development of adjoining areas, and an overall objective of an interconnected public street network in the community. The functional classification of existing streets is in Volume 1 of the Comprehensive Plan.
(4) Determination of Street Functional Classification. The functional classification of various types of streets within and adjacent to each subdivision, land division, or condominium development shall be determined by the Director of Public Works based on the following criteria:
(a) Arterial streets shall be arranged to provide for through traffic and ready access to centers of employment, centers of governmental activity, shopping areas, major recreation areas, and points beyond the boundaries of the community. They shall also be properly integrated with and related to the existing and proposed system of arterial streets and highways, and shall be, insofar as practicable, continuous and in alignment with existing or planned streets with which they are to connect.
(b) Collector streets shall be arranged to provide ready collection of traffic from residential areas and conveyance of this traffic to arterial streets and highways. Collector streets shall also connect to special traffic generators such as schools, churches, and shopping centers and other concentrations of population.
(c) Local streets shall be arranged to conform to the topography, discourage use by through traffic, permit the design of efficient storm and sanitary sewerage systems, and require the minimum street
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.6.03: Street Extensions through Section 74.6.05: Design Standards Adjacent to Arterial
Streets, Collector Streets, Railroads
ARTICLE 6: DESIGN STANDARDS 26
area necessary to provide safe and convenient access to abutting property. Not every street within a subdivision, land division, or condominium development is necessarily a local street.
(d) Alleys may be provided for off-street loading and service access. Dead-end alleys without a proper turn-around shall not be approved, and alleys shall not connect to an arterial street. Alleys may be provided in the N Neighborhood zoning district to service garages and for refuse collection. All alleys must be paved with asphalt or other hard surfacing.
Section 74.6.03: Street Extensions
Proposed street rights-of-way shall extend to the boundary lines of the tract being subdivided or developed unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions or unless, in the opinion of the appropriate Village approval authority, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision, land division, or condominium development or for the advantageous development of the adjacent tracts.
Section 74.6.04: Street Names
(1) Procedure. The subdivider shall propose names of all new and extended public streets on the face of the plat or certified survey map, with all street names subject to Village Board approval as part of the approval of a final plat or certified survey map. No street names shall be used that have not been approved by the Village Board and Marathon County.
(2) Standards. Street names shall not duplicate or be substantially similar to existing street names in Marathon County. Streets that are or are planned to be continuations of others already in existence and named shall bear the name of the existing street, except where otherwise approved by the Village Board. Any notable geologic, geographic, cultural, biographical, historical, botanical, horticultural, scientific, or other factors or events associated with the area served by the street shall be considered in street naming.
Section 74.6.05: Design Standards Adjacent to Arterial Streets, Collector Streets, Railroads
(1) Access Control. Subdivisions, land divisions, and condominium developments shall be designed in such a manner that meets access and visibility standards in Chapter 71 of the Weston Municipal Code, or any similar town ordinance if located in the extraterritorial area.
(2) Streets Parallel to Arterial Streets. The subdivider may be required to provide marginal access or service streets including those that are approximately parallel to, and at a suitable distance from, arterial streets and railroads. Marginal access streets and service drives may be required to facilitate the free flow of traffic along arterial streets and highways, and to encourage the appropriate use of the land between same. Local streets running generally parallel and immediately adjacent to arterial streets and railroads shall be avoided in residential zoning districts.
(3) Landscaped Buffer Yards. Where proposed residential lots back upon the right-of-way of an existing or proposed arterial street, limited access highway, or railroad right-of-way, a landscaped buffer yard of at least 25 feet in depth in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the zoning district shall be provided adjacent to the arterial street, other limited access highway, or railroad right-of-way. Such landscape bufferyard shall remain in private ownership unless otherwise approved by the Village Board. The treatment within this landscaped buffer yard shall meet associated requirements in Section 94.11.02(3)(d) of the zoning ordinance, be unified along the entire frontage, consider noise mitigation, and be in accordance with a landscape plan prepared by the subdivider and approved by the Village. This yard shall be a permanently reserved part of the platted lots and shall be designated with a note on the
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.6.06: Street Dimensional Standards through Section 74.6.06: Street Dimensional Standards
ARTICLE 6: DESIGN STANDARDS 27
plat or CSM as follows: “NOTE: The landscaped buffer yard is reserved for the planting of trees, shrubs, and other vegetation, with the associated property owner responsible for their ongoing maintenance and replacement. The placement of structures within this yard is prohibited, except if approved by the Village Board.”
Section 74.6.06: Street Dimensional Standards
(1) Base Dimensional Standards. The minimum right-of-way width, roadway width, sidewalk requirements, and parking requirements for proposed public streets are as specified in Figure 6.06(1).
(2) Additional and Alternative Standards.
(a) If the Village’s official map or Comprehensive Plan provides for alternative requirements, such as different right-of-way width or an on-street bicycle lane, the Director of Public Works may substitute the alternative requirements for those listed in Figure 6.06(1).
(b) Extension of existing streets that exceed the standards in Figure 6.06(1) shall be developed to conform to the existing street dimension or taper to the dimensions noted in that figure, as determined by the Director of Public Works.
(c) Cross-sections for freeways, expressways, parkways, and boulevard streets shall be based upon detailed engineering studies submitted with the subdivision plat.
(d) The Village may require on-street bike lanes on arterial streets and on collector streets with current or expected heavy traffic volumes. Where on-street bike lanes are required, the width of each bike lane shall not be less than 4 feet, not including the gutter section. Such width shall be in addition to the width required by Figure 6.06(1). Placement of bike lanes shall be in accordance with the AASHTO Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities.
(e) Cul-de-sac streets designated to have one end permanently closed shall not be permitted within the Village. Within the extraterritorial area and where streets are temporarily ended at the edges of a plat, cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 1,000 feet in length measured from the centerline of the intersecting street up to, but not including, the cul-de-sac bulb. Such cul-de-sac bulb shall be of a design approved by the Director of Public Works.
(f) Roundabout intersections shall be designed in accordance with WisDOT’s Facilities Development Manual (FDM) or the FHWA Guide (NCHRP Report 672), as determined by the Director of Public Works.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.6.07: Street Grades through Section 74.6.08: Street Radii of Curvature
ARTICLE 6: DESIGN STANDARDS 28
Figure 6.06(1): Minimum Public Street Design Requirements 1
Type of Street1
Right-of-way width (feet)
Street Width (feet)2
Sidewalks Required 3
On-Street Parking? 2
Arterial
100 4
46-52 5
Yes, both sides
No
Collector
80 4
33-41 5
Yes, both sides
Determined on a case-by-case basis
Local
60-66 4 5
24-33 5
Yes, both sides
Yes, on at least one side 6
Alley
17
16
No
No
NOTES:
1 See Article 14 in Chapter 94 for alternative requirements within the N Neighborhood zoning district.
2 Street width includes pavement width, plus the width of the gutter section of the curb where curbing is present or proposed. The Village may require extra street width and/or off-street parking where adjacent land uses are expected to generate significant on-street parking demand, such as schools, parks, and other public and institutional uses.
3 All sidewalks shall be concrete and five feet in width. The Village may substitute a single 10-foot wide asphalt multiuse path for a sidewalk on both sides of the street where consistent with Village plans, safe pedestrian access, and best practices for multiuse path placement.
4 Or as indicated on the Village’s Official Map.
5 Upon recommendation of the Director of Public Works, the Plan Commission shall establish the exact right-of-way or pavement width on each street within the ranges specified in this figure.
6 One-sided parking shall be located on the north and east sides of streets unless otherwise determined by the Director of Public Works.
Section 74.6.07: Street Grades
Street grades shall be established to avoid excessive grading, the indiscriminate removal of ground cover and trees, and general leveling of the topography. All changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical curves of minimum length meeting AASHTO standards for vertical curve design. The minimum centerline grade of all new streets shall in no case be less than 0.5%. Unless necessitated by exceptional topography subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works, the maximum centerline grade of any street or public way shall not exceed the following:
(1) Arterial Streets. 6%.
(2) Collector Streets. 8%.
(3) Local Streets and Alleys. 10%.
(4) Pedestrian Ways. 5%. If higher than 5% then landings need to be provided every 2.5 feet of vertical change.
(5) Multiuse Paths. 5%, steeper grades may be allowed if 5% cannot be met (i.e. in cases of topography.)
Section 74.6.08: Street Radii of Curvature
When a continuous street centerline deflects at any one point by more than 10 degrees, a circular curve shall be introduced having a radius of curvature on said centerline of not less than 500 feet for arterial streets, 300
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.6.09: Half-Streets and Reserve Strips through Section 74.6.11: Sidewalks, Walkways, and Multiuse Paths
ARTICLE 6: DESIGN STANDARDS 29
feet for collector streets, and 150 feet for local streets. A tangent of at least 100 feet in length shall be provided between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
Section 74.6.09: Half-Streets and Reserve Strips
(1) Where an existing half street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other half of the street shall be dedicated by the subdivider. No plat shall otherwise contain half streets.
(2) Reserve strips of privately held lands shall not be permitted on any land division or subdivision as a means of the land owner to control access onto a public street.
Section 74.6.10: Street Intersections
(1) Streets shall intersect each other at as nearly right angles as topography and other limiting factors of good design permit, but in no case at an angle of less than 70 degrees.
(2) There shall be not less than 2 streets converging at one intersection, unless a safe intersection design is approved by the Director of Public Works.
(3) The distance between intersections for arterial, collector, and local streets shall be in accordance with Section 71.4.01 of the Weston Municipal Code.
(4) Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a minimum radius of 25 feet.
(5) Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such streets. Street jogs with centerline offsets of greater than 125 feet are required where neither street is an arterial or collector street, and 300 feet in other instances.
(6) Where the grade of any street at the approach of an intersection exceeds seven percent, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than four percent grade, a distance of 50 feet measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street.
(7) Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent deemed necessary to provide adequate sight distance.
Section 74.6.11: Sidewalks, Walkways, and Multiuse Paths
(1) Sidewalks and Walkways. All sidewalks and mid-block walkways shall be at least 5 feet in width, constructed of concrete, located per Figure 6.06(1), and designed in accordance with design requirements available from the Director of Public Works. All sidewalks shall be separated from the curb or paved street surface by a minimum 6 foot wide grassed terrace. Sidewalks shall be located 6 inches to the inside the right-of-way line, unless an alternative location is approved by the Director of Public Works.
(2) Multiuse Paths. Multiuse paths shall be provided by the subdivider where recommended by the Comprehensive Plan. The substitution of a multiuse path for one or both sidewalks, where required in Figure 6.06(1), may be approved at the discretion of the Director of Public Works where it can be demonstrated that such provision will better meet the needs of residents and is consistent with the Village’s Comprehensive Plan and best practices. All multiuse paths shall be designed in accordance with the AASHTO Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities, except where modified by the Director of Public Works.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.6.12: Blocks through Section 74.6.13: Lots
ARTICLE 6: DESIGN STANDARDS 30
(3) Minimum Widths. The minimum width of a right-of-way or easement for a multiuse path shall be 15 feet, with a minimum pavement width of 10 feet. The minimum width of a right-of-way or easement for a pedestrian-only walkway shall be 10 feet, with a minimum surface width of 5 feet.
Section 74.6.12: Blocks
The widths, lengths, and shapes of blocks shall be suited to the planned use of the land, zoning requirements, need for convenient access, control and safety of street traffic, and the limitations and opportunities of topography, and shall meet the following additional standards:
(1) Minimum and Maximum Block Length. In residentially zoned areas, blocks shall not be less than 400 feet nor more than 1,800 feet in length, unless otherwise dictated by exceptional topography or other limiting factors of good design.
(2) Minimum Block Width. Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets, railroads or waterways.
(3) Pedestrian Crosswalks. Pedestrian crosswalks, not less than 10 feet wide, may be required through the center of blocks more than 900 feet long to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other community facilities.
(4) Nonresidential Blocks. Blocks designed for business, commercial or industrial uses shall be of such length and width as may be determined suitable by the Village for the prospective use.
Section 74.6.13: Lots
(1) Generally. The size, shape, and orientation of lots or condominium building sites shall be appropriate for the location of the land division, subdivision, or condominium development and for the type and intensity of development and use contemplated in the Comprehensive Plan and zoning ordinance. The lots shall be designed to provide an aesthetically pleasing building site and a proper architectural setting for the buildings contemplated.
(2) Regular Lots. Side lot lines shall be at or near right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines on which the lots face. Lot lines shall follow municipal boundary lines and zoning district boundaries rather than cross them.
(3) Double Frontage Lots. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be prohibited, except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from through traffic or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
(4) Frontage on Public Street. Every lot of record shall front or abut for a distance of at least 40 feet to a public street to which it may legally take access.
(5) Conformance with Zoning Dimensional Requirements. Area and width of lots shall conform to zoning ordinance requirements set forth in Article 5 of Chapter 94, where applicable. Whenever a tract is subdivided into large parcels, such parcels shall be arranged and dimensioned as to allow further division of any such parcels into smaller lots.
(6) Lot Depth. Lots shall have a minimum average depth of 100 feet. Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided and a proportion of 2 to 1 shall be considered a desirable ratio under normal conditions. Depth of lots reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial use shall be adequate to provide for off-street service and parking required by the use contemplated and zoning.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.6.14: Easements. through Section 74.6.14: Easements.
31
(7) Waterfront Lots. Lands lying between the meander line and the water's edge and any otherwise unplattable lands which lie between a proposed land division, subdivision, or condominium development and the water's edge shall be included as part of lots, outlots or public dedications in any plat abutting a lake, river, or stream.
(8) Flag Lots. Flag lots, as defined in Article 13, shall be prohibited within the Village limits, except where pre-existing lot or development patterns necessitates use of a flag lot.
Section 74.6.14: Easements.
(1) Generally. The subdivider shall indicate, on the face of each final plat and certified survey map, all existing, proposed, and required utility, drainage, access, and other easements.
(2) Easements on Subdivision Plats. Indicating and describing an easement by subdivision plat is generally sufficient to fully convey the easement. The beneficially and purpose (for example, water main, sewer main, both water and sewer) of the easement shall be explicitly stated on the face of plat. Restrictions shall also be noted as to locating buildings, other accessory structures like fences, hard-surfacing, and other lot improvements within the easement.
(3) Easements Associated with CSMs and Condominium Developments. For certified survey maps and condominium developments, all easements shall be conveyed via the preparation and recording of a separate instrument including similar substantive information as required under subsection (2). The face of the certified survey map or condominium plat shall include appropriate references to that separate instrument.
(4) Provision to Village and Assigns. All utility and drainage/stormwater easements within the Village shall be indicated as being provided to the Village of Weston and its assigns, except where otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works.
(5) Easement Width. Easements shall be wide enough to conduct safe and efficient access to; and installation, repair, maintenance, and/or replacement of; the facilities as determined by the Director of Public Works. Easements for public pathways and walkways shall be as prescribed in Section 74.6.11(3). Utility and drainage/stormwater easements shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width. Where side or rear lot lines within a land division, subdivision, or condominium development abut one another, the division or condominium development may provide easements on abutting lot lines to form such minimums.
(6) Drainage/Stormwater Easements. Where a land division, subdivision, or condominium development is traversed by a navigable waterway or a drainageway, a drainageway/stormwater conveyance easement or dedication shall be provided around it. The location, width, alignment and improvement of and within such easement or dedication shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works and per Chapter 86, Article 5 of the Weston Municipal Code. Access along and to all navigable waterways shall be per Section 74.9.06(2).
(7) Landscaping. The Village permits placement of landscaping within easements, but not to the extent that it affects the function of the easement. The Village shall not be responsible for replacement of any landscaping in easements, except for grass, in the event that future repair or maintenance requires its removal.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.7.01: Applicability through Section 74.7.02: Determination of Adequacy of Public
Facilities and Services
ARTICLE 7: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 32
ARTICLE 7: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Section 74.7.01: Applicability
The provisions of this Article apply to all subdivisions and land divisions as defined in Article 13, except where limited by law within the extraterritorial area and elsewhere by this Chapter, other Village ordinances, and applicable statutory and case law.
Section 74.7.02: Determination of Adequacy of Public Facilities and Services
(1) Generally. The appropriate Village approval authority shall not approve a certified survey map, preliminary plat, final plat, or condominium plat unless adequate public facilities and public services are available to meet the needs of the future inhabitants of the proposed land division, subdivision, or condominium development.
(2) Required Data from Subdivider. With or following the submittal of any preliminary plat, condominium plat, final plat, or certified survey map, the subdivider shall furnish any data requested by the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works shall work with the Zoning Administrator to transmit this information to appropriate Village staff, commissions, committees, and boards for review. The Zoning Administrator shall act as coordinator for their reports to the appropriate Village approval authority on the adequacy of water, sanitary and storm sewers, fire service, police, parks and open space, recreation facilities, and transportation facilities. Failure to submit such data as requested may be grounds for denial of the preliminary plat, condominium plat, final plat, or certified survey map.
(3) Determination Criteria. Public facilities and public services for a proposed land division, subdivision, or condominium development shall be found to be adequate by the Village approval authority when all of the following conditions exist:
(a) Where the proposed land division, subdivision, or condominium development is located within a designated Sewer Service Area; main line interceptor sewer service is presently available to the area or is designated for extension; and the land division, subdivision, or condominium development is proposed to connect with such service. The appropriate Village approval authority shall also consider the recommendations of the Director of Public Works on the capacity of interceptor lines and of sewerage treatment facilities.
(b) Where the proposed land division, subdivision, or condominium development is not located within a designated Sewer Service Area, other acceptable means of sanitary waste disposal are provided which will protect the public health, safety, and welfare and meet other applicable ordinance requirements.
(c) Where the proposed land division, subdivision, or condominium development will be serviced by public water service with adequate capacity for the proposed land division, subdivision, or condominium development; and the land division, subdivision or condominium development is proposed to connect with such water service. The appropriate Village approval authority shall consider the recommendations of the Director of Public Works or water utility on water line capacities, water sources, and storage facilities.
(d) Where the proposed land division, subdivision, or condominium development is not located within an area serviced by public water service with adequate capacity, other acceptable means of water service are provided which adequately protect the public health, safety, and welfare and meet applicable ordinance requirements.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.7.03: Development Agreement through Section 74.7.03: Development Agreement
ARTICLE 7: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 33
(e) Adequate facilities are available to insure proper stormwater management, in accordance with Chapter 86, Article 5 of the Weston Municipal Code where applicable.
(f) Future residents of the proposed land division, subdivision, or condominium development can be assured park, recreation and open space areas, facilities and services which meet the standards of the Comprehensive Plan where applicable.
(g) Timely and adequate fire, emergency medical, and police protective services can be provided to the future residents and buildings.
(h) The proposed land division, subdivision, or condominium development is accessible by existing publicly maintained, all weather roads that are adequate to accommodate both existing traffic and new traffic to be generated, or necessary additional roads and road improvements are proposed by the subdivider or otherwise budgeted for construction. The appropriate Village approval authority shall consider recommendations of other consenting agencies and jurisdictions, and such factors as levels of service and average peak use.
(4) Partial Determination of Adequacy. Where the appropriate Village approval authority determines that one or more public facilities or services are not adequate for the proposed land division, subdivision or condominium development, but that a portion of the area could be served adequately, or that careful phasing of the development could result in all public services being adequate, conditional approval may include only such portions or may specify phasing of the development.
Section 74.7.03: Development Agreement
(1) Generally. The subdivider and the Village shall enter into a development agreement which identifies all public improvements the subdivider is required to complete and the timeline for completion. Said agreement shall be in a form and content approved by the Village Administrator and shall bind the subdivider to comply with the requirements of this Chapter and any specification, plans or conditions imposed or approved pursuant thereto. As a condition of the approval of any final plat and (where applicable) certified survey map or condominium plat located within the Village or served by Village infrastructure, the subdivider shall install 100% of the public improvements required by the development agreement or provide a letter of credit in an amount equal to 120% of the cost of the public improvements required by the development agreement.
(2) Performance Guarantee. The subdivider or condominium developer shall file with said development agreement, a letter of credit or bond, at the option of the developer, or other surety approved by the Zoning Administrator or Director of Public Works, in an amount equal to 120% of the estimated total to complete the public improvements required by the development agreement. The cost shall be estimated or approved by the Director of Public Works. Such surety shall have a term not exceeding 14 months after substantial completion of the public improvements. For purposes of this Section, substantial completion occurs at the time the binder coat is installed on the roads to be dedicated or, if the required public improvements do not include a road to be dedicated, at the time that 90% of the public improvements by cost are completed. Upon substantial completion of the public improvements, the amount of security the subdivider is required to provide shall be equal to the total cost to complete any uncompleted public improvements plus 10% of the total cost of the completed public improvements. The subdivider may construct the project in such phases as the Village Board approves. If the subdivider’s project will be constructed in phases, the amount of any surety required shall be limited to 120% of the cost of the phase of the project that is currently being constructed and any remaining surety obligations from previous phases.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.7.03: Development Agreement through Section 74.7.03: Development Agreement
ARTICLE 7: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 34
(3) Required Development Agreement Contents. Each development agreement shall:
(a) Specify the public improvements required for the land division, subdivision, or condominium plat, and require their construction according to approved engineering plans and specifications.
(b) Provide that all required improvements shall be completed by the subdivider or condominium developer or his contractors no later than 18 months from the date of Village approval of the engineering plans and specifications for the land division, subdivision, or condominium development, unless otherwise specified in the development agreement. This shall include all required park, recreational, and multiuse path improvements.
(c) Provide for guarantees by the subdivider of all public improvements for not less than one year following final acceptance by the Village, and an additional one year after each replacement of any guaranteed work.
(d) Provide adequate supervision and regulation of construction schedules and methods.
(e) Outline requirements for acceptance of public improvements by the Village.
(f) Require that contractors engaged in work on public improvements be adequately insured for liability, including workers' compensation liability.
(g) Assure that the subdivider and all contractors agree to indemnify the Village and its professional consultants for any liability arising out of the construction of public improvements.
(h) Provide for the payment of required fees and the dedication of required lands and improvements.
(i) Provide for the reimbursement of the Village for staff time, professional consultant’s fees, and other costs incurred in connection with the development of the property.
(j) Provide for the surety to guarantee completion of the public improvements and the other obligations of the subdivider under the agreement or this Chapter.
(k) Require the subdivider to submit second drawings in a digital format specified by the Director of Public Works following the completion and acceptance of all public improvements.
(l) Require the subdivider to control weeds and all growth of natural vegetation in a manner consistent with Village ordinances on each lot, outlot, or publicly dedicated parcel until such time as that land is transferred to another entity.
(m) Require that the subdivider be responsible for clearing all soil, vegetation, gravel, and similar construction site debris that is tracked onto public streets during the day on which such tracking occurs.
(n) Require the construction and maintenance of landscaped buffer yard landscaping and arterial street noise mitigation measures as approved to meet any applicable requirements under this Chapter.
(o) Require the subdivider's compliance with all other Village ordinances, including Chapter 70 (Streets, Sidewalks, and Other Public Places), Chapter 71 (Street Access Controls), and Chapter 86 (Utilities), conditions of approval, and other applicable regulations.
(p) Include such other provisions as deemed necessary or appropriate by the Zoning Administrator to carry out the intent of this Chapter and other provisions of the Weston Municipal Code applicable to the development. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the Zoning
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.7.04: Required Public and Private Improvements through Section 74.7.04: Required Public and Private Improvements
ARTICLE 7: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 35
Administrator to require additional or alternative provisions to meet the approval standards contained therein.
Section 74.7.04: Required Public and Private Improvements
(1) Generally. To the extent applicable, each subdivider shall construct or provide for public and private infrastructure improvements to the specifications provided in this Section and available from the Director of Public Works within land divisions, subdivisions, and condominium developments in the Village and in the extraterritorial area to the extent allowed by law.
(2) Plans and Specifications. The improvements listed in this Section shall be constructed in accordance with engineering plans prepared by the subdivider and approved by the Director of Public Works. Such plans and the associated improvements shall comply with applicable ordinances and as specified by the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works shall reference the most recent editions and addenda of the following publications: State of Wisconsin Department of Transportation (WisDOT) Standard Specifications for Highway and Structure Construction, WisDOT approved version of the USDOT Federal Highway Administration Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, Standard Specifications for Sewer and Water Construction in Wisconsin (prepared by the Public Works Industry Improvement Program), AASHTO Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities, the Village’s Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Requirements, and other appropriate engineering publications when making specifications other than those in Village ordinance. Water supply and sanitary sewer extensions must also comply with applicable sections of Wisconsin Administrative Code
(3) Responsibility. Except as indicated in this Section, the subdivider shall be responsible for all costs for installation of all public infrastructure necessary to serve the land division, subdivision, or condominium development, including the bringing of such infrastructure from where it exists to the division in question as well as providing all infrastructure within the division.
(4) Required Improvements.
(a) Survey Monuments. The subdivider shall install survey monuments placed in accordance with the requirements of Wis. Stat. § 236.15, and as the Director of Public Works may require.
(b) Public Sanitary Sewerage Service. Within a designated Sewer Service Area, the subdivider shall construct sanitary sewers in such a manner as to make adequate sanitary sewerage service available to each lot within the land division, subdivision, or condominium development, except where otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works. The size, type, depth, minimum grade, and installation of all sanitary sewers shall be specified and consistent with design requirements available from the Director of Public Works. Proposed sanitary sewer lines shall extend to the boundary lines of the tract being divided unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions or unless, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the land division, subdivision, or condominium development or for the advantageous development of the adjacent tracts. The subdivider shall install and complete the installation of sewer laterals to the street lot line prior to any street paving, curbing, or sidewalk construction.
(c) Private On-Site Wastewater Treatment Systems (POWTS). Outside of a designated Sewer Service Area or where public sanitary sewer service is not available in the determination of the Director of Public Works, the subdivider shall make adequate private sewage treatment systems available to each lot within the land division, subdivision, or condominium development as specified or allowed in applicable ordinances, statutes, or regulations, including but not limited to Wis. Admin. Code SPS
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.7.04: Required Public and Private Improvements through Section 74.7.04: Required Public and Private Improvements
ARTICLE 7: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 36
383. Private holding tanks are not permitted within the Village, except under the circumstances described in Section 94.3.03(13) of the zoning ordinance. If a public sanitary sewer project serving the area of the proposed land division is included in the Village’s capital improvement program, the subdivider shall install sanitary sewer mains and laterals to the street lot line and shall cap all laterals.
(d) Public Water Supply Service. All new lots within the Village must be connected to public water service where the Director of Public Works determines that it is available in the area of the subdivision, land division, or condominium development. In such cases, the subdivider shall construct water mains in such a manner as to make adequate water service available to each lot within the land division, subdivision, or condominium development. The size, type, depth, and installation of all water mains shall be specified and consistent with design requirements available from the Director of Public Works. Proposed water supply mains shall extend to the boundary lines of the tract being subdivided unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions or unless, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the land division, subdivision, or condominium development or for the advantageous development of the adjacent tracts. The subdivider shall install and complete the installation of water service laterals to the street lot line prior to any street paving, curbing, or sidewalk construction.
(e) Private Water Systems. Where public sanitary sewer service is not available in the determination of the Director of Public Works, the subdivider shall make provision for adequate private water systems as specified by the Village, state, county and/or town. If a public water main project serving the area of the proposed land division is included in the Village’s capital improvement program, the subdivider shall install public water mains and laterals to the street lot line and shall cap all laterals.
(f) Stormwater Management Facilities. For land divisions, subdivisions, and condominium plats within the Village, the subdivider shall construct stormwater management facilities in accordance with Chapter 86, Article 5 of the Weston Municipal Code.
(g) Other Utilities. The subdivider shall cause gas, electrical power, telephone, cable, broadband/fiber optic and other telecommunications facilities to be installed in such a manner as to provide adequate service to each lot in the land division, subdivision, or condominium development. No utilities shall be located on overhead poles, except where underground installation is impossible due to exceptional topography, vegetative conflicts, other physical barrier, or by Village Board approval. Joint trenching for electrical and fiber optic lines is permitted and may be desirable to facilitate transmission.
(h) Street Grading. After the installation of temporary block corner monuments and the above improvements, the subdivider shall grade all streets proposed to be dedicated to the public, including the grading of roadbeds in the street rights-of-way to subgrade.
(i) Curb and Gutter. After the installation of the above improvements, the subdivider shall construct concrete curb and gutter at pavement edges in accordance with Village ordinance and design requirements available from the Director of Public Works. This requirement may be waived at the discretion of the Director of Public Works in areas designated for permanent rural use as reflected in the Comprehensive Plan and any Village-adopted stormwater management plan. Wherever possible, provision shall be made at the time of construction for driveway access curb cuts in accordance with Chapter 71. The breaking or cutting of curbs will only be allowed for driveway aprons.
(j) Street Surfacing. After installation of the above utilities, the subdivider shall install base course and surface all roadways in streets proposed to be dedicated to the widths prescribed in Figure 6.06(1)
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.7.04: Required Public and Private Improvements through Section 74.7.04: Required Public and Private Improvements
ARTICLE 7: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 37
and in accordance with design requirements available from the Director of Public Works. No breaking of new pavement for utility installation or otherwise will be allowed for a period of 5 years from initial placement, unless approved by the Director of Public Works in an emergency.
(k) Sidewalks and Multiuse Paths. Sidewalks and/or multiuse paths shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of Section 70.108 of the Weston Municipal Code and Section 74.6.11 of this Chapter. Design requirements are available from the Director of Public Works.
(l) Street Lights. The subdivider shall install LED streetlights, or other similar energy efficient lighting as approved by the Director of Public Works, along all streets proposed to be dedicated to the public. Street light design and placement shall be compatible with the neighborhood, the type of development proposed, electric utility requirements, and public maintenance costs. Such lights shall be placed at each street intersection, at each street curve greater than 45 degrees, and at such interior block locations as required by the Director of Public Works.
(m) Street Signs; Regulatory Signs and Pavement Markings. The subdivider shall install at the intersection of all streets proposed to be dedicated a street name sign of a design specified by the Village. The subdivider shall also install regulatory signs and regulatory pavement markings, such as for traffic lanes, bicycle lanes, restricted parking areas, “road closed” signs/barriers, and crosswalks, as determined necessary by the Director of Public Works. The subdivider may propose, and the Village may approve, group development signs (e.g., subdivision entrance signs) in accordance with Article 9 of the zoning ordinance.
(n) Street Trees. The subdivider shall install at least one street tree for every 50 lineal feet, or fraction thereof, of frontage a property has on a public street right-of-way. Trees shall be located within the terrace area wherever possible, midway between the sidewalk and curb. Street trees shall be installed in accordance with Section 94.11.02(3)(a) of the zoning ordinance, and placed so as to not conflict with utility installation or traffic visibility.
(o) Driveways. Where driveways are to be provided, the subdivider shall install a hard surfaced driveway from all property lines to the pavement edge of adjacent streets and shall otherwise comply with the applicable requirements of Section 71.5.01 of the Weston Municipal Code and design requirements available from the Director of Public Works. Concrete approaches are required where there is existing curb and gutter and sidewalk or where sidewalk is proposed in the future. In the absence of curb and gutter, concrete approaches are prohibited.
(p) Off-site Improvements. Where the extension of streets and/or utilities from off-site locations is necessary to serve the proposed land division, subdivision, or condominium development, the subdivider shall be required to install such necessary extensions, including providing for perpetual Village access to the extended facilities and obtaining easements, rights-of-ways, and permits necessary for the extended facilities.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.8.01: Applicability through Section 74.8.04: Engineering Plans
ARTICLE 8: CONSTRUCTION 38
ARTICLE 8: CONSTRUCTION
Section 74.8.01: Applicability
The provisions of this Article apply to all subdivisions, land divisions, and condominium developments as defined in Article 13, except where limited by law within the extraterritorial area and elsewhere by this Chapter, other Village ordinances, and applicable law.
Section 74.8.02: Commencement
Initial site preparation shall meet the applicable provisions of this Article and Chapter 86, Article 5, Division 3 of the Weston Municipal Code. Except for initial site preparation, no construction or installation of improvements shall commence in a proposed land division, subdivision, or condominium development until (a) the certified survey map, final plat, or condominium plat has been approved and recorded and (b) the Director of Public Works has approved associated engineering plans and given written authorization.
Section 74.8.03: Relationship to Building Permits
No Village building or zoning permit associated with a land division, subdivision, or condominium development shall be issued until the associated plat or certified survey map is recorded. No Village building permit within the Village shall be within a land division, subdivision, or condominium development before the construction and Village acceptance of curb and gutter, binder street pavement, and sidewalks, or other improvement if specified in the development agreement, unless otherwise approved by the Village Board.
Section 74.8.04: Engineering Plans
The following engineering plans and accompanying construction specifications shall be provided in both hard copy and digital form to the Director of Public Works before authorization of construction or installation of the associated improvements specified in Article 7, where required. All engineering plans and construction specifications shall meet applicable sections of this Chapter, other chapters in the Weston Municipal Code, and design requirements available from the Director of Public Works.
(1) Street plans and profiles showing existing and proposed grades, elevations and cross-sections of required improvements including pavement, curb and gutter, sidewalks, walkways, and multiuse paths.
(2) Sanitary sewer plans and profiles showing the locations, grades, sizes, elevations, and materials of required facilities.
(3) Public water system main plans and profiles showing the locations, sizes, elevations, and materials of required facilities.
(4) Plans indicating the location and specifications of conduit for future use by telecommunications providers, including broadband, where such services will not be provided at time of initial development.
(5) Master grading plan.
(6) Erosion and sedimentation control plans meeting the requirements of Chapter 85, Article 5 of the Weston Municipal Code.
(7) Stormwater management plans and profiles showing the locations, grades, sizes, cross sections, elevations, materials, and designs in accordance with Chapter 85, Article 5 of the Weston Municipal Code.
(8) Street lighting plans showing all proposed locations, types, designs, and specifications.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.8.05: Inspection through Section 74.8.06: Submittal of Record Drawings
ARTICLE 8: CONSTRUCTION 39
(9) Sign plan for street name signs, regulatory signs and markings, and group development signs if any.
(10)Plans showing the locations, size, and species of street trees, and landscaping, berming, or other facilities within any required landscaped buffer yard or noise mitigation area.
(11)A master plan for the development of any public parks, open spaces, or recreational areas within the division, utility connections, and other facilities appropriate to the type, purpose, and location of such public lands.
(12)Additional special plans or information as required under this Chapter.
Section 74.8.05: Inspection
The subdivider, prior to commencing any work within the land division, subdivision, or condominium development, shall make arrangements with the Director of Public Works to provide for inspection. At the subdivider’s expense, the Director of Public Works shall inspect and approve all completed work prior to release of the performance guarantees specified in Section 74.7.03 and the associated development agreement.
Section 74.8.06: Submittal of Record Drawings
Following construction and acceptance of all public improvements, the subdivider or condominium developer shall submit to the Director of Public Works record drawings showing all public improvements for the plat as built, in a digital format specified by the Director of Public Works. Failure to provide such drawings shall be grounds for the Village to cease issuance of building and zoning permits within the area of the division.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.9.01: General Provisions through Section 74.9.02: Park and Recreational Site Dedication
ARTICLE 9: PARKS AND RECREATION 40
ARTICLE 9: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section 74.9.01: General Provisions
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to ensure that adequate parks and other recreational sites are properly sized, located, preserved, and improved. This Section has also been established to ensure that the cost of providing the park and recreation sites and facilities necessary to serve the additional people brought into the community by land division and subdivision may be equitably apportioned on the basis of additional needs created by such divisions.
(2) Applicability. This Section shall apply to all lands divided for new residential dwelling units within the Village. Within the extraterritorial area, if public park and recreation site dedication is not required for residential divisions by another jurisdiction with authority, proposed public parks and recreation sites shall be reserved for acquisition by the applicable town, county, or Village at undeveloped land costs for a period not exceeding 2 years, unless extended by mutual agreement between the subdivider and the local government(s) with potential interest in acquiring the land. The amount of land to be reserved shall be based on the park dedication area requirement in Section 74.9.02.
(3) Park Dedication and Fees, Generally. The need and location of park and recreation sites to be dedicated shall be determined by the appropriate Village approval authority, following a recommendation from the Parks & Recreation Committee if the division is in the Village. Where such authority determines that park and recreation site dedication is not compatible with the Comprehensive Plan or official map, or for other reasons is not advised by the Village, the subdivider shall, in lieu thereof, pay a fee to the Village to meet this requirement in whole or on a pro-rata basis. Where park and recreational site dedication is not required, the subdivider shall be responsible for paying a fee to acquire other public park and recreational lands that will benefit the future residents of the division.
Section 74.9.02: Park and Recreational Site Dedication
(1) Park Dedication Ratio. Where the dedication of park and recreation sites is required under this Article, the normal amount of park and recreation site dedication shall be based on the type and number of family units to be established in the subdivision times the number of persons per unit, divided by 100 persons per 1.2 acres. The type and number of units authorized shall be determined by applicable zoning ordinance standards for the intended zoning district of the lots, and/or via the development agreement. The following number of persons per unit shall be utilized in such calculations:
(a) For each single family residence, 3.4 persons per unit
(b) For each duplex housing unit, 3.1 persons per unit
(c) For each 1-bedroom multiple family housing unit, 1.9 persons per unit
(d) For each 2-bedroom multiple family housing unit, 2.8 persons per unit
(e) For each 3 or more bedroom multiple family housing unit, 3.4 persons per unit
(2) Relationship to Comprehensive Plan and Official Map. Whenever a public park or recreation site proposed in the Comprehensive Plan or official map is embraced, in whole or in part, in a tract of land to be divided, that proposed public park or recreation site shall be dedicated and credited toward the requirements of subsection (1). Where a public park and recreation site as shown on the Comprehensive Plan or official map within the tract is greater in area than required by dedication under subsection (1), the Village Board may require that the subdivider reserve for acquisition by the Village, through agreement,
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.9.03: Improvement of Dedicated Park and
Recreational Sites
through Section 74.9.03: Improvement of Dedicated Park and
Recreational Sites
ARTICLE 9: PARKS AND RECREATION 41
purchase, or condemnation, the remaining greater park area for a period of 2 years of plat or certified survey map approval unless extended by mutual agreement. Such reserved lands shall be kept in one or more outlots to be held by the subdivider. Over that period, the Village shall have the ability to negotiate the purchase of said land at undeveloped land prices.
(3) Other Locational Criteria. The dedicated site shall be located so as to serve the recreation and open space needs of the division or condominium development from which the dedication was made. Consideration shall be given in the location of existing natural and cultural features as documented on the preliminary plat, as required by Section 74.3.01(2)(b). All lands proposed to be dedicated for park purposes shall be demonstrated to present no environmental hazard, and that they will not require environmental mitigation or remediation measures, through a phase one environmental assessment provided by the subdivider.
(4) Access. Public access to all park and recreation sites shall be provided by street frontage of sufficient width to assure safe, convenient access to the dedicated land, with a minimum public street frontage of no less than 15% of the perimeter of the park. In unique situations, the Village approval authority may permit access via public access easement to the dedicated site. The easement shall be sufficiently wide so that the public and maintenance equipment will have convenient access to the site.
(5) Usability. The dedicated land for recreation shall be usable, as defined in Article 13. Lands dedicated for stormwater management shall not be credited towards the park and recreation site dedication requirement. Wetlands or sloped areas may be considered usable for recreational purposes at the discretion of the approval authority. The shape of the dedicated parcel of land shall be sufficiently square or round to be usable for recreational activities planned for the area or the type of park intended.
(6) Settlement by Land Dedication or Deed. If the Village Board accepts land, which is included within the area of the plat or CSM, such land shall be identified as a dedication to the public and the recording of any such plat or map shall be deemed a sufficient conveyance to vest fee simple title of all lands so marked or noted to the Village as set forth in Wis. Stats. §§ 236.29 and 236.34. If the Board accepts land which is outside the boundary of either a subdivision plat or certified survey map, such land shall be deeded to the Village prior to the recording of the associated plat or CSM. Where deemed appropriate by the Village Board, parcels of land dedicated or deeded under this Section may be traded or sold to facilitate the acquisition of more suitable tracts of parkland.
Section 74.9.03: Improvement of Dedicated Park and Recreational Sites
(1) Generally. Where a public park or recreational site is to be dedicated within a plat or certified survey map, it shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to improve the park or recreational site in accordance with this Section.
(2) Improvement Standards. When public park and recreation lands are dedicated to the Village, prior to final Village acceptance of such lands, the subdivider may be required to:
(a) Properly grade and contour for proper drainage.
(b) Provide surface contour suitable for anticipated use of area.
(c) Cover areas to be seeded with a minimum of 6 inches of quality topsoil, seed as specified by the Director of Public Works, fertilize with 16-6-6 at a rate of 7 pounds per one 1,000 square feet, and mulched, as specified in the “Standard Specifications for Highway and Structure Construction, Sections 627 and 629.” The topsoil furnished for the park or recreational site shall consist of the natural loam, sandy loam, silt loam, silty clay loam, or clay loam humus-bearing soils adapted to the
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.9.04: Fee in Lieu of Park Dedication and
Recreation Fees
through Section 74.9.05: Potential Credit for Private Open Space and
Improvements
ARTICLE 9: PARKS AND RECREATION 42
sustenance of plant life, and such topsoil shall be neither excessively acid nor excessively alkaline. Fine grading and seeding must occur within 18 months following execution of the development agreement, unless otherwise authorized by the Village Board. The improved area shall not be deemed officially accepted until a uniform groundcover to a minimum 2-inch height has been established.
(d) For natural areas included within a dedicated park or recreational site, restore the land to a natural state to the extent practicable and necessary.
(e) For each neighborhood park, provide a standard residential water service of a size specified by the Director of Public Works and provide a standard 4-inch diameter residential sewer service. For each community park, provide a minimum 6-inch water service and at least 1 fire hydrant, and at least one 4-inch sanitary sewer lateral, all located at the street property line.
(f) In cases where private lots adjoin the public park and recreational site, grade, sign, and/or landscape the area along such property lines to clearly demarcate the borders between private lots and the public site.
(3) Maintenance. The subdivider shall maintain the park or recreational site until the Village accepts its dedication, which shall include all watering, mowing, and other maintenance to maintain a neat, clean, and living appearance. It shall be the responsibility of the Village to maintain the dedicated areas upon their dedication and acceptance by the Village.
(4) Failure to Complete. If the subdivider fails to satisfy the requirements of this Section in a timeframe specified by the development agreement, the Village Board may contract said completion and bill such costs to the subdivider, following a public hearing and written notice to the subdivider of noncompliance. Failure to pay such costs may result in the immediate withholding of building permits within the division until such costs are paid.
Section 74.9.04: Fee in Lieu of Park Dedication and Recreation Fees
(1) Fee Amount. Where the appropriate Village approval authority determines that money in lieu of dedication of a park and recreational site is to be paid, in whole or in part, the subdivider shall pay a fee in lieu of parkland dedication of $244 per single family residential lot, $446 per duplex lot, $138 per 1-bedroom multiple family unit authorized, $204 per 2-bedroom unit authorized, and $244 per 3+ bedroom unit authorized.
(2) Settlement by Fee Payment. If fees are accepted, they are to be paid in a lump sum prior to the recording of a final plat or CSM.
(3) Use of Fees. Revenues received from any person shall be deposited in a special account for parks and recreation facilities and shall be used exclusively for such purposes in the Village.
Section 74.9.05: Potential Credit for Private Open Space and Improvements
(1) Private Open Space. Where the appropriate Village approval authority agrees that private open space for park and recreation purposes is to be provided in a proposed land division, subdivision, or condominium development, following a recommendation from the Parks & Recreation Committee, and such space is to be privately owned and maintained as recreational space by the future residents of the division or development, the development agreement may provide for credit against public parkland dedication and/or fees in this Article. Such agreement shall specify the land and improvements to be provided, and the amount of credit granted. Any decision to allow a developer to provide private improvements in lieu of public parkland and/or fees shall rest in the sole discretion of the Village Board.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.9.06: Access to Waterways through Section 74.9.06: Access to Waterways
ARTICLE 9: PARKS AND RECREATION 43
(2) Standards for Credit for Private Open Space and Improvements Thereto. The appropriate Village approval authority must find that the following standards are met before providing credit under subsection (1).
(a) It is in the public interest to accept private open space instead of a public park and recreation site.
(b) Yards, setbacks, and other open areas required to be maintained by zoning regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private open space.
(c) The private ownership and maintenance of the open space must be adequately provided for by written and recorded agreement.
(d) The use of the private open space must be restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants that run in favor of the future owners of property within the tract and the Village and that cannot be eliminated without the consent of the Village Board.
(e) The private open space shall be designed and improved for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access, and location of the private open space land.
Section 74.9.06: Access to Waterways
(1) Statutory Requirement. A land division, subdivision, or condominium development abutting a navigable waterway shall, in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stat. § 236.16(3), provide access at least 60 feet wide to the low water mark so that there will be public access, connected to public roads, at ½ mile intervals as measured along the lake or stream shore, except where greater intervals or different access is agreed upon by the state of Wisconsin, and excluding shore areas where public parks or open space, streets, or roads on either side of a stream are provided.
(2) Other Access to Navigable Waterways. The Village may require a public access easement along all navigable waterways. Where natural waterways traverse the land division, subdivision, or condominium development containing sufficient waterway area to contain the design discharge and where such natural waterways are endowed with significant natural beauty and have proven themselves reasonably stable, the land divider, subdivider, or condominium developer shall leave such channels in their natural state and shall dedicate, or provide public access easements along, such waterways, together with a sufficient access, along the periphery of the swale as a separate parcel or parcels, unless otherwise allowed by the Village. Such dedication shall not be credited against the parkland dedication requirements specified in this Article.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.10.01: Fees for Procedures Requested by the
Village or Town of Weston
through Section 74.10.04: Reimbursable Costs
ARTICLE 10: FEES 44
ARTICLE 10: FEES
Section 74.10.01: Fees for Procedures Requested by the Village or Town of Weston
There shall be no fees for applications filed in the public interest by the Village Board, Plan Commission, Joint Extraterritorial Committee, or other agency or official of the Village or Town of Weston.
Section 74.10.02: Fees for Procedures Requested by Any Other Party
The fees for the applications, procedures, and permits established by this Chapter shall be established by resolution of the Village Board of the Village of Weston.
Section 74.10.03: Payment of Fees for Procedures Requested by Any Other Party
Except for reimbursable costs described below and as otherwise prescribed under this Chapter or by development agreement, fees shall be payable at the time applications are filed with the Village (per the requirements of this Chapter). Reapplication fees may be required. Fees are not refundable.
Section 74.10.04: Reimbursable Costs
In addition to Village staff involvement, the Village may retain the services of other professional consultants including, but not limited to attorneys, engineers, landscape architects, architects, environmental specialists, and recreation specialists, in such matters. Any person, firm, or corporation requesting action by the Village on matters contained in this Chapter shall be required to reimburse the Village for any and all costs incurred by the Village for retaining professional consultant services to review any such matter.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.11.01: Violations through Section 74.11.03: Matters Concerning Violations
ARTICLE 11: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 45
ARTICLE 11: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Section 74.11.01: Violations
It shall be unlawful to divide or develop land anywhere within the Village or its extraterritorial area in violation of this Chapter. In case of any violation, the Village Board, the Plan Commission or Joint Extraterritorial Committee, Zoning Administrator, or any person who would be specifically damaged by such violation may institute appropriate action or proceeding to enjoin a violation of this Chapter.
Section 74.11.02: Penalties
(1) By Village. Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this Chapter shall upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100.00 nor more than $1000.00 as stated in the Fee Schedule and costs of prosecution for each violation and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding 30 days. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) Under Statutes. Recordation improperly made has penalties provided in Wis. Stat. § 236.30. Conveyance of lots in unrecorded plats has penalties provided in Wis. Stat. § 236.31. Monuments disturbed or not placed have penalties as provided for in Wis. Stat. § 236.32. An assessor's plat under Wis. Stat. § 70.27 may be ordered by the Village at the expense of the subdivider when a subdivision is created by successive divisions.
Section 74.11.03: Matters Concerning Violations
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Article for a violation of the provisions of this Chapter, the Village reserves and maintains the continued right to abate violations of this Chapter, as follows:
(1) Hazardous Condition Caused by Violation of this Chapter. If the Zoning Administrator determines that a violation of this Chapter exists, and further determines that the nature of such violation poses a great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Zoning Administrator shall cause the violation to be abated. Costs associated with said abatement shall be charged to the owner of the property on which said violation has occurred. The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to abate a violation of this Chapter.
(2) Non-Hazardous Condition Caused by Violation of this Chapter. If the Zoning Administrator determines that a violation of this Chapter exists, and further determines that the nature of such violation is not such as to pose great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Zoning Administrator shall serve written notice by registered mail on the current property owner (as indicated by tax records) on which said violation is occurring to remove said violation within 10 working days. If such violation is not removed within 10 working days, the Zoning Administrator shall cause the violation to be abated per subsection (1) above. Costs associated with said abatement shall be charged to the owner of property on which said violation has occurred.
(3) Cost of Abatement. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Article for a violation of this Chapter, the cost of abating a violation of this Chapter shall be collected as a debt from the owner of the property on which said violation has occurred. An account of the expenses incurred by the Village to abate the violation shall be kept and such expenses shall be charged to and paid by the property owner. Notice of the bill for abatement of the violation shall be mailed to the last known address of said property owner by registered mail, and shall be payable within 30 days from the receipt thereof. Within 60 days
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.11.03: Matters Concerning Violations through Section 74.11.03: Matters Concerning Violations
ARTICLE 11: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 46
after such costs and expenses are incurred and remain unpaid, the Village Clerk shall enter such charges onto the tax roll as a special tax as provided by Wis. Stat. § 66.0627.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.12.01: Generally through Section 74.12.02: Procedure for Exception or Waiver
ARTICLE 12: EXCEPTIONS AND WAIVERS 47
ARTICLE 12: EXCEPTIONS AND WAIVERS
Section 74.12.01: Generally
Where, in the judgment of the Village land division approval authority, the literal application of certain provisions of this chapter to a particular land division or development is unnecessary to achieve the intent and purpose of this chapter and would result in unnecessary hardship to the subdivider, or where a Village-approved N Neighborhood general development plan suggests waiver or modification of certain provisions, the Village land division approval authority may waive or modify such provisions to the extent deemed just and proper and consistent with Wisconsin law. Such relief shall be granted only upon a finding by the land division approval authority that the waiver or modification will not result in any significant detriment to the public good nor conflict with the intent and purpose of this chapter or the desirable general development of the community in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. Other Articles provide administrative officers the ability to grant exceptions and waivers in specified circumstances.
Section 74.12.02: Criteria and Conditions for Exception or Waiver
(1) Criteria. No exception or waiver shall have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this Chapter. Exceptions or waivers may be granted only where findings are made based upon the evidence presented in each specific case that all of the following criteria are met:
(a) The granting of the exception or waiver will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property.
(b) The conditions upon which the request is based are unique to the property for which the relief is sought and are not applicable generally to other property, except as allowed through a general development plan for properties zoned N Neighborhood.
(c) Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations is carried out, except as allowed through a general development plan for properties zoned N Neighborhood.
(d) The relief sought will not in any manner vary the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, zoning ordinance, official map, or other ordinances, except that those documents may be amended in the manner prescribed by law.
(e) The purpose of the exception or waiver is not based exclusively on a financial consideration.
(2) Conditions. In approving exceptions or waivers, the approval authority may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the criteria in subsection (1) and the purpose of this Chapter.
Section 74.12.02: Procedure for Exception or Waiver
(1) Request. A request for an exception or waiver shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider before or when the preliminary plat, final plat, certified survey map, or condominium plat is filed. The request shall state fully the grounds for the exception or waiver and all of the facts relied upon by the applicant.
(2) Supermajority Vote. A ¾ vote of the entire membership of the approval authority shall be required to grant any waiver or modification to such provisions.
ARTICLE 13: DEFINITIONS
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.13.01: Introduction to Word Usage,
Abbreviations and Definitions
through Section 74.13.04: Definitions
ARTICLE 13: DEFINITIONS 48
Section 74.13.01: Introduction to Word Usage, Abbreviations and Definitions
The purpose of this Article is to define words, terms and phrases contained in this Chapter which are essential to the understanding, administration and enforcement of this Chapter, and which may not be part of common English usage.
Section 74.13.02: Word Usage
The interpretation of this Chapter shall abide by the provisions and rules of this Section, except where the context clearly requires otherwise, or where the result would clearly be inconsistent with the apparent intent of this Chapter.
(1) Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and derivative forms.
(2) Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and words in the plural number shall include the single number.
(3) The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and vice versa.
(4) The words “shall,” “must,” and “will” are mandatory.
(5) The words “may,” “can,” and “might” are permissive.
(6) The word “person” includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, associations, trusts, and any other legal entity.
(7) The word “Village” shall mean the Village of Weston, Wisconsin.
(8) The word “County” shall mean the County of Marathon, Wisconsin, except where its context clearly requires otherwise.
(9) The word “State” shall mean the State of Wisconsin.
(10)The word “Plan Commission” shall mean the Village of Weston Plan Commission.
(11)The words “Extraterritorial Committee” shall refer to the Village of Weston-Town of Weston Extraterritorial Zoning Committee as created under Wis. Stat.§ 62.23(7a).
(12)The words “Board of Trustees” and “Village Board” shall refer to the Village of Weston Board of Trustees.
Section 74.13.04: Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, wherever they occur in this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this Section.
Access: A means of providing vehicular or non-vehicular egress from or ingress to a property, highway, or private roadway.
Access, Direct: A condition of immediate physical connection resulting from a highway, alley, or private road abutting a property.
Access standards: See Chapter 71 of the Weston Municipal Code.
Acre: 43,560 square feet.
Alley: A public right-of-way which normally affords a secondary means of access to the side or rear of an abutting property, and which is not intended for through traffic.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.13.04: Definitions through Section 74.13.04: Definitions
ARTICLE 13: DEFINITIONS 49
Appropriate Village Approval Authority: For the purposes of this Chapter, the Village Plan Commission, Extraterritorial Zoning Committee, Village Board, or Zoning Administrator, whichever body is granted authority under this Chapter to approve a preliminary plat, final plat, certified survey map, or condominium plat, or an exception or waiver thereto.
Block: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shore-lines of waterways, or municipal boundary lines
Building: A structure having a roof and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels.
Building Setback Line: A line within a lot or other parcel of land so designated on the preliminary plat, between which line and the adjacent boundary of the street upon which the lot abuts the erection of a building is prohibited, as prescribed by Chapter 94.
Certified Survey Map (CSM): A map intended for the division of not more than four lots, as further defined in Chapter 236 of Wisconsin Statutes.
Community: A town, municipality, or a group of adjacent towns and/or municipalities having common social, economic or physical interests.
Comprehensive Plan: The adopted Comprehensive Plan of the Village, as may be from time to time amended. The Comprehensive Plan is intended to promote public health, safety, and welfare of the Village by effectively guiding long-range growth and development within the Village and its extraterritorial area. The Comprehensive Plan provides goals, objectives, policies, and recommendations for future land use, transportation, housing, economic development, utilities, community facilities, agricultural resources, natural resources, cultural resources, intergovernmental relations, and implementation. Implementation of the Comprehensive Plan is accomplished through this Chapter, other chapters of the Municipal Code, more detailed plans, public investments, private development decisions, intergovernmental cooperation, and citizen involvement. The authority for the Village of Weston to prepare and adopt a Comprehensive Plan is established under Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23 and 66.1001.
Condominium Development or Condominium: A building or group of buildings in which units are owned individually and the structure, common areas, and facilities are owned by all owners on a proportional, undivided basis. It is a real estate development that is legally created as a condominium form of ownership, regardless of land use, pursuant to Wis. Stat. Chapter 703.
Covenant: A contract entered into between private parties or between private parties and public bodies pursuant to Wis. Stat.§ 236.293. Which constitute a restriction on the use of all private or platted property within a minor land division or subdivision for the benefit of the public or property owners and to provide mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to impair stability of property values.
Crosswalk: A right-of-way within a block, dedicated to public use and intended primarily for pedestrians, but which may include utilities where necessary, and from which motor-propelled vehicles are excluded.
Cul-de-sac: A local street having one end open to traffic and the other end permanently terminated in a vehicular turnaround meeting Village standards.
Developer: The legal or beneficial owner(s) of a lot or parcel of any land proposed for inclusion in a development, including an option or contract purchaser.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.13.04: Definitions through Section 74.13.04: Definitions
ARTICLE 13: DEFINITIONS 50
Development: The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any buildings; any use or change in use of any buildings or land; any extension of any use of land; or any clearing, grading, or other movement of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to this Chapter.
Development Agreement: A contract for public improvements negotiated between the subdivider and the Village under this Chapter.
Division of Land: Where the title or any part thereof is transferred by the execution of a land contract, an option to purchase, an offer to purchase and acceptance, a deed, a subdivision plat or a certified survey map.
Driveway: An area defined by gravel, limestone, or paving located wholly within the boundaries of privately held property and intended as an access from the public right-of-way to an allowed parking space or area. It does not include parking spaces or areas, or turnarounds.
Dwelling Unit: A room or group of rooms providing or intended to provide permanent living quarters for not more than one family. Also “housing unit.”
Easement: Written authorization, recorded in the Register of Deeds’ office, from a landowner authorizing another party to use any designated part of the land owner’s property for a specified purpose.
ETZ Area: The area outside of the Village municipal limits in which the Village exercises joint zoning authority with the Town of Weston, under extraterritorial zoning authority granted by Wisconsin Statutes. Also “extraterritorial zoning area.”
Extraterritorial Area: The area outside of the Village municipal limits in which the Village may exercise extraterritorial powers of planning, land division, official mapping, and/or zoning under Wisconsin Statutes.
Extraterritorial Zoning Committee: The committee formed under Wisconsin Statutes to make and advise zoning decisions within the ETZ Area. Also referred to as the “Joint Committee” or “Joint Extraterritorial Committee.”
Family: An individual or two or more persons, each related by blood, marriage, adoption, or guardianship, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a group of not more than four persons not so related, maintaining a common household in which bathrooms, kitchen facilities, and living quarters are shared.
Final Plat: the final map, drawing or chart which the subdivider’s plan of subdivision is presented for approval and which if approved will be submitted to the Marathon County Register of Deeds for recording.
Flag Lot: A lot with its widest point set back from the road, and having a thin, long strip (“flagpole”) of land connected to the road to provide legal access and frontage.
Frontage: The length of the front property line of the lot, lots, or tract of land abutting a public street, road, highway, or rural right-of-way.
Grade: the slope of a road, street or other public way, specified in percent.
Land Division: A term for a division of land where a single parcel of land is converted into two or more legal parcels, any one of which is less than 35 acres in area. Each contiguous land holding under common ownership that is less than 35 acres shall be included in a land division as a lot or outlot.
Lot: A parcel of land that: (a) is undivided by any street or private road; and (b) has frontage on a public street or other officially approved means of access, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal structure or
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.13.04: Definitions through Section 74.13.04: Definitions
ARTICLE 13: DEFINITIONS 51
use and sufficient in size to meet the lot width, lot frontage, lot area, yard, parking area and other provisions of this Chapter and the Village zoning ordinance.
Lot, Corner: A lot situated at the junction of and abutting two or more intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed 135 degrees.
Lot Depth: The average distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot.
Lot Line: A lot line is a property line bounding a lot, except that where any portion of a lot extends into the public right-of-way or a proposed public right-of-way, the line of such public right-of-way shall be the lot line for purposes of this Chapter.
Lot Line, Rear: In the case of rectangular or most trapezoidal shaped lots, the lot line that is opposite and most distant from the front lot line of the lot is the rear lot line. In the case of an irregular, triangular, or gore-shaped lot, a line 20 feet in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the front line shall be considered to be the rear lot line. In the case of a double frontage lot, there shall be no rear lot line
Mature Tree: A tree that is native to the region and non-invasive as determined by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, and is 12 inches or greater in diameter at a height of four feet above grade. However, no tree specifically planted for commercial purposes shall be defined as a mature tree for purposes of this Chapter.
Minor Land Division: A land division proposed to be completed by certified survey map that does not:
1. Include or involve the dedication of land to the public, such as for public roads, parks, or stormwater facilities;
2. Require, in the determination of the Zoning Administrator or Director of Public Works, a development agreement under Section 74.7.03; or
3. Raise issues related to compliance with this Chapter, other chapters of the Village’s Municipal Code, or the Village of Weston Comprehensive Plan, in the determination of the Zoning Administrator.
Mixed Use Development: A land development that includes or allows a blend of commercial services, retail, office, multiple family residential, and/or institutional uses within a single lot or building. Single family and/or two family residential development may not be part of and is not considered mixed use development.
Municipality: For the purposes of this Chapter, a village or town government.
N Neighborhood: A development that exhibits several of the following characteristics reminiscent of traditional neighborhood design: alleys, streets laid out in a grid system, buildings oriented to the street, front porches on houses, pedestrian-orientation, mixed land uses, and village squares or greens. See Section 94.2.02(4) and Article 14 of the zoning ordinance.
Outlot: A parcel of land, other than a lot, so designated on a subdivision plat or certified survey map, which is not intended for building development in the land division without further alteration or combination, except for buildings related to public utility, stormwater, or recreation services.
Owner: The person, persons, or other legal entity having the right of legal title to a lot or parcel of land.
Parcel: The area within the boundary lines of a lot.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.13.04: Definitions through Section 74.13.04: Definitions
ARTICLE 13: DEFINITIONS 52
Plan Commission: The Plan Commission of the Village, also commonly referred to as the Planning Commission. See Section 94.16.16 of the Weston Municipal Code.
Plat: A map on which a developer’s map for a subdivision or condominium development is presented to the Village for approval.
Preliminary Plat: A map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision submitted for Village approval, and submitted in advance of a final plat.
Private On-Site Wastewater Treatment System (POWTS): A sewage treatment and disposal system serving a single principal building with a septic tank and soil absorption field, holding tank where permitted under this Chapter, or alternative private sewage system located on the same lot as the principal building. Private on-site wastewater treatment systems are regulated under Wis. Admin. Code SPS 383, other state regulations, and the Marathon County Sanitary Ordinance.
Public Improvement: Any improvement, facility, or service, together with customary improvements and appurtenances thereto, necessary to provide for public needs such as streets, roads, alleys, pedestrian walks or paths, storm sewers, flood control improvements, water supply and distribution facilities, sanitary sewage disposal and treatment, public utility and energy services.
Public Lands: For the purposes of this Chapter, publicly owned and maintained properties that include, but are not limited to, street rights-of-way, public parks, and other publicly-owned open space.
Public Way: Any public road, street, highway, walkway, drainage-way, or part thereof.
Replat: The process of changing, or a map or plat which changes, the boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat, certified survey map or part thereof. The legal dividing of a large block, lot or outlot within a recorded subdivision plat or certified survey map without changing exterior boundaries of said block lot or outlot is not a replat.
Right-of-Way: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way, and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established.
Setback: The shortest distance between a building’s or structure’s exterior and the nearest point on the referenced lot line.
Sewer Service Area: The geographic area within which the Village, or another governmental entity that owns and manages a sanitary sewer system, may legally extend sanitary sewer service under state and federal water quality laws. Sewer service areas are generally drawn based on local service basins and projections of future urban development.
Street: A public or private right-of-way that affords a primary means of vehicular access to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane, throughway, or however otherwise designated, but excepting driveways to buildings.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.13.04: Definitions through Section 74.13.04: Definitions
ARTICLE 13: DEFINITIONS 53
Street, Arterial: A street that serves longer intra-urban trips and traffic traveling through the Village, has limited to no direct access for abutting land uses, and has measured or projected traffic volumes of over 6,000 vehicles per day; or as otherwise may be designated as an arterial street within the Comprehensive Plan or by the Village Board. Private access may be permitted with limitations imposed by the Village, Marathon County, the Wisconsin Department of Transportation and/or the Federal Highway Administration. The Functional Classification System includes designation as principal and minor arterials.
Street, Collector: A street that collects and distributes internal traffic within the Village (such as within a residential neighborhood), provides connections between local and arterial streets and limited restrictions on access for abutting land uses, and has a measured or projected traffic volume of between 1,500 and 8,000 vehicles per day; or as otherwise may be designated as a collector street within the Comprehensive Plan by the Village Board. The Functional Classification System includes designations as collector streets.
Street, Half: A street bordering one or more property lines of a tract of land in which the subdivider has allocated but part of the ultimate right-of-way width.
Street, Local: A street designed to provide access to abutting land uses and leading into a collector or occasionally into and arterial street, but which is not designed to carry through traffic from outside the neighborhood where it is locate. Not an arterial street or a collector street.
Street, Marginal-access: A local street that parallels and is adjacent to a major street or highway, and that provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
Subdivider: Any person, firm or corporation, or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land resulting in a land division, subdivision, condominium development, or replat.
Subdivision: The division of a lot, parcel, or tract of land by the owners thereof, or their agents, for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development where (a) a single act of division creates 5 or more parcels, lots, or building sites, each less than 35 acres in size; or (b) an act of division results in the creation of 5 or more parcels, lots, or building sites by successive divisions within a period of 5 years, where at least 5 of the parcels, lots, or sites are less than 35 acres in size. The establishment of a condominium development pursuant to Wis. Stat. Chap. 703, shall also be deemed to be a subdivision for purposes of this Chapter. Subdivisions are created through the recording of a final plat, except for condominium developments. Notwithstanding the above, “subdivision” does not include a division of land into not more than nine lots and outlots of 1½ acres each or less where the land division is in an area is zoned for commercial, industrial, or mixed use development in the Village or its extraterritorial zoning area as defined above.
Usable Land: Land intended for public park dedication where required under this chapter that (a) is located outside of the floodplain, wetlands, surface waters, stormwater basins and conveyance routes, and other areas with severe limitations for park development in the determination of the Parks and Recreation Committee; (b) Contains developer-finished slopes of less than 4% for active recreation areas, and slopes of less than 12% for passive recreation areas and conservancy; (c) Is sufficiently shaped and contains suitable soils for construction of the anticipated park facilities, in the determination of the Zoning Administrator; (e) Is visible and accessible to the public for foot, bike, and motor vehicle access and for effective monitoring for public safety; and (h) Is situated in a location that is consistent with the Village’s Comprehensive Plan and that adequately serves the park’s service area.
Wetland: An area where water is at, near, or above the land surface long enough to be capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which has soils indicative of wet conditions.
CHAPTER 74: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MAY 18, 2016
Section 74.13.04: Definitions through Section 74.13.04: Definitions
ARTICLE 13: DEFINITIONS 54
Zero Lot Line Structure: A structure that is built over the property line, where walls separating occupancy units follow lot lines, such as a zero lot line duplex or townhouse.
Zoning Administrator: The person authorized and charged by the Village with the administration of this Chapter. See Section 94.16.15 of the Weston Municipal Code.
Zoning Ordinance: Chapter 94 of the Weston Municipal Code.
Chapter 78 Taxation and Special Assessments Page 1
Chapter 78
TAXATION AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 78.100. Fees and charges.
ARTICLE II. ROOM TAX
Sec. 78.101. Definitions.
Sec. 78.102. Imposition of tax.
Sec. 78.103. Tax moneys.
Sec. 78.104. Audit.
Sec. 78.105. Failure to file.
Sec. 78.106. Interest.
Sec. 78.107. Refund.
Sec. 78.108. Forfeiture for failure to pay Room Tax.
Sec. 78.109. Maintaining records and confidentiality.
Sec. 78.110. Permit.
Sec. 78.111. Revocation of permit.
Sec. 78.112. Sale of business.
__________
* Cross References--Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes or levying special assessments or taxes saved from repeal, § 1.110(6); Administration, Chapter 2; Board of Review, § 2.137 et seq.; Businesses, Chapter 18; Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places, Chapter 70.
Chapter 78 Taxation and Special Assessments Page 2
ARTICLE III. SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
Sec. 78.113. Purpose.
Sec. 78.114. Special assessment options.
Sec. 78.115. Assessment formula.
Sec. 78.116 Applying the adjust front footage formula.
Sec. 78.117. Determination of assessable front footage.
Sec. 78.117.1. Alternative procedure/sewer and water assessments.
Sec. 78.118. Determination of assessment cost for new street and curb and gutter construction.
Sec. 78.119. Determination of assessment cost for street and curb and gutter reconstruction.
Sec. 78.120. Drive approach construction.
Sec. 78.121. Sidewalks; new construction and reconstruction.
Sec. 78.122. Determination of assessment cost for sanitary sewer, lift station, water main construction and booster stations.
Sec. 78.123. Access fee for sanitary sewer and water main improvements.
Sec. 78.124. Service laterals required.
Sec. 78.125. Assessment paid by installments.
Sec. 78.126. Assessment prior to annexation.
Chapter 78 Taxation and Special Assessments Page 3
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 78.100. Fees and charges.
All fees and charges under this chapter are set by the village board from time to time in the village fee schedule, and none of the provisions of this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect such fees and charges.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
ARTICLE II. ROOM TAX*
Sec. 78.101. Definitions.
The definitions of words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in Wis. Stat. § 66.0615, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
(Ord. of 1-16-1989, § 1(1)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-005, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 78.102. Imposition of tax.
(a) Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.0615, a Room Tax is imposed on the privilege and service of furnishing, at retail, rooms or lodging to transients by hotelkeepers, motel operators and other persons furnishing accommodations that are available to the public, irrespective of whether membership is required for the use of the accommodations. Such Room Tax shall be at the rate of 8% of the gross receipts from such retail furnishings of rooms or lodgings. Such Room Tax shall not be subject to the selective sales tax imposed byWis. Stat. § 77.52 (2)(a)1.
(b) Sales of rooms to the federal government, State of Wisconsin, Wisconsin local governmental units, and other entities holding tax-exempt certificates shall be exempt from the Room Tax imposed under this article. The exemption shall be granted only if the following conditions have been met for any sale of a room:
(1) The retailer shall bill the lodging in the name of the exempt entity; and
(2) The retailer must be provided with either:
a. In the case of federal, State of Wisconsin or local governmental units, a tax-exempt status number and a letter of authorization or purchase order from the governmental unit, or
__________
* State Law References--Room tax generally, Wis. Stat. § 66.0615.
Chapter 78 Taxation and Special Assessments Page 4
b. In the case of other tax-exempt entities, the entities certificate of exempt status number.
(Ord. of 1-16-1989 and Ord. of 8-16-04, § 1(12)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-005, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 78.103. Tax moneys.
(a) Collection of tax. This section shall be administered by the Village Finance Director/Treasurer. The Room Tax is imposed for each calendar quarter, or first partial calendar quarter, and is due within thirty (30) days of the end of that quarter. A return shall be filed with the Village Finance Director/Treasurer, with each quarterly payment. The return shall itemize the gross receipts of the preceding calendar quarter from the retail furnishing of rooms or lodging, the amount of taxes imposed for such period, and such other information as the Village Finance Director/Treasurer deems necessary. Every person required to file such quarterly return shall, with the first return, elect to file on an annual calendar year or fiscal year. An annual return shall be filed with the Village Finance Director/Treasurer summarizing the quarterly returns, reconciling and adjusting for errors in the quarterly returns, and containing such additional information as the Village Finance Director/Treasurer requires. The annual return shall be filed within 90 days of the close of each calendar or fiscal year. The annual returns shall be made on forms as prescribed by the Village Finance Director/Treasurer. All returns shall be signed by the person required to file a return or duly authorized agent. The Village Finance Director/Treasurer may, for good cause, extend the time for filing any return for up to thirty (30) days after its original due date.
(b) Distribution of tax. Some of the Room Tax shall be retained by the Village for unrestricted use and the remaining amount shall be forwarded to the Weston Tourism Commission for tourismpromotion and tourismdevelopment. Beginning with the Room Tax collected on January 1, 2017, the Village shall retain, each year, the greater of either 30% of the Room Tax collected for that year or one of the following amounts:
(1) For the fiscal year 2017, the same dollar amount of the Room Tax retained as the Village retained in its 2014 fiscal year.
(2) For the fiscal year, 2018, the same dollar amount of the Room Tax retained as the Village retained in its 2013 fiscal year.
(3) For the fiscal year, 2019, the same dollar amount of the Room Tax retained as the Village retained in its 2012 fiscal year.
(4) For the fiscal year, 2020, the same dollar amount of the Room Tax retained as the Village retained in its 2011 fiscal year.
(5) For the fiscal year, 2021 and thereafter, the same dollar amount of the Room Tax retained as the Village retained in its 2010 fiscal year.
Chapter 78 Taxation and Special Assessments Page 5
(c) Weston Tourism Commission. The Weston Tourism Commission (the “Commission”) shall consist of five members. At least one of themembers shall represent theWisconsin hotel and motel industry. All members, except the Wisconsin hotel and motel industry representative, shall be residents of the Village of Weston. The Wisconsin hotel and motel industry representative must be employed by, or have an ownership interest in, a hotel or motel located in the Village of Weston.
(1) Appointments. Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Village President and confirmed by a majority vote of the members of the Village Board who are present when the vote is taken. Members shall serve for a one-year term, at the pleasure of the appointing official, and may be re-appointed. The Commission shall, from among its members, elect a chairperson, vice chairperson, and secretary.
(2) Meetings.
a. All meetings of the Commission shall be at the call of the Chairperson or upon written request of any two (2) members directing the Secretary to hold such meetings.
b. Three (3) members present at the meeting shall constitute a quorum.
c. Notice of the time and place of all Commission meetings shall be posted in accordance with Wisconsin State Statutes.
d. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings and shall keep other pertinent records that may come into the Commission’s possession. Commission records are subject to the Wisconsin Public Records Law, subject to the confidentiality requirements of the Wisconsin Room Tax Statute. The Chairperson or his/her designee shall be designated to serve as custodian of the Commission’s records.
e. The Commission shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as may be required for the ordinary conduct of its business.
(3) Powers and Duties.
a. The Commission shall have the powers and duties conferred upon it by Wis. Stat § 66.0615. All Room Tax revenue provided to the Commission shall be spent on tourism promotion and tourism development within the Village of Weston including, but not limited to, marketing projects, transient tourist information services and tangible municipal development activities.
b. Any contract entered into by the Commission shall not be valid and enforceable until approved by the Village Board.
Chapter 78 Taxation and Special Assessments Page 6
c. The Commission shall provide an annual report to the Village Board itemizing the amounts and purposes for which the Room Tax revenues were allocated.
(Ord. of 1-16-1989 and Ord. of 8-16-04, § 1(10)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-005, 2/22/2017, Ord. No 18-014, 5/26/2018; Ord No. 18-022, 10/20/2018]
Sec. 78.104. Audit.
If the Village Board or the Village Finance Director/Treasurer has probable cause to believe that the correct amount of Room Tax has not been assessed or that a return is not correct, the Village or the Village Finance Director/Treasurer may order the inspection and auditing of the financial records of any person subject to the Room Tax pertaining to the furnishing of accommodations to determine whether the correct amount of Room Tax is assessed and whether any Room Tax return is correct. Any person who fails to comply with a request to inspect and audit the person’s financial records shall be subject to a forfeiture not to exceed 5% of the Room Tax due for the quarter or quarters involved.
(Ord. of 1-16-1989, and Ord. of 8-16-04 § 1(9)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-005, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 78.105. Failure to File.
If any person fails to file a return as required by this article, the Room Tax due shall be determined by the Village Finance Director/Treasurer using his/her best judgment.
(Ord. of 1-16-1989, and Ord. of 8-16-04 § 1(2)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-005, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 78.106. Interest.
Room Tax not paid before the due date shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per month on the unpaid balance. An extension of time to file a return shall not extend the due date of Room Tax payment for purposes of interest computation.
(Ord. of 1-16-1989, Ord. of 8-16-04 and Ord. of 07-10-13§ 1(3)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-005, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 78.107. Refund.
Chapter 78 Taxation and Special Assessments Page 7
No refund or modification of any Room Tax determination may be granted until the person files a correct Room Tax return and permits the Village Finance Director/Treasurer to inspect and audit the person’s financial records.
(Ord. of 1-16-1989, and Ord. of 8-16-04 § 1(4)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-005, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 78.108. Forfeiture for failure to pay Room Tax.
Any person who is subject to the Room Tax imposed by this article who fails to pay the Room Tax due under Sec. 78.102 shall be subject to a forfeiture not to exceed 25% of the Room Tax due for the previous year or $5,000, whichever is less.
(Ord. of 1-16-1989, and Ord. of 8-16-04 § 1(5)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-005, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 78.109. Maintaining records and confidentiality.
(a) Every person subject to the Room Tax shall keep or cause to be kept such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the Village Finance Director/Treasurer requires.
(b) All information obtained from an audit are deemed confidential, except for the persons using the information in the discharge of duties imposed by law or of the duties of their office or by order of a court. The Village may use the information to publish statistics classified so as not to disclose the identity of particular returns. The Village may exchange audit information with the Department of Revenue. Any person violating this subsection are subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100 nor more than $500.
(Ord. of 1-16-1989, and Ord. of 8-16-04 § 1(6)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-005, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 78.110. Permit.
(a) Every person furnishing rooms or lodging under Sec. 78.102 shall file with the Village Clerk an application for a permit to operate a hotel or motel for each place of business. Every application for a permit shall be made upon a form prescribed by the Village Clerk and shall set forth the name under which the applicant transacts or intends to transact business, the location of the place of business, and such other information as the Village Clerk requires. The application shall be signed by the owner if a sole proprietor and, if not a sole proprietor, by the person authorized to act on behalf of such sellers. At the time of making an application, the applicant shall pay to the Village Clerk a fee as provided in the Village fee schedule for each permit.
Chapter 78 Taxation and Special Assessments Page 8
(b) In order to protect the revenue of the Village, the Village Clerk may require any person liable for the Room Tax imposed by this article to place with the Village Clerk, before or after a permit is issued, such security or bond, as the Village Clerk determines. If any taxpayer fails or refuses to place such security or bond, the Village Clerk may refuse or revoke such permit. If any taxpayer is delinquent in the payment of the Room Taxes imposed by this article, the Village Clerk may, upon ten days' notice, recover the Room Taxes, interest and penalties from the security or bond placed with the Village Clerk by such taxpayer. No interest shall be paid or allowed by the Village to any person for the deposit of such security or bond.
(c) After compliance with subsections (a) and (b) of this section by the applicant, the Village Clerk shall grant and issue to each applicant a separate permit for each place of business within the Village. Such permit is not assignable and is valid only for the person in whose name it is issued and for the transaction of business at the place designated. It shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at the place for which issued.
(Ord. of 1-16-1989, and Ord. of 8-16-04 § 1(7)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-005, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 78.111. Revocation of permit.
Whenever any person fails to comply with this article, the Village Clerk may revoke or suspend any or all of the permits held by such person, upon ten days’ notification and after affording such person the opportunity to show cause why the permit should not be revoked. The Village Clerk shall give to such person written notice of the suspension or revocation of any of such person's permits. The Village Clerk shall not issue a new permit after the revocation of a permit unless the Village Clerk is satisfied that the former holder of the permit will comply with the provisions of this article. The fee prescribed in the village fee schedule shall be imposed for the renewal or issuance of a permit that has been previously suspended or revoked.
(Ord. of 1-16-1989, and Ord. of 8-16-04 § 1(8)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-005, 2/22/2017]
Sec. 78.112. Sale of Business.
If any person liable for any amount of Room Tax under this article sells out the business or stock or goods or quits the business, such person's successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount of Room Tax until the former owner produces a receipt from the Village Finance Director/Treasurer showing that it has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. If a person subject to the Room Tax imposed by this article fails to withhold such amount of Room Tax from the purchase price as required, the person shall become personally liable for payment of Room Tax owed.
Chapter 78 Taxation and Special Assessments Page 9
(Ord. of 1-16-1989, and Ord. of 8-16-04 § 1(11)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-005, 2/22/2017]
ARTICLE III. SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS*
Sec. 78.113. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for payment for the construction, improvement and preservation of the driveway approaches, streets, curbs, gutters, and sewer and water mains in the village by the levy of special assessments therefor upon various classes of real estate, in a fair and equitable manner, through the application of a variety of formulas. All such levies shall be grounded in the exercise of the police powers of the village.
(Ord. of 4-21-1998, Ord. of 3-22-2012, § 1(13.05.010)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 19-002, 1/26/2019]
Sec. 78.114. Special assessment options.
(a) Statutory procedures. Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.0701, the village adopts the procedures for levying special assessments as contained in Wis. Stat. § 66.0703, with the exception that the village may at its discretion use the following procedures in lieu of the procedures described in Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0703(8)(c), (8)(d) and (8)(e):
(1) When the board determines to proceed with the work or improvement, it shall approve the plans and specifications therefor and adopt a resolution directing that such work or improvement be carried out in accordance with the report as finally approved.
(2) The village may adopt the final resolution to levy the special assessments either before the work is carried out or after the work is completed and actual project costs have been determined. The final resolution shall list the cost of the special assessment levied against each property benefitted by the improvement. The village clerk/treasurer shall publish the final resolution as a class 1 notice, under Wis. Stats. Chapter 985, in the assessment district and a copy of such resolution shall be mailed to every interested person whose post office address is known, or can be ascertained with reasonable diligence.
(3) When the final resolution is published, all awards, compensations and assessments arising therefrom are deemed legally authorized and made, subject to the right of appeal under Wis. Stat. § 66.0703(12).
(b) Developer financing. Where the municipality is unwilling or unable to make a special assessment, the improvements will be made on a developer-financed basis as follows:
Chapter 78 Taxation and Special Assessments Page 10
(1) The applicants will advance as a contribution in aid of construction the total amount equivalent to that which would have been assessed for all property under subsection (a) of this section.
________
* State Law References--Special Assessments, Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0703, 66.0715(2), 66.0701, 66.0705.
(2) Part of the contribution required in subsection (b)(1) of this section will be refundable. When additional property is benefitted within ten years of the date of completion, which the original developer did not own or have an interest in at the time of the project, contributions in aid of construction will be collected equal to the amount which would have been assessed under subsection (a) of this section for the abutting property benefitted. This amount will be refunded to the original contributors. In no case will the contributions received from additional customers exceed the proportionate amount which would have been required under subsection (a) of this section nor will it exceed the total assessable cost of the original extension. After ten years has elapsed there will be no refunds.
(c) Special agreement. The village board, through recommendation by the appropriate committee, would handle each case on an individual basis. A resolution would be passed stating the conditions of the agreement.
(Ord. of 4-21-1998, Ord. of 3-22-2012, § 1(13.05.020)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 78.115. Assessment formula.
(a) The assessment may be made on the adjusted front footage formula. In such formula, odd-shaped lots and cul-de-sac lots are adjusted to an average front footage equivalent to the frontage of a rectangularly shaped lot of the same depth. This method is declared and found to be a more equitable assessment method than the simple front footage method. The adjusted front footage method gives consideration to the depth and shape, as well as frontage, on the street improved. The plat example in figure 1 illustrates how the method is used in practice.
FIGURE 1
Chapter 78 Taxation and Special Assessments Page 11
Lot A, corner lot--Adjusted footage shall be based on the first side improved. If both sides are improved the adjusted front footage shall be based on the long side.
Lot B
100 feet by 150 feet
Adjusted front footage
100.00 feet
Lot C
80 feet by 150 feet
Adjusted front footage
80.00 feet
Lot D
100 feet by 150 feet
Adjusted front footage
100.00 feet
Lot E
10,000 square feet 150 feet
Adjusted front footage
66.67 feet
Lot F
10,000 square feet150 feet
Adjusted front footage
66.67 feet
Lot G
11,900 square feet150 feet
Adjusted front footage
79.00 feet
Lot H*
16,150 square feet150 feet
Adjusted front footage
108.00 feet
Note: Square footage amounts for lots G and H are estimates.
*Note that the adjusted front footage can be further modified under Sec. 78.116(1).
(b) In the adjusted front footage formula in figure 1 the lot depth figure of 150 feet has been used in the calculations. However, in applying this formula to a specific block, the actual denominator used in the formula shall be the apparent, general lot depth of the block in which the lot is situated or 150 feet, whichever is less. Such apparent lot depth shall be determined by the public works and utility committee and included in the schedule of the proposed assessments required by Wis. Stat. § 66.0703, subject to the usual control of the village board, set forth in the cited section of the statutes.
(c) Large lots (residential lots with area greater than 40,000 square feet and commercial and industrial lots) may be assessed based on lot area or other methods of assessments that are deemed to be fair and equitable by the public works and utility committee.
Chapter 78 Taxation and Special Assessments Page 12
(d) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Actual front footage, means the actual length of a lot's property lines abutting a public improvement and measured as described in legal documents (deeds, certified survey maps, subdivision plats, or other public land survey records).
Adjusted front footage, means the front footage of a lot after making allowances for lot shape and size in accordance with this special assessment policy. The adjusted front footage may be greater or less than the actual front footage.
Assessable front footage, means the front footage upon which the assessment will be levied. The assessable front footage will usually be the same as the adjusted front footage. However, in cases such as those involving corner lots which were previously assessed on one side, or where a lot may have received a partial assessment, the assessable front footage can differ from the adjusted front footage.
(Ord. of 4-21-1998, Ord. of 3-22-2012, § 1(13.05.030)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 19-002, 1/26/2019]
Sec. 78.116. Applying the adjusted front footage formula.
Throughout this section, 150 feet will be used as the denominator for purposes of explaining the application of the formula.
(1) Odd-shaped lots. For odd-shaped lots, such as found on cul-de-sacs or triangular intersections, etc., the adjusted front footage is computed by dividing the area of the lot, up to a maximum distance of 150 feet from the street where the improvement is to be installed, by 150. When the adjusted front footage formula is applied and results in an adjusted front footage which is greater than the actual front footage, then the assessable front footage shall be the adjusted front footage.
(2) Approximately rectangular lots. For a lot which is approximately rectangular, the adjusted front footage is computed by averaging the front and back sides of the lot. If the lot is deeper than 150 feet, the width at the 150-foot depth is used for the back lot line. This method is limited to where the divergence between the front and rear lot lines is five feet or less.
(3) Rectangular lots. For the normal rectangular lot, the adjusted front footage is the actual front footage of the lot, using the 150-foot denominator.
(4) Shallow lots. For rectangular lots under 150 feet in depth, the adjusted front footage is determined by dividing the actual lot area by 150 feet.
Chapter 78 Taxation and Special Assessments Page 13
(5) Neck lots. For lots which have a small frontage on a street, with a narrow strip running back 150 feet more or less, an adjusted front footage is determined by dividing the actual lot area by 150 feet.
(6) Corner lots. The adjusted front footage for corner lots shall be based on the first side improved. If both sides are improved, the adjusted front footage shall be based on the long side. On lots where property lines meet with an arc, the front footage shall be computed as half the arc measurement at the property line. The adjusted front footage will further take into account the lot shape as described in this section. Where one side has been previously improved and assessed and the second side is improved, an assessment will be levied for the second side served if the lot could be divided along the second side to make another lot conforming to existing or potential zoning. The adjusted front footage for the second side served in this case will be the adjusted front footage on the second side less 150 feet.
(7) Double frontage lots. See lot B in figure 1. A double frontage lot assessment is an exception to the rule. Its assessment shall be for the first side served. The assessment shall be computed on the adjusted front footage method that conforms to the shape and size of the lot, except that if the lot is capable of division on a line roughly parallel to either of the abutting streets, into two or more lots upon which two or more principal buildings could be erected according to the regulations of the zoning district in which the lot is located, the assessment shall then be for both sides when served and at the adjusted front footage formula as conforms to the size and shape of the resulting "lots." Any variance that may be granted by the zoning board of appeals will be excluded from consideration in calculating lot division for purposes of assessment under this section.
(8) Triple frontage lots. Triple frontage lots have characteristics of double frontage and corner lots. A triple frontage lot will be considered the same as a double frontage lot.
(9) Other cases. Lots not meeting any of the specific criteria described in Sec. 78.115 and this section will be handled on a case by case basis.
(Ord. of 4-21-1998, Ord. of 3-22-2012, § 1(13.05.040)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 78.117. Determination of assessable front footage.
The assessable front footage is the frontage upon which the assessment will be calculated and shall be determined by taking the adjusted front footage, as determined in Secs 78.115 and 78.116, less any allowances for previous assessments, or other unassessable front footage.
(Ord. of 4-21-1998, § 1(13.05.050)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 78 Taxation and Special Assessments Page 14
Sec. 78.117.1. Alternative procedure/sewer and water assessments.
As a complete alternative to the methods of assessments for sanitary sewer and water main improvements provided in Secs. 78.115, 78.116 and 78.117, the following procedure may be used either exclusively or in combination with other methods of assessments allowed by law in making such assessments.
(1) Lump sum/REU assessment. A lump sum or base assessment may be levied against each assessable parcel within the boundaries of the district to be assessed. In addition to the lump sum assessment, residential equivalency unit assessments (REU's), using average residential water consumption as the standard of measurement, may be applied to those commercial and industrial users of the system that are projected to use the system in excess of the daily average water usage of a single family residence. Such additional REU assessments may vary in proportion to the existing or projected use of the property.
(2) Assessments for costs of reserve capacity. The reserve capacity cost of a sewer or water system benefitting future users may be fairly apportioned among property owners who could not otherwise be connected to the service without the interceptor or water main. REU's shall be calculated for each such property and payments made on the assessment will not be due until each such property is developed.
(3) Changes in REU assessment. Where remodeling or additions to an existing structure would change the REU's assessed against a parcel of property, then and additional amount equal to the new REU's times the original assessed amount per REU must be paid in full before occupancy is permitted.
(Ord. of 2-21-2000, § 1) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 78.118. Determination of assessment cost for new street and curb and gutter construction.
(a) Assessable costs. One hundred percent of new street and curb and gutter construction will be assessed.
(b) Assessment calculation. The assessment for the initial installation of street, curb, gutter and pavement construction shall be computed by multiplying the assessable front footage, as provided in Sec. 78.117, by the per-foot charges as calculated for the project.
(Ord. of 4-21-1998, § 1(13.05.060)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 19-002, 1/26/2019]
Chapter 78 Taxation and Special Assessments Page 15
Sec. 78.119. Drive approach construction.
One hundred percent of the drive approach costs will be assessed to the property owner on all new construction and street reconstruction projects based on an actual square foot measurement.
(Ord. of 4-21-1998, § 1(13.05.080)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 19-002, 1/26/2019]
Sec. 78.120. Determination of assessment cost for sanitary sewer, lift station, water main construction and booster stations.
(a) General method of determining cost for sanitary sewer and water main construction. The amount to be levied against an abutting property shall be determined by multiplying the assessable front footage (as determined in Sec. 78.117) of the individual parcel abutting the street or right-of-way to be improved or so improved by the assessable cost per foot, which is determined by dividing the total cost of the project for the blocks, block, or part thereof by the total number of feet of assessable front footage on both sides of the street. The total cost of the project may include, but shall not be limited to, all construction and excavation costs, including rock removal and supplementary bedding, dewatering costs, and survey, inspection and engineering costs if applicable and so authorized.
(b) Exceptions.
(1) Cost based on eight-inch mains. Assessments for sanitary sewer and water main construction shall be based upon the cost of installation of eight-inch mains, notwithstanding larger pipe actually installed, unless the customer's needs require a larger size main.
(2) Corner lots. Assessable footage shall be determined according to section 78.116.
(3) Large lots. Large lots shall be defined as residential lots over 40,000 square feet in area and industrial and commercial lots. For large lots the assessment for the improvements will be based on the area of the property benefitted, or by other methods of assessment deemed to be fair and equitable by the Public Works and Utility Committee.
(4) Unplatted area. The public works and utility committee shall apply the general guidelines of the adjusted front footage formulas of Secs. 78.115 and 78.116, this section, or other methods of assessment that are deemed to be fair and equitable.
(c) Lift stations. Lift stations may be fully or partially assessed to the properties of the area which they serve. Lift stations may be assessed by the area method, the front footage method, the per lot or per dwelling unit method, or by any other methods
Chapter 78 Taxation and Special Assessments Page 16
deemed to be fair and equitable by the public works and utility committee. The assessments shall be levied in districts served by lift stations and are based on present capital costs as recommended by the Public Works and Utility Committee.
(d) Booster stations. Booster stations may be fully or partially assessed to the properties of the area which they serve. Booster stations may be assessed by the area method, the adjusted front footage method, the per lot or per dwelling unit method, or by any other methods deemed to be fair and equitable by the Public Works and Utility Committee. The assessments shall be levied in districts served by booster stations and are based on present and future capital, operational and maintenance costs as recommended by the Public Works and Utility Committee.
(Ord. of 4-21-1998, § 1(13.05.100)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 19-002, 1/26/2019]
Sec. 78.121. Access fee for sanitary sewer and water main improvements.
(a) When a property is benefitted by connecting private service laterals or where a development directly abutting the water or sewer mains extends additional mains with a direct connection to a sanitary sewer or water main, either existing or newly constructed, and where no assessments for the sanitary sewer and water main improvements have been previously levied against the property, the Public Works and Utility Committee shall cause an access fee to be charged to the benefitted property in lieu of the special assessment normally charged to abutting owners.
(b) For previously existing mains, the access fee shall be based on the current special assessment costs for similar construction, and for new mains the access fee shall be based on the actual project costs for new construction determined in accordance with Sec. 78.120.
(c) The access fee shall be charged when recently annexed properties are to be connected to existing mains, or when properties not previously assessed by normal special assessment procedures are connected to mains.
(d) Payment for the access fee shall be a lump sum payment made in advance of the village's/utility's granting permission to connect to the mains owned by the village/utility. However, the village may by resolution approve an installment payment plan as normally used for special assessments in accordance with Sec. 78.123.
(e) When an access fee is levied for an improvement not previously assessed by the village, and where the improvement was already 100 percent assessed to a project developer or where the improvement was constructed and financed solely by a developer under the direction of the village but without direct village cost, then the village may refund the access fee to the project developer in accordance with the following:
Chapter 78 Taxation and Special Assessments Page 17
(1) A "project developer" shall refer to a person, persons or business organization which financed at least 50 percent or more of the total project cost.
(2) A connection fee may be refunded to a project developer who qualifies as stated in this subsection (e) providing the connection fee is collected by the village within ten years from the year in which the improvement was constructed. After ten years has elapsed, any claims for refunds shall be invalid.
(3) A request for refund of an access fee shall be made in writing by the original project developer who was either assessed for the project or solely financed the project.
(4) No person other than the original project developer shall be eligible to claim or receive a refund. The village, in its sole discretion, shall determine whether a refund shall be made after examining evidence and testimony. The village may request additional information from the developer other than that specified in this subsection (e). A finding of incomplete or unsubstantiated evidence may be grounds for denial of the claim for refund.
(5) To qualify for an access fee refund, a project developer must be able to substantiate his claim by either:
a. Producing a record of the assessment originally levied by the village indicating the original improvement was fully assessed by the village to the developer;
b. Submitting a sworn affidavit stating the developer paid for improvements serving properties other than the developer's own for which the developer received no previous reimbursement. The affidavit should be filed immediately after completion of the improvement, and refiled or amended at the time of the claim. Incorrect claims or untruthful statements shall subject the affiant to penalties of law.
(6) The amount of the refund shall be calculated according to subsection (5)b of this section, less a fee of ten percent of the total to be paid to the village for administration expenses.
(7) The payment of the refund may be in a lump sum or in installments, as the village may direct at the time of the claim.
(Ord. of 4-21-1998, § 1(13.05.110)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 19-002, 1/26/2019]
Sec. 78.122. Service laterals required.
Chapter 78 Taxation and Special Assessments Page 18
(a) Prior to the improvement of the village street by the installation of curb, gutter, pavement or other permanent surfacing, utility laterals and service pipes shall be laid from the mains or utility tunnels to the abutting property. Where the work is done by village forces or by public contract let by the village, the cost of such installation on private property shall be borne 100 percent by the property served. Extended time for payment, if any, shall be the same as for the street improvement. The village shall follow the procedures of Wis. Stat. § 66.0703 as to notice, plans, estimates and levies for special assessment for the work.
(b) Laterals and service pipes for non-village-owned utilities may be required to be installed prior to the street improvement. The installation shall be by resolution of the village board for each street on a project-by-project basis.
(Ord. of 4-21-1998, § 1(13.05.120); Ord. of 3-22-2012) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 19-002, 1/26/2019]
Sec. 78.123. Assessment paid by installments.
(a) Special assessments for the improvements provided for in this article may be paid over a period set forth in the preliminary and final special assessment resolutions. The number of annual installments shall be five when the average principal amount of special assessments on a project is $1,000.00 or less. The village board may, but is not required, to extend the number of annual installments to more than five, but not greater than ten annual installments when the average principal amount of special assessments on a project is $1,001.00 or more.
(b) Special assessments for the improvements provided for in this article may be paid over a period in excess of ten years only in those instances where the village board finds it to be in the public interest to construct a project and impose special assessments for the improvement upon real estate whose present or foreseeable use in the immediate future is not directly related to or dependent upon the improvements.
(Ord. of 4-21-1998, § 1(13.05.130); Ord. of 5-21-2001(2), § 1) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 78.124. Assessment prior to annexation.
(a) As a condition of annexation, and prior to action by the village board on any proposed annexation ordinance, a tender must be made to the village for unremunerated improvements made by the village from which benefits have accrued to the property petitioned or would have been received by such property but for the fact that such land was outside of the village when the improvements were made.
Chapter 78 Taxation and Special Assessments Page 19
(b) Such tender must be made in cash, agreed to on an installment basis in accordance with village policies in effect at the time of such request for annexation, or, at the village's prerogative, an agreement may be entered into providing for payment.
(c) The benefits which must be paid are those which could have been assessed on a special assessment basis, whether under the police power or under the special benefit procedures, had the area to be considered for annexation been in the village at the time the improvements were made, and include but are not limited to new street construction, curb and gutter, sanitary sewer, water main, and any other improvements.
(d) Should the annexation ordinance fail, then any tender shall be returned to the petitioner unless the improvements are already benefitting the property, in which case the tender shall be retained and enforced by the village.
(Ord. of 4-21-1998, § 1(13.05.140)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 1
Chapter 82
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES*
ARTICLE I IN GENERAL
Sec. 82.100. Provisions of state law adopted by reference.
Sec. 82.101. Other laws adopted.
Sec. 82.102. Penalty.
Sec. 82.103. Traffic violation and registration program.
Sec. 82.104. Enforcement.
Sec. 82.105. Traffic devices ratified.
Sec. 82.106. Official traffic signs and signals.
Sec. 82.107. Parking regulations.
Sec. 82.108. Accident reports.
Sec. 82.109. Traffic and parking regulations on school grounds.
Sec. 82.110. Railroad grade crossing stops.
Sec. 82.111. Regulation of nondealership motor vehicle sales.
Sec. 82.112. Truck idling near a school or residence.
ARTICLE II SNOWMOBILES
Sec. 82.200. Provisions of state law relating to snowmobiles adopted by reference.
Sec. 82.201. Snowmobile routes.
__________
* Cross References--Any ordinance prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, ATV and snowmobile routes, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load weights of vehicles or loading zones saved from repeal, § 1.110(7); junkyards and automobile graveyards, § 18.129 et seq.; vehicles giving offensive odor or noise or spilling loads, § 38.101; Law Enforcement, Chapter 42; Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, Chapter 54; disorderly conduct with motor vehicle, § 54.102;
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 2
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places, Chapter 70; traffic control near excavations, § 70.119; Off-Street Parking § 94.12.09 and Off Street Loading, § 94.12.10et seq.
State Law References--Vehicles generally, Wis. Stats. § 340.01 et seq.
ARTICLE III. BICYCLES
Sec. 82.300. Penalty.
Sec. 82.301. Registration required.
Sec. 82.302. Registration; fee; inspection.
Sec. 82.303. Display of registration plate.
Sec. 82.304. Transfer and cancellation of registration.
Sec. 82.305. Buying or selling bicycles.
ARTICLE IV. MINIBIKES AND SELF –PROPELLED DEVICES
Sec. 82.400. Definitions.
Sec. 82.401. Penalty.
Sec. 82.402. Operation.
Sec. 82.403. Liability of parent or guardian.
ARTICLE V. ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE AND UTILITY TERRAIN VEHICLE ROUTES AND OPERATION ON HIGHWAYS WITHIN THE VILLAGE OF WESTON
Sec. 82.500. Purpose.
Sec. 82.501. Authority.
Sec. 82.502. Definitions.
Sec. 82.503. Operation of All-Terrain and Utility Vehicles.
Sec. 82.504. Designation of All-Terrain and Utility Terrain Vehicle Routes.
Sec. 82.505. Conditions applicable to All-Terrain and Utility Terrain vehicle routes.
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 3
Sec. 82.506. Enforcement.
Sec. 82.507. Penalties.
Sec. 82.508. Maintenance.
ARTICLE VI. SPEED LIMITS
Sec. 82.600. Speed Limits.
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 4
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 82.100. Provisions of state law adopted by reference.
(a) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all provisions of Wis. Stats. Chapters 340 through 348 describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic for which the penalty is a forfeiture only, including penalties to be imposed and procedures for prosecution, are adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated in this section by reference is required or prohibited by this section.
(b) Sections of Wis. Stats. Chapters 340 through 348 adopted by reference shall include but not be limited to the following:
Wis. Stat. § 340.01
(Words and phrases defined)
Wis. Stats. §§ 341.04(1) and (2)
(Operating unregistered or improperly registered vehicle)
Wis. Stat. § 341.08(6)
(Registration by minor)
Wis. Stat. § 341.11(4)
(Display of registration plates)
Wis. Stat. § 341.15
(Display of registration plates)
Wis. Stat. § 341.16(4)
(Issuance of duplicate plates)
Wis. Stat. § 341.55
(Penalty for misuse of plates)
Wis. Stat. § 341.57(3)
(Registration of finance companies and banks)
Wis. Stat. § 341.61
(Improper use of registration)
Wis. Stat. § 341.615
(Reproducing evidence of registration prohibited)
Wis. Stat. § 341.62
(False evidence of registration)
Wis. Stat. § 341.625
(Special registration plates)
Wis. Stat. § 341.63
(When registration is to be suspended)
Wis. Stat. § 341.65
(Unregistered; motor vehicles prohibited; immobilization; removal; disposal)
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 5
Wis. Stat. § 342.05(4)
(Certificate of title required)
Wis. Stat. § 342.06(3)
(Failure to furnish information)
Wis. Stat. § 342.15
(Motor vehicle salvage pools and auction companies to maintain records)
Wis. Stats. §§ 342.15(5), (6), (7)
(Transfer of interest in vehicle)
Wis. Stats. §§ 342.155(2), (3)
(False statement; mileage discloser)
Wis. Stats. §§ 342.156(1), (2)
(Transfer of leased motor vehicles)
Wis. Stat. § 342.16
(Transfer to or from dealer)
Wis. Stat. § 342.30
(Identification numbers)
Wis. Stat. § 342.31
(Report of stolen or abandoned vehicles)
Wis. Stat. § 342.33
(Sale of vehicle used as taxicab)
Wis. Stat. § 342.34
(Department notified of destruction or junking of vehicles)
Wis. Stat. § 342.40
(Vehicle abandonment prohibited; removal)
Wis. Stat. § 343.01
(Words and phrases defined)
Wis. Stat. § 343.10(8)
(Violation of restriction of occupational license)
Wis. Stat. § 343.12(1)
(School bus driver's operators permit required)
Wis. Stat. § 343.19(2)
(False statement in application for duplicate license or identification card)
Wis. Stat. § 343.305
(Implied consent)
Wis. Stat. § 343.35
(Surrender of licenses upon cancellations, revocation or suspension)
Wis. Stat. § 343.43
(Unlawful use of license)
Wis. Stat. § 343.435
(License not to be used as security)
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 6
Wis. Stat. § 343.44
(Driving while disqualified or ordered out-of-service or after license revoked or suspended)
Wis. Stat. § 343.45
(Permitting unauthorized person to drive)
Wis. Stat. § 343.46
(Duty of persons renting vehicles to another)
Wis. Stat. § 343.50(11)
(Failure to surrender canceled identification card)
Wis. Stat. § 343.50(12)
(Unlawful use of identification card)
Wis. Stat. § 343.52
(Unlawful use of special identification cards)
Wis. Stats. §§ 343.60
through 343.72
(Licensing of driver schools and instructors)
Wis. Stat. § 343.73
(Penalty)
Wis. Stat. § 344.01
(Words and phrases defined)
Wis. Stats. §§ 344.45
through 344.48
(Penalties for violation of chapter)
Wis. Stat. § 344.51
(Financial responsibility for domestic rented vehicles)
Wis. Stat. § 345.01
(Words and phrases defined)
Wis. Stats. §§ 345.20
through 345.53
(General provisions in traffic forfeiture actions)
Wis. Stat. § 345.55
(Traffic officers not to profit from arrests)
Wis. Stat. § 346.01
(Words and phrases defined)
Wis. Stat. § 346.02
(Applicability of chapter)
Wis. Stat. § 346.03
(Applicability of rules of the road to authorized emergency vehicles)
Wis. Stats. § 346.04
(Obedience to traffic officers, signs and signals)
Wis. Stats. §§ 346.05
through 346.16
(Driving, meeting, overtaking and passing)
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 7
Wis. Stat. § 346.075
(Overtaking and passing bicycles)
Wis. Stat. § 346.17
(Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §§ 346.04--346.16)
Wis. Stats. §§ 346.18
through 346.21
(Right-of-way)
Wis. Stat. § 346.22
(Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §§ 346.18--346.21)
Wis. Stats. §§ 346.23
through 346.29
(Drivers and pedestrians)
Wis. Stat. § 346.30
(Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §§ 346.23--346.29)
Wis. Stats. §§ 346.31
through 346.35
(Turning and stopping and required signals)
Wis. Stat. § 346.36
(Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §§ 346.31--346.35)
Wis. Stats. §§ 346.37
through 346.42
(Traffic signs, signals and markings)
Wis. Stats. § 346.43
(Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §§ 346.37--346.42)
Wis. Stats. §§ 346.44
through 346.485
(Required stops)
Wis. Stats. § 346.49
(Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §§ 346.44--346.48)
Wis. Stats. §§ 346.50
through 346.55
(Restrictions on stopping and parking)
Wis. Stats. § 346.56
(Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §§ 346.50--346.55)
Wis. Stats. §§ 346.57
through 346.595
(Speed restrictions)
Wis. Stat. § 346.60
(Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §§ 346.57--346.595)
Wis. Stat. § 346.61
(Reckless and drunken driving)
Wis. Stat. § 346.62
(Reckless driving)
Wis. Stat. § 346.63
(Operating under influence of intoxicant)--first offense in five years
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 8
Wis. Stat. § 346.64
(Employment of drunk operators)--first offense in six months
Wis. Stat. § 346.65
(Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §§ 346.62--346.64)
Wis. Stat. § 346.66
(Applicability of sections relating to accident and accident reporting)
Wis. Stats. §§ 346.67
through 346.73
(Accidents and accident reports)
Wis. Stat. § 346.74
(Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §§ 346.67--346.73)
Wis. Stats. §§ 346.77
through 346.804
(Bicycles and play vehicles)
Wis. Stat. § 346.82
(Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §§ 346.77--346.804)
Wis. Stats. §§ 346.87
through 346.945
(Miscellaneous rules)
Wis. Stat. § 346.95
(Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §§ 346.87--346.94)
Wis. Stats. §§ 347.01
through 347.05
(General provisions)
Wis. Stats. §§ 347.06
through 347.29
(Lighting equipment)
Wis. Stat. § 347.30
(Penalty for violating lighting equipment requirements)
Wis. Stats. §§ 347.35
through 347.49
(Other equipment)
Wis. Stat. § 347.48(2m)
(Safety belts and child safety restraint systems)
Wis. Stat. § 347.50
(Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §§ 347.35--347.49)
Wis. Stats. §§ 348.01, and 348.02
(Size, weight, load--General provisions)
Wis. Stats. §§ 348.05
through 348.10
(Size and load)
Wis. Stat. § 348.11
(Penalty for violating size and load limitations)
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 9
Wis. Stats. §§ 348.15
through 348.20
(Weight)
Wis. Stat. § 348.21
(Penalty for violating weight limitations)
Wis. Stats. §§ 348.25
through 348.27
(Permits)
Wis. Stat. § 348.28
(Permits to be carried--Penalty)
(Ord. of 1-18-1988(2), § 1; Ord. of 6-10-1985(3), § 1) [Amended via Ord. No 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 82.101. Other laws adopted.
There is adopted by reference the following section of the Wisconsin Statutes, but the prosecution of such offenses under this article shall be as provided in Wis. Stats. Chapters 340 through 348; and the penalty for violation shall be limited to a forfeiture as provided in Sec. 82.102:
Wis. Stat. § 941.01(1)
(Negligent operation of vehicle off highway)
(Code 1982, § 7.02) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 82.102. Penalty.
(a) Forfeiture. The penalty for violation of any provision of this article shall be a forfeiture.
(b) Uniform offenses. Forfeitures for violation of any provision of Wis. Stats. Chapters 340 through 348, adopted by reference, shall conform to forfeitures for violation of the comparable state offenses, including any variations or increases for second offenses.
(c) Special local regulations. The forfeiture for violation of local village regulations shall not be less than $5.00 nor more than $200.00 for the first offense and not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 for the second offense within two years.
(d) Miscellaneous. The forfeiture for violation of any provision of this chapter not otherwise specified shall be not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00.
(Code 1982, § 7.12) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 10
Sec. 82.103. Traffic violation and registration program.
(a) Purpose. In order to discourage nonmoving traffic violations and to encourage the payment of forfeitures imposed for such violations, the board deems it advisable to participate in the state traffic violation and registration program.
(b) Nonmoving violations and registration program. Pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stat. § 345.28(4) and Wis. Admin. Code TRANS Chapter 128, the village elects to participate in the nonmoving traffic violation registration program of the department of transportation and pay the costs established by the department under Wis. Stat. § 85.13; such costs shall, in turn, be assessed against persons charged with nonmoving traffic violations. The Everest Metro Police Department shall be responsible for complying with the requirements set forth in Wis. Stat. § 345.28(4).
(c) Forfeiture for certain stipulated nonmoving traffic violations. The forfeiture upon stipulation for the violations of Wis. Stats. §§ 346.503 through 346.55, incorporated into this article by reference, and for violations of Sec. 82.107 shall be in the sum of $10.00.
(d) Payment and increased forfeiture. If a stipulation is not entered into within five days commencing at 6:00 p.m. on the day the citation is issued, the forfeiture shall be increased to conform to the forfeitures for a violation of the comparable state offenses, including any variations or increases for second offenses.
(e) Stipulation deposit.
(1) The amount of the forfeiture for such violations shall be paid in cash, money order, bank check or by other means acceptable to the police department. It shall be made payable to the village. Such payment may be made by mail as provided on the citation. If the person receiving the citation transmits the citation by messenger or mail to the police station, the police department may require such person to print his name, post office address, his operator's license number and date of birth on the citation as appropriate.
(2) No officer or village authority shall be personally or officially responsible for payment of any dishonored check in payment of any forfeiture.
(f) Failure to pay forfeiture. The provisions of Wis. Stat. § 345.28 are specifically incorporated in this section by reference. If the alleged violator fails to pay the amount of the forfeiture or to appear in court within 28 days after the issuance of a nonmoving traffic citation, the village may take any of the actions authorized under Wis. Stat. § 345.28 with respect to the violation.
(Ord. of 6-10-1985(1), § 1; Ord. of 10-23-1989, § 1; Ord. of 1-2-1990, § 1) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 11
Sec. 82.104. Enforcement.
(a) Authority. This article shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 345.20 through 345.53, Wis. Stats. Chapter 799, and Wis. Stat. § 66.0113.
(b) Stipulation of guilt or no contest. Stipulations of guilt or no contest may be made by persons arrested for violations of this article in accordance with Wis. Stat. § 66.0114(1)(b) whenever the provisions of Wis. Stat. § 345.27 are inapplicable to such violations. Stipulations shall conform to the form contained on the uniform traffic citation and complaint under Wis. Stat. § 345.11 and may be accepted within five days of the date of the alleged violation. Stipulations may be accepted by the police department.
(c) Deposits. Any person stipulating guilt or no contest under subsection (b) of this section must make the deposit required under Wis. Stat. § 345.26 or if the deposit is not established under such statute, shall deposit a forfeited penalty as provided in the schedule established by the chief of police and approved by the board. Deposits may be brought or mailed to the office of the police department or as directed by the arresting officer. Deposits for parking or nonmoving violations shall be mailed or brought to the village clerk/treasurer or to the police department.
(d) Notice of demerit points and receipt. Every officer accepting a forfeited penalty or money deposit under this section shall receipt in triplicate as provided in Wis. Stat. § 345.26(3)(b). Every officer accepting a stipulation under the provisions of this section shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 345.26(1)(a) and 345.27(2) and shall require the alleged violator to sign a statement of notice in substantially the form contained on the uniform traffic citation and complaint promulgated under Wis. Stat. § 345.11.
(Code 1982, § 7.13) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 82.105. Traffic devices ratified.
All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings in place on the date of adoption of this Code are expressly ratified and confirmed.
[Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 82.106 Official traffic signs and signals.
(a) Erection of official traffic signs and signals. The operations manager is authorized and directed to procure, erect and maintain appropriate standard traffic signs, signals and markings conforming to the rules of the state highway division, giving such notice of the provisions of this section as required by law. Signs shall be erected in
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 12
such locations and manner as the board shall determine will best effect the purposes of this section and give adequate warning to users of the street or highway.
(b) Removal of official signs and signals. The operations manager shall have the authority granted by Wis. Stat. § 349.09 and is directed to order the removal of a sign, signal, marking or device placed, maintained or displayed in violation of Wis. Stat. § 346.41. Any charge imposed on a premises for removal of such illegal sign, signal or device shall be reported to the board at its next regular meeting for review and certification.
(c) Yield right-of-way. The village board may, by ordinance or resolution, provide for the installation of yield signs at any intersection over which it has exclusive jurisdiction, but if the intersection is part of a thru highway, such yield signs can be installed at such intersections only as provided in Wis. Stat. § 349.07(6)(a). The design, installation and use of such signs shall be in accordance with the rules of the state highway commission.
(d) Speed limits. The village board, by resolution, shall from time to time set speed limits on village streets. Such limits shall be listed in the manual of traffic speed zoning.
(Code 1982, § 7.10) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 82.107. Parking regulations.
(a) Winter parking regulated. When signs have been erected at or reasonably near the village limits as provided in Wis. Stat. § 349.13, alternate side parking shall be in effect on all streets between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. of any day from October 31 to May 1. All vehicles shall be parked only on the even-numbered side of the street on even-numbered calendar days, and only on the odd side of the street on odd-numbered calendar days, unless otherwise posted or exempted. No person shall park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle in violation of this subsection.
(b) Official signs. No person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle on any public street or alley in the village when or where official signs have been erected or displayed prohibiting or limiting parking at such place, except in conformity with such official signs.
(c) Snow removal emergency. When circumstances warrant, the village may declare a snow removal emergency and specify its duration, during which emergency the street shall be cleared for the purpose of permitting the official removal of snow and ice; provided that:
(1) Notice of such declaration shall be given by either the president or the director of public works and the police chief or by broadcast or telecast over a radio or television station located in the Wausau, Wisconsin, area.
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 13
(2) After notice is given, during the period of such snow removal emergency as so declared, no vehicle shall be parked, stopped or left standing on any public street or alley within the village.
(3) If any vehicle shall be found standing, stopped or parked upon any public street or alley within the village during the period of a snow removal emergency, the chief of police may cause such vehicle to be towed away. The owner of such vehicle shall not be entitled to recover possession of such vehicle until an expense and tow charge as set by board resolution is paid to the village clerk/treasurer or chief of police and his receipt exhibited. All charges for towing and storage shall be in addition to all other penalties imposed by law or ordinance.
(Ord. of 11-11-1985, § 1) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 15-029, 12/9/2015]
Sec. 82.108. Accident reports.
The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall within 24 hours after such accident file with the police department a copy of the report required by Wis. Stat. § 346.70. If the operator is unable to make such report, any occupant of the vehicle at the time of the accident, capable of making such report, shall have the duty to comply with this section. Such reports shall be subject to the provisions and limitations in Wis. Stats. §§ 346.70(4)(f) and 346.73.
(Code 1982, § 7.09) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
State Law References--Authority, Wis. Stats. § 349.19.
Sec. 82.109. Traffic and parking regulations on school grounds.
(a) Authority. Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 118.105, the provisions of this section shall apply on all school property, public and parochial located in the village.
(b) Parking. No person shall park any vehicle in any vehicular traveling area or parking areas of the D.C. Everest School District or parochial school district, except in conformity with the posted parking regulations set forth for such vehicular travel and parking areas.
(c) Speed limits. No person shall, at any time, operate a motor vehicle upon any D.C. Everest School District or parochial school district grounds at a speed in excess of any posted speed limit, or lacking any specific speed limit posting at a speed greater than ten miles per hour.
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 14
(d) Vehicles prohibited at specified times. No person shall, at any time, operate a motor vehicle other than a school bus or emergency vehicle, in or upon any drive designated for buses only, during the hours indicated by posted signs on weekdays during the months when school is in session.
(e) Parking lot dividers and islands. No person shall operate a motor vehicle on such premises across parking lot islands or parking lot dividers.
(f) Applicability of other sections. Secs. 82.100, 82.101, 82.106, 82.107, 82.108, 82.112, 82.119, 82.121, and 82.122 shall also apply to this section.
(g) Section references in subsection (f) of this section to apply on public and parochial school property. All sections referred to in subsection (f) of this section are amended in accordance with Wis. Stat. § 118.105 and apply on all school property, public and parochial located in the village.
(h) Applicability of state law. Any changes, additions or deletions in Wis. Stat. § 118.105 and Wis. Stats. Chapters 23, 28, 343 through 348 and 350 shall be applied to this section.
(Ord. of 5-19-1997, §§ 1, 2) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 82.110. Railroad grade crossing stops.
Pursuant to the authority granted in Wis. Stat. § 349.085, operators of vehicles shall be required to stop at all railroad grade crossings within the village at which there has been installed an official stop sign of the size and type prescribed in Wis. Stat. § 349.065.
(Code 1982, § 7.07) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 82.111. Regulation of nondealership motor vehicle sales.
(a) Sale of motor vehicles on unowned property prohibited. No person shall sell, advertise or display a motor vehicle for sale on any property unless the person owns the property on which the motor vehicle is sold, displayed or advertised.
(b) Exceptions. This section shall not apply to a person licensed by the state as a motor vehicle dealer at the property's address and who occupies the property pursuant to a written lease.
(c) Abandoned vehicles. Any motor vehicle left unattended without permission of the property owner for more than 48 hours, which is not titled in the owner of the
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 15
property as shown by public records or as may be determined by other reasonable
means, shall be deemed abandoned and dealt with as provided in Wis. Stat. § 342.40.
(d) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall upon
conviction be subject to Sec. 1.111.
(Ord. of 9-27-1989, § 1) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 82.112. Truck idling near a school or residence.
(a) Purpose and authority.
(1) The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the public health of the citizens of the
Village of Weston and the environment by reducing emissions from diesel
powered motor vehicles. This section is enacted under the authority of Wis.
Stat. § 66.0101.
(b) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
(1) "Commercial motor vehicle" means any vehicle or combination of vehicles as
defined in Wis. Stats. Chapter 340 and any other motor truck with a gross
vehicle weight rating of ten thousand one pounds or more, except for either a
zero-emission vehicle or a pickup truck as defined in Wis. Stats. Chapter 340.
(2) "Driver" means any person who drives, operates, or is in actual physical control
of a vehicle.
(3) "Emergency" means sudden, urgent, usually unforeseen occurrence.
(4) "Gross vehicle weight rating" means the weight specified by the manufacturer
as the maximum loaded weight of a single vehicle.
(5) "Idling" means the engine is running while the vehicle is stationary.
(6) "Official traffic control device" means any sign, signal, marking or device,
consistent with Wis. Stats. Chapter 340, placed or erected by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning, or guiding traffic, but does not include islands, curbs, traffic barriers,
speed humps, speed bumps or other roadway design features.
(7) "Official traffic control signal" means any device, whether manually,
electrically, or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to
stop and proceed and which is erected by authority of a public body or official
having jurisdiction.
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 16
(8) "Vehicle" means any on-road, self-propelled vehicle that is required to be registered and have a license plate by the Department of Motor Vehicles.
(9) "Vehicle/equipment owner" means the registered owner, lessee, licensee or bailee of any heavy- or medium-duty vehicle who operates or directs the operation of any such vehicle on either a for hire or not for hire basis.
(c) Applicability. This chapter applies to the operation of diesel powered commercial motor vehicles as defined by Wis. Stat. § 340.01(8).
(d) Excessive idling prohibited. No person responsible for the operation of a diesel powered commercial vehicle shall allow or cause the vehicle to idle with the motor running in the Village for more than five (5) minutes in a sixty (60) minute period.
(e) Exceptions.
(1) This Chapter does not apply to a vehicle for the period or periods during which:
a. Idling is necessary while stopped:
1. For an official traffic control device,
2. For an official traffic control signal,
3. For traffic conditions over which the driver has no control, including, but not limited to, stopped in a line of traffic, stopped at a railroad crossing, or stopped at a construction zone, or
4. At the direction of a peace officer;
b. Idling is necessary to ascertain that the vehicle is in safe operating condition, equipped as required by all provisions of law, and all equipment is in good working order, either as part of the daily vehicle inspection or as otherwise needed, provided that such engine idling is mandatory for such verification;
c. Idling is necessary for testing, servicing, repairing or diagnostic purposes;
d. Idling is necessary for a period not to exceed three to five minutes (as per the recommendation of the manufacturer) to cool down a turbo charged heavy-duty vehicle before turning the engine off;
e. Idling is necessary to accomplish work for which the vehicle/equipment was designed, other than transporting goods, such as operating a lift, crane, pump, drill, hoist, mixer or other auxiliary equipment other than a heater or air conditioner;
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 17
f. Idling is necessary to operate a lift or other piece of equipment designed to ensure safe loading and unloading of goods and people;
g. Idling is necessary to operate defrosters, heaters, air conditioners, or other equipment to prevent a safety or health emergency, but not solely for the comfort of the driver or passengers.
1. The only exception for driver comfort would be a vehicle driver that is required to have rest time by law. In this case, the driver may only idle at a designated rest area or truck stop and will not idle within one thousand feet of a residential area or school,
2. The only specific exception for passenger comfort would be vehicles with a passenger onboard with a disability or health condition that would be critically aggravated if the vehicle were not maintained at an adequate temperature,
3. In the event idling is necessary to operate defrosters, heaters, air conditioners, or other equipment to prevent a safety or health emergency, but not solely for the comfort of the driver or passengers, such idling shall not occur within one hundred feet of a residence or a school;
h. Idling is necessary solely to recharge a battery or other energy storage unit of a hybrid electric vehicle/equipment;
i. Idling is necessary to operate equipment that runs intermittently;
j. A passenger bus idles a maximum of 15 minutes in any 60-minute period to maintain passenger comfort while non-driver passengers are on board;
k. Off-road equipment or transit buses are in immediate stand-by mode for passenger loading/unloading, project and/or worker safety, for readiness of an upcoming phase of a specific project element, or is needed for a stop-and-go project element.
l. An armored vehicle idles when a person remains inside the vehicle to guard the contents or the vehicle is being loaded or unloaded.
(2) Nothing in this chapter allows idling in excess of other applicable laws, including but not limited to:
a. Wis. Stats. Chapter 342 - Requirements for leaving a motor vehicle unattended.
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 18
b. Any local provision of this code or requirement as stringent as, or more stringent than, this Chapter.
(f) Penalties. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to the penalty provision of Sec. 1.111.
[Created via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015] [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
ARTICLE II SNOWMOBILES
Sec. 82.200. Provisions of state law relating to snowmobiles adopted by reference.
(a) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, all provisions of Wis. Stats. Chapter 350 describing and defining regulations with respect to snowmobiles for which the penalty is a forfeiture only, including penalties to be imposed and procedure for prosecution, are adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated by reference is required or prohibited by this section.
(b) Sections of Wis. Stats. Chapter 350 adopted by reference shall include but not be limited to the following:
Wis. Stat. § 350.01
(Definitions)
Wis. Stat. § 350.02
(Operation of snowmobiles on or in the vicinity of highways)
Wis. Stat. § 350.03
(Right-of-way)
Wis. Stat. § 350.05
(Operation of youthful operators restricted)
Wis. Stat. § 350.07
(Driving animals)
Wis. Stat. § 350.08
(Owner permitting operation)
Wis. Stat. § 350.09
(Headlamps, taillamps and brakes, etc.)
Wis. Stat. § 350.10
(Miscellaneous provisions for snowmobile operation)
Wis. Stat. § 350.101
(Intoxicated snowmobiling)
Wis. Stat. § 350.102
(Preliminary breath screening test)
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 19
Wis. Stat. § 350.1025
(Application of intoxicated snowmobiling law)
Wis. Stat. § 350.103
(Implied consent)
Wis. Stat. § 350.104
(Chemical tests)
Wis. Stat § 350.106
(Report arrest to department)
Wis. Stats. § 350.107
(Officer's action after arrest for operating a snowmobile while under influence of intoxicant)
Wis. Stats. §§ 350.11(1, 3(a)(1), (4))
(Penalties)
Wis. Stat. § 350.12
(Registration of snowmobiles)
Wis. Stat. § 350.15
(Accidents and accident reports)
Wis. Stat. § 350.17(2)
(Refusing to stop after being requested or signaled to do so by law enforcement officer)
Wis. Stat. § 350.19
(Liability of landowners)
(Code 1982, § 7.17) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 82.201. Snowmobile routes.
(1) General regulations. Except as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 350.02 and 350.045, or for snowmobile events authorized in accordance with Wis. Stat. § 350.04, no person shall operate a snowmobile upon any public right-of-way, in any public park or on any other property in the Village of Weston except upon snowmobile routes, trails and areas designated by the village board.
(2) Designated snowmobile trails, roads and/or highways.
(a) Snowmobile trails. Snowmobile operation within the Village of Weston is permitted upon routes and trails designated as "snowmobile trails" on a map entitled "Snowmobile Access Corridor--10 mph Village and Town of Weston, Marathon County, Wisconsin" dated October 12, 2001, prepared by the Village of Weston Engineering Department, a copy of which is on file in the office of the village clerk.
(b) Village street and highway access routes. There is hereby established by the village board a snowmobile "access buffer zone" as shown and depicted on the
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 20
map described in subsection 2(a) of this section. Except for the non-access roadways shown on the said map, snowmobile operation at speeds not exceeding ten miles per hour shall be permitted upon those village streets and roadways, and shoulders thereof, which are located within the "access buffer zone" solely as a means of providing access for persons traveling by snowmobile from a residence within the limits of the buffer zone to the nearest snowmobile trail or route closest to that residence. Any operation of a snowmobile on any road or street other than for immediate access to a snowmobile trail or route within the access buffer zone is prohibited.
(3) Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall upon conviction thereof, be subject to the following forfeitures and costs.
(a) For a first or second violation, a forfeiture of not more than $250.00 for each offense.
(b) For any person who violates any provision of this section who, within the last three years prior to the conviction for the current violation, was two or more times previously convicted for violating the same provision of this ordinance, a forfeiture of not more than $500.00.
(c) In addition to the foregoing forfeitures a person convicted shall be subject to costs of prosecution and in default of payment of said forfeitures and/or costs of prosecution, imprisonment in the Marathon County Jail for a period not to exceed 90 days or until such forfeiture and costs are paid.
(Ord. of 11-20-2000, § 1; Ord. of 11-5-2001, § 1) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
ARTICLE III. BICYCLES
Sec. 82.300. Definitions.
In this article, the following words and phrases have the designated meanings unless a different meaning is expressly provided or the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(a) “Bicycle” means every vehicle propelled by feet or hands acting upon pedals or cranks and having wheels any two of which are not less than fourteen inches (14”) in diameter.
(b) “Bicycle Lane” means that portion of a roadway set aside by the Village for the exclusive use of bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, or pedestrians on foot or using rollerblades, and so designated by appropriate signs and markings.
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 21
(c) “Bike Route” means any bicycle lane, bicycle way or highway which has been duly designated by the responsible governing body and identified by appropriate signs and markings.
(d) “Bicycle Way” means any path or sidewalk or portion thereof designated for the use of bicycles and electric personal assistive mobility devices by the responsible governing body.
(e) “Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Device” means a self-balancing, two-nontandem-wheeled device that is designed to transport only one person and that has an electric propulsion system that limits the maximum speed of the device to 15 mph or less.
[Amended via Ord. 18-016, 7/19/2018]
Sec. 82.301. Penalty.
The penalty provisions of Sec. 1.111 shall apply to any violation of this article.
(Ord. of 2-21-1983, § 6) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Amended via Ord. 18-016, 7/19/2018]
Sec. 82.302. Registration required.
(a) No person shall operate a bicycle upon any street, alley, public highway, sidewalk, bicycle lane, bicycle route, bicycle way or other public right-of-way in the village unless the bicycle is registered and has affixed a registration plate as provided in this article.
(b) This article shall apply to all permanent and temporary residents of the village and to such nonresidents who operate bicycles upon the streets of the village habitually or frequently, either in going to or from school, or to and from work, or for other purposes, but shall not apply to casual travelers or tourists passing through the village on their bicycles, nor to those residents of cities, villages and townships adjacent to the village who are validly and currently registered within their respective jurisdictions.
(Ord. of 2-21-1983, § 2) [Amended via Ord. No 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Amended via Ord. 18-016, 7/19/2018]
Sec. 82.303. Registration; fee; inspection.
(a) Registration shall be made with the police department, who shall provide the appropriate forms. Upon payment of a registration fee provided in the village fee
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 22
schedule, the police department shall issue a registration plate for the bicycle, which shall permit the bicycle to be operated within the village as provided in this article.
(b) The registration shall be permanent from the date of issuance provided the bicycle remains with the registered owner and at the registered address. In the event of a sale or other transfer of the bicycle to a new owner, a transfer of registration must be completed in conformity with the provisions of Sec. 82.117.
(c) No person shall be entitled to register a bicycle when that person is believed by the Everest Metro Police Department to have no claim to, or evidence of, ownership of the bicycle or have no right to possession of such bicycle.
(d) The Everest Metro Police Department may inspect each bicycle before registering it, and the department may refuse to register any bicycle that the registering officer believes to be in an unsafe mechanical condition.
(Ord. of 2-21-1983, § 2) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Amended via Ord. 18-016, 7/19/2018]
Sec. 82.304. Display of registration plate.
(a) No bicycle shall be considered registered until a registration plate, which shall remain legible at all times is affixed to the bicycle, which shall remain so affixed until the bicycle is either dismantled, destroyed or removed by the Everest Metro Police Department for cause. Such license shall be attached securely to the rear of the operator's seat or to the rear fender of the bicycle.
(b) No person shall intentionally destroy, mutilate or alter the identification plate affixed to any bicycle or remove, without the permission of the owner, any identification plate from any bicycle. If a replacement plate must be issued, the fee shall be as provided in the village fee schedule.
(Ord. of 2-21-1983, § 3) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Amended via Ord. 18-016, 7/19/2018]
Sec. 82.305. Transfer and cancellation of registration.
Within ten days after any bicycle registered under this article changes ownership, is transferred or dismantled and/or taken out of operation, the person in whose name the bicycle has been registered shall report such information to the Everest Metro Police Department. In the event of a change of ownership or other transfer of the bicycle wherein the bicycle remains in use in the village, the license plate will remain with the bicycle. Every such person who transfers the title of any bicycle shall endorse upon the bottom of the registration card the name and address of the transferee, the date of the transfer and the name of the transferor. The transferee shall re-register
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 23
the bicycle and shall pay a transfer fee as provided in the village fee schedule. If a bicycle is dismantled and/or taken out of operation, the license plate will not remain with the bicycle but shall be immediately destroyed by the person disposing of or dismantling the bicycle.
(Ord. of 2-21-1983, § 4) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Amended via Ord. 18-016, 7/19/2018]
Sec. 82.306. Buying or selling bicycles.
Every person engaged in the business of buying, selling or exchanging bicycles in the village shall maintain for three years from the date of the transaction a record containing the brand name, color, type and serial number of each bicycle bought, sold or exchanged and shall record the name and address of each person buying, selling or exchanging a bicycle. This record shall be open to inspection by a representative of the Everest Metro Police Department during reasonable business hours.
(Ord. of 2-21-1983, § 5) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Amended via Ord. 18-016, 7/19/2018]
Sec. 82.307. Bicycle Lanes
(a) Designation. Pursuant to Wis. Stat. §349.23(2), the Village hereby designates those clearly marked portions of Ross Avenue between Cut Off Road and Babl Lane as a Bicycle Lane.
(b) Permitted Use. The Ross Avenue Bicycle Lane may be used by Bicycles, Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Devices, or pedestrians on foot or using other human propelled devices such as rollerblades.
(c) Movement. Bicycles and Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Devices shall move within the Bicycle Lane in the same direction as motor vehicle traffic on the roadway next to the Bicycle Lane and pedestrians shall move within the Bicycle Lane in the opposite direction of, or facing motor vehicle and bicycle traffic.
[Amended via Ord. 18-016, 7/19/2018]
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 24
ARTICLE IV. MINIBIKES AND SELF PROPELLED DEVICES
Sec. 82.400. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Highway, means all public ways and thoroughfares and bridges on such ways and thoroughfares. It includes the entire width between the boundary lines of every way open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purposes of vehicular travel. It includes not only the actual traveled portion of the roadway, but also the shoulders, ditches and other adjacent areas that are owned by or reserved for the use of the public.
Minibike, means any self-propelled device primarily used for transportation or sport, including but not limited to motorcycles, go-carts, motorized bicycles, off-the-road trail bikes, and all-terrain vehicles.
Self-propelled device, means any device designed primarily for off-the-road use which is internal combustion engine driven or electric motor driven, and in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn. It includes without limitation for lack of enumeration, such devices commonly known as minibikes, go-carts and motor bicycles.
(Code 1982, § 7.26(1)) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Cross References--Definitions generally, § 1.101.
Sec. 82.401. Penalty.
The violation of any of the provisions of this article relating to the operation of minibikes or self-propelled devices shall subject the violator to Sec. 1.111.
(Code 1982, § 7.26(4)) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 82.402. Operation.
No person shall operate a minibike or self-propelled device in the village in the following manner:
(1) At a rate of speed that is unreasonable or imprudent under the circumstances.
(2) In any careless way so as to endanger the person or property of another.
(3) While under the influence of intoxicating liquor, fermented malt beverages, narcotics or other controlled substances.
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 25
(4) In such a way that the exhaust of the motor makes an excessive or unusual noise.
(5) Without a functioning muffler.
(6) Upon any public highway, street or alley, or upon any sidewalk or parkway in the village unless such vehicle is registered as required by Wis. Stats. Chapter 341 and its operation and operator are specifically permitted to operate the vehicle by statute.
(7) Upon any slide, ski or skating area, except for the purpose of serving the area or crossing the places where marked.
(8) On any lands operated or leased by the village.
(9) Upon the private property of another without the consent of the owner or lessee. Failure to post private property does not imply consent for use. Any motor-driven craft, minibike or self-propelled device shall, at all times, have the consent of the owner before operation of such craft or vehicle on private lands.
(10) On or across a cemetery, burial ground, school or church property, without the express consent of the owner.
(Code 1982, § 7.26(2)) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 82.403. Liability of parent or guardian.
No parent or guardian of any child under the age of 18 years shall authorize or permit such child to violate any of the provisions of this article. Any child under the age of 18 years who shall operate a minibike or self-propelled device shall be presumed to be operating the vehicle under the authority of a parent or guardian.
(Code 1982, § 7.26(3)) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
ARTICLE V. ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE AND UTILITY TERRAIN VEHICLE ROUTES AND OPERATION ON HIGHWAYS WITHIN THE VILLAGE OF WESTON
Sec. 82.500. Purpose.
(a). The purpose of this ordinance is to establish all-terrain and utility terrain vehicle routes in the Village of Weston and to regulate the operation of all-terrain and utility terrain vehicles in the Village of Weston.
Sec. 82.501. Authority.
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 26
(a). The Village Board of the Village of Weston, Marathon County, Wisconsin, has the specific authority to adopt this All-Terrain and Utility Vehicle Ordinance under s. 23.33(8)(b) and (11), Wis. Stats.
Sec. 82.502. Definitions.
(a). For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall be used. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural number; and the plural number includes the singular number. The words “shall”, “will”, and “must” are always mandatory. The words “may” and “should” are discretionary terms. The masculine shall include the feminine. Terms not defined in this Section, shall be interpreted based on common usage.
1) All-Terrain Vehicle (ATV): means a commercially designed and manufactured motor-driven device that has a weight, without fluids, of 900 pounds or less, has a width of 50 inches or less, is equipped with a seat designed to be straddled by the operator, and travels on 3 or more low-pressure tires or non-pneumatic tires.
2) Village: means the Village of Weston, the Village Board, Board of Trustees, or any other Village of Weston official(s) authorized by the Village Board to act on behalf of the Village of Weston.
3) Utility Terrain Vehicle (UTV): means any of the following:
• A commercially designed and manufactured motor driven device that does not meet federal motor vehicle safety standards in effect on July 1, 2012, that is not a golf cart, low-speed vehicle, dune buggy mini-truck, or tracked vehicle, that is designed to be used primarily off of a highway, and that has, and was originally manufactured with, all of the following:
1. A weight, without fluids, of 2,000 pounds or less.
2. Four or more low-pressure tires or non-pneumatic tires.
3. A steering wheel.
4. A tail light.
5. A brake light.
6. Two headlights.
7. A width of not more than 65 inches.
8. A system of seat belts, or a similar system, for restraining each occupant of the device in the event of an accident.
9. A system of structural members designed to reduce the likelihood that an occupant would be crushed as the result of a rollover of the device.
• A commercially designed and manufactured motor driven device to which all of the following applies:
1. It has a weight, without fluids, of more than 900 pounds but not more than 2000 pounds.
2. It has a width of 50 inches or less.
3. It is equipped with a seat designed to be straddled by the operator.
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 27
4. It travels on 3 or more low-pressure tires or non-pneumatic tires.
Sec. 82.503. Operation of All-Terrain and Utility Vehicles.
(a). Pursuant to s. 23.33(4)(d)4., Wis. Stats., except as otherwise provided in s. 23.33(4), Wis. Stats., no person may operate an all-terrain or utility terrain vehicle on any road, freeway or highway in the Village except on roadways that are designated as all-terrain and utility terrain vehicle routes by this ordinance.
Sec. 82.504. Designation of All-Terrain and Utility Terrain Vehicle Routes.
(a). South on County Road J from the Eau Claire River, to 6606 County Road J and north on County Road J from 6606 County Road J to the Eau Claire River. Legend A on the ATV Ordinance Map.
(b). West on Schofield Avenue from the boundary line (between Ringle and Weston) to 6606 County Road J and east on Schofield Avenue from 6606 County Road J to the boundary line (between Ringle and Weston). Legend B on the ATV Ordinance Map.
(c). West on Weston Avenue from the boundary line (between Ringle and Weston) to 10002 Adventure Way and east to the boundary line (between Ringle and Weston) from 10002 Adventure Way. Legend C on the ATV Ordinance Map.
Sec. 82.505. Conditions applicable to All-Terrain and Utility Terrain vehicle routes.
(a) Pursuant to s. 23.33(8)(d), Wis. Stats, the following restrictions are placed on the use of the Village all-terrain and utility terrain vehicle routes designated by this ordinance:
1. Routes shall be marked with uniform all-terrain and utility terrain vehicle route signs in accordance with s. NR 64.12(7), Wisconsin Administrative Code. No person may do any of the following in regard to signs marking Village all-terrain and utility terrain vehicle routes unless authorized to do so:
2. Intentionally remove, damage, deface, move, or obstruct any uniform all-terrain and utility vehicle route or trail sign or standard or intentionally interfere with the effective operation of any uniform all-terrain and utility terrain vehicle route or trail sign or standards if the sign or standard is legally placed by the State, any municipality, or any authorized individual.
3. Possess any uniform all-terrain and utility terrain vehicle route or trail sign or standard of the type established by the department for the warning, instruction, or information of the public, unless he or she obtained the uniform all-terrain and utility terrain vehicle route or trail sign or standard in a lawful manner. Possession of a uniform all-terrain and utility terrain vehicle route or trail sign or standard creates a rebuttable presumption of illegal possession.
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 28
(b) Operation shall be subject to all provisions of s. 23.33, Wis. Stats., which is adopted as a part of this ordinance by reference, pursuant to s. 23.33(11), Wis. Stats.
(c) Operators must abide by all traffic laws unless further restricted by this Ordinance.
(d) The speed limit for ATVs and UTVs shall be established at not greater than 35 (thirty-five) miles per hour or the speed limit for automobiles, whichever is lower, on all segments of Village roads designated as ATV route.
(e) ATVs/UTVs may be operated on paved surfaces only, unless yielding the right of way.
(f) All all-terrain and utility vehicle operators shall ride single file.
(g) No ATV/UTV may be operated on any designated route without fully functional headlights, tail-lights and brake lights.
(h) No ATV/UTV may be operated on any designated route between the hours of 11:59
p.m. and 5:00 a.m. daily, unless a different restriction on hours of operation has been specified by the Village and notice of the same is duly posted on the segment.
(i) All ATV/UTV operators shall ride on the right-hand side of the paved portion of the highway, unless making a left turn. Operation on the gravel shoulders, grassy in-slope, ditches, or other highway right-of-way is prohibited, unless yielding right of way.
(j) No ATV/UTV may be operated on any designated ATV route if the ATV/UTV does not meet all applicable Federal noise and air pollution standards.
(k) No person under the age of sixteen (16) may operate an ATV/UTV on any segment of Village Road which is a designated ATV route.
(l) No person under the age of eighteen (18) may operate an ATV/UTV on any designated route unless wearing approved protective head gear.
(m)Every person who operates an ATV/UTV on a segment of Village road which is designated as an ATV route shall have in his or her immediate possession a valid motor vehicle operator’s license, and shall display the license document upon demand from any law enforcement officer or official described in Wis. Stat. Section
23.33(12).
Sec. 82.506. Enforcement.
(a). This ordinance may be enforced by any law enforcement officer authorized to enforce the laws of the state of Wisconsin. A copy of this ordinance shall be sent by the Village Clerk, Everest Metro Police Department, the Department of Natural Resources, the Marathon County Sheriff’s Department and any other law enforcement agency serving the Village of Weston’s jurisdiction.
Sec. 82.507. Penalties.
(a). The penalties under s. 23.33(13)(a), Wis Stats., are adopted by reference.
Sec. 82.508. Maintenance.
(a). Designation of segments of the Village road system as ATV/UTV routes does not impose upon the Village a greater duty of care or responsibility for maintenance of those segments than for any other segment of Village road. Operators of ATV/UTV’s on Village roads assume all the usual and normal risks of ATV/UTV operation.
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 29
[Created via Ord. 18-017, 7/19/2018]
ARTICLE VI. SPEED LIMITS
Sec. 82.600. Speed Limits.
(a) A traffic and engineering investigation having been made on the following described, highways, roads and streets, the maximum permissible speed at which vehicles may be operated on said highway, road or street is herewith established as reasonable and safe pursuant to Wis. Stats §§ 346.57 and 349.11, shall be as set forth herein, subject to erection of standard signs giving notice thereof.
(1) The maximum permissible speed for all vehicles on the following described village highway, road or street in the Village of Weston shall be 25 miles per hour:
ABITZ LANE North from Ross Avenue to its terminus
ABRAHAM STREET North from Callon Avenue to it terminus
ACRE AVENUE East from Zadra Street to South Timber Street
ALAN LANE East from Sandy Lane to Schoonover Road
ALDERSON STREET North from State Highway 29 to Mallard Court
ALEX STREET East from River Meadow Drive to Caleb Drive
ALTA VERDE STREET North from Highland Avenue to Neupert Avenue
AMANDA DRIVE South from Flambeau Street to Isaiah Street
AMIR DRIVE South from Schofield Avenue to its terminus
ANDREA STREET East from Brehm Street to Brianna Street
ANNABELLE COURT East from Von Kanel Street to its terminus
ANTELOPE DRIVE South from Decoy Street to Canoe Street
NORTH APACHE LANE North from River Bend Road to River Bend Road
APACHE LANE North from Trotzer Lane to River Bend Road
ARROW STREET North from Sternberg Avenue to its terminus
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 30
ASPEN STREET North from Sternberg Avenue to Bernard Avenue
AUGUSTINE AVENUE East from Zadra Street to Von Kanel Street
BABL LANE East from Ross Avenue to Morning View Lane
BARBICAN AVENUE East from East Everest Avenue to its terminus
BARKLEY WAY East from its terminus to Quirt-Sann Drive
BAYBERRY STREET North from Ross Avenue to Concord Avenue
BAYINGTON AVENUE South from Schmutzler Avenue to Knaack Avenue
BECKY BOULEVARD South from Lora Lee Lane to Feith Avenue
BERNARD AVENUE East from Birch Street to Aspen Street
EAST BERNARD AVE. East from Crestwood Drive to Camp Phillips Road (County Road X)
BEVERLY LANE East from Random Street to Wendy Lane
BIRCH STREET South from Concord Avenue to Weston Avenue
BIRCHWOOD LANE North from Terrier Lane to its terminus
NORTH BIRCH LANE North from Neupert Avenue to Oak Avenue
SOUTH BIRCH LANE South from Neupert Avenue to Business U.S. Highway 51
BLOEDEL AVENUE East from Pine Park Street to Alderson Street
BOXER LANE East from Setter Road to Labrador Road
BREHM STREET South from Christie Lane to Andrea Street
BRIANNA STREET South from Christie Lane to Andrea Street
BROLTA LANE South from Sandhill Drive to Howland Avenue
BROOK COURT East from Babl Lane to its terminus
BRUCE DRIVE South from Northwestern Avenue to Cecil Street
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 31
BURNS STREET North from Jelinek Avenue to its terminus
BUSKA STREET North from Parkway Lane to Harwood Avenue
CALEB DRIVE South from Decoy Street to Heath Street
CAMP PHILLIPS ROAD South from Ross Avenue to Schofield Avenue
CANOE STREET East from Sandy Lane to its East terminus
CARIBOU LANE North from River Pointe Road to its terminus
CARTER AVENUE East from Birch Street to Gordon Street
CASEYRAE COURT South from Kelly Place to Teagan Lane
CASTLEBERRY CIRCLE South from Warwick Drive to Windsor Drive
CATHY DRIVE North from Hewitt Avenue to its terminus
CECIL STREET South from Northwestern Avenue to its terminus
CEDAR AVENUE East from Zadra Street to Rae James Street
CHADWICK STREET South from Colleen Avenue to its terminus
CHEROKEE STREET North from Trotzer Lane to Kiowa Lane
CHERRY STREET South from Schofield Avenue to Bloedel Avenue
CHERYL DRIVE East from Cathy Drive to Sandy Lane
CHRISTIANSEN AVENUE West from Kramer Lane to its terminus
CHRISTIE LANE West from County Road J to its terminus
COLLEEN AVENUE East from Mesker Street to Chadwick Street
COMMUNITY CENTER DRIVE East from Birch Street to East Everest Avenue
CONCORD AVENUE East from Bayberry Street to Camp Phillips Road (County Road X)
CONNIE LANE West from Kyle Road to Mary Lane
CORONADO STREET North from Jelinek Avenue to Cortez Lane
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 32
COROZALLA DRIVE East from Ross Avenue to Mesker Street
CORTEZ LANE East from Lawndale Street to Coronado Street
COUNTRY CREEK LANE East from Alderson Street to Meadow Creek Lane
CRANBERRY
BOULEVARD East from Birch Street to Ministry Parkway
CREEL DRIVE East from Musky Drive to Quentin Street
CRESTWOOD DRIVE South from East Bernard Avenue to Ross Avenue
CROSSTRAIL LANE North from Standing Oak Drive to its terminus
CUTOFF ROAD South from Ross Avenue to Schofield Avenue
DALEY AVENUE East from Machmueller Street to Alta Verde Street
DANIELLE DRIVE South from Lora Lee Lane to Feith Avenue
DAWN STREET South from Callon Avenue to Solar Avenue
DECKER STREET North from Callon Avenue to Scenic Drive
DECOY STREET East from Antelope Drive to Caleb Drive
DEER STREET North from Eau Claire Avenue to its terminus
DELIKOWSKI STREET South from Joseph Avenue to Jelinek Avenue
DELONAY STREET West from Normandy Street to its terminus
D.J. LANE East from Le Duc Street to J.M. Place
DOMINIKA STREET South from Connie Lane to its terminus
DOUGLAS LANE East from Camp Phillips Road (County Road X) to Kirk Street
DUSK STREET South from Callon Avenue to Solar Avenue
EAU CLAIRE AVENUE East from Alderson Street to Camp Phillips Road (County Road X)
EDWARD STREET South from Schofield Avenue to its terminus
ELM STREET South from Ross Avenue to Sternberg Avenue
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 33
EL SEGUNDO AVENUE East from Normandy Street to Alta Verde Street
ERIC STREET South from Jason Avenue to Jelinek Avenue
EVEREST AVENUE East from Volkman Street to Alta Verde Street
EAST EVEREST AVENUE West from its East terminus to its West terminus
FEITH AVENUE East from Teagan Lane to its terminus
FELCH DRIVE North from Ross Avenue to its terminus
FERGE STREET South from Post Avenue to Jelinek Avenue
FLAMBEAU STREET East from Amanda Drive to Caleb Drive
FLORLANA LANE West from West Raybelle Drive to its terminus
FOOTHILL AVENUE West from Alta Verde Street to its terminus
FOX RUN LANE North from Eau Claire Avenue to its terminus
FOX STREET South from Sternberg Avenue to Schofield Avenue
FRANCISCAN WAY South from Ministry Parkway to Cross Point Boulevard
FULLER STREET South from Ross Avenue to Schofield Avenue
GLAD STREET South from Mount View Avenue to Schofield Avenue
GORDON STREET South from Sternberg Avenue to Schofield Avenue
SOUTH GORDON STREET South from North Krueger Avenue to its terminus
HAMPTON AVENUE East from Meuret Avenue to Northwestern Avenue
HARWOOD AVENUE East from Alderson Street to Buska Street
HEATH STREET East from Shawn Drive to Caleb Drive
HEATHER STREET South from Thomas Avenue to Rogan Lane
HEUSS AVENUE East from Volkman Street to Alta Verde Street
HEWITT AVENUE West from Sandy Lane to Pine Ridge Lane
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 34
HICKORY STREET South from Cedar Avenue to Acre Avenue
HIDDEN RIVER CIRCLE East from Fuller Street to Babl Lane
HIDDEN RIVER COURT East from Hidden River Circle to its terminus
HIGHLAND AVENUE East from its West terminus to its East terminus
HIGH RIDGE CIRCLE South from Hidden River Circle to Hidden River Circle
HILGEMANN STREET South from Westfair Avenue to East Jelinek Avenue
HOLLY AVENUE West from Von Kanel Street to its terminus
HORIZON COURT East from Birch Street to its terminus
HOWLAND AVENUE East from County Road X to Woodland Drive
HUBERT AVENUE East from James Lee Street to Pat Street
HUNT STREET South from Callon Avenue to Feith Avenue
ISAIAH STREET East from River Meadow Drive to Walleye Drive
JACOB STREET West from Sandy Lane to Roxann Drive
JAEQUELYN ROAD South from Lora Lee Lane to Feith Avenue
JAMAR STREET South from Sternberg Avenue to Schofield Avenue
JALEN CIRCLE West from Teagan Lane to its terminus
JAMES LEE STREET South from Hubert Avenue to Ross Avenue
JANELLE STREET South from Christie Lane to Andrea Street
JANICE AVENUE West from Fuller Street to its terminus
JASON STREET East from Eric Street to Jessica Street
JEAN ELLEN STREET South from Sternberg Avenue to Lee Avenue
JELINEK AVENUE East from BR US 51 to Birch Street
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 35
EAST JELINEK AVENUE East from Camp Phillips Road (County Road X) to Municipal Street
JESSICA STREET South from Jason Street to Jelinek Avenue
J.M. PLACE South from D.J. Lane to Ross Avenue
JOAN DRIVE South from Northwestern Avenue to its terminus
JONES STREET South from Weston Avenue to its terminus
JOSEPH AVENUE East from Alderson Street to Delikowski Street
KATHLEEN STREET South from East Monterey Avenue to East Everest Avenue
KAYAK DRIVE East from Tappe Drive to Canoe Street
KECK AVENUE East from BR US 51 to Burns Street
KELLY PLACE East from CaseyRae Court to Teagan Lane
KELLYLAND STREET South from D.J. Lane to Moyer Avenue
KENNEDY AVENUE East from South Timber Lane to Von Kanel Street
KIOWA LANE East from Apache Lane to Cherokee Street
KIRK STREET South from East Jelinek Avenue to East Everest Avenue
KNAACK AVENUE East from Bayington Street to Camp Phillips Road (County Road X)
NORTH KRUEGER AVENUE East from South Gordon Street to Edward Street
SOUTH KRUEGER AVENUE East from South Gordon Street to Edward Street
KYLE ROAD South from Connie Lane to Mary Lane
LABRADOR ROAD South from Jelinek Avenue to Setter Road
LAGUNA AVENUE East from Normandy Street to Alta Verde Street
LANG LANE West from Ryan Street to its terminus
LAWNDALE STREET South from Cortez Lane to Highland Avenue
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 36
LE DUC STREET South from D.J. Lane to Ross Avenue
LEE AVENUE East from Linda Street to Mesker Street
LEEDS COURT North from Leyburn Drive to its terminus
LEYBURN DRIVE East from Windsor Drive to Birch Street
LINDA STREET South from Corozalla Drive to Lee Avenue
LOOK STREET South from Barclay Way to Weiland Avenue
LORA LEE LANE East from Shawana Street to Jaequelyn Road
LOUANN DRIVE West from Michael Drive to River Meadow Drive
MACHMUELLER STREET South from Jelinek Avenue to Foothill Avenue
MAKENZIE DRIVE South from Quentin Street to Creel Drive
MAPLE STREET South from Ross Avenue to Sternberg Avenue
MARY LANE East from Connie Lane to Kyle Street
MC INTYRE AVENUE East from Volkman Street to Machmueller Street
MEADOW CREEK LANE South from Parkway Lane to Country Creek Lane
MEMORIAL COURT North from Schofield Avenue to its terminus
MERIDIAN AVENUE East from Fuller Street to Regent Street
MESKER STREET South from Ross Avenue to East Jelinek Avenue
MEURET LANE North from Northwestern Avenue to its terminus
MICHAEL DRIVE North from Cheryl Drive to Alex Street
MINISTRY PARKWAY East from Birch Street to Cranberry Boulevard
MONTEREY AVENUE East from Lawndale Street to Alta Verde Street
EAST MONTEREY AVENUE East from Kathleen Street to Camp Phillips Road (County Road X)
MOOSE DRIVE South from Creel Drive to its terminus
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 37
MORNING VIEW LANE East from Fuller Street to its terminus
MOUNT VIEW AVENUE East from Fox Street to Schofield Avenue
MOYER AVENUE West from Fuller Street to Kellyland Street
MUNICIPAL STREET South from Sternberg Avenue to Stella Avenue
MUSKIE DRIVE South from Isaiah Street to its terminus
NEUPERT AVENUE East from Volkman Street to Alderson Street
EAST NEUPERT AVENUE East from Alderson Street to its terminus
NORMA AVENUE East from Fox Street to Birch Street
NORMANDY STREET South from Schofield Avenue to Highland Avenue
NORTHLAND STREET South from Everest Avenue to Foothill Avenue
OAK AVENUE East from North Birch Lane to its terminus
OAK TERRACE South from Pine Terrace to River Pines Court
OLD COSTA LANE South from Schofield Avenue to Mary Lane
ORION LANE South from Howland Avenue to Crosstrail Lane
PARK RIDGE DRIVE East from Alderson Street to Labrador Road
PARKWAY LANE West from Meadow Creek Lane to its terminus
PAT STREET South from Hubert Avenue to Powers Street
PENINSULA LANE From north terminus to south terminus
PHEASANT RUN COURT South from Howland Avenue to its terminus
PINE PARK STREET South from Schofield Avenue to Jelinek Avenue
PINE RIDGE LANE South from Hewitt Avenue to Riverfront Place
PINE STREET South from village limits to Schofield Avenue
PINE TERRACE From its west terminus to Oak Terrace
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 38
PLEASANT VIEW DRIVE East from Alderson Street to Eau Claire Avenue
POINTE ROAD East from Alderson Street to its terminus
PORTAGE STREET South from Canoe Street to Quentin Street
POST AVENUE East from Volkman Street to Normandy Street
POWERS STREET South from Richards Avenue to Ross Avenue
PRAIRIE STREET South from Westfair Avenue to East Jelinek Avenue
PRIEBE AVENUE East from Volkman Street to BR US 51
PROGRESS WAY North from Weston Avenue to Weston Avenue
PUFFER STREET South from Beverly Lane to Mallard Court
QUENTIN STREET (east segment) East from Tappe Drive to its terminus
QUENTIN STREET East from Amanda Drive to Caleb Drive
QUIRT SANN DRIVE South from Ross Ave to Weiland Avenue
RADTKE AVENUE West from Elm Street to its terminus
RAE JAMES STREET South from Cedar Avenue to Holly Avenue
RANDOM STREET South from Vern Lane to Mallard Court
RANDY JAY STREET South from East Jelinek Avenue to Douglas Lane
RANDYLYN STREET South from Feith Avenue to Ryan Amy Drive
EAST RAYBELLE DRIVE East from West Raybelle Drive to Eau Claire Avenue
WEST RAYBELLE DRIVE South from East Raybelle Drive to Eau Claire Avenue
RED OAK COURT East from River Bend Road to its terminus
REGENT STREET South from Saxon Avenue to Meridian Avenue
RICHARDS AVENUE East from James Lee Street to Pat Street
RICHFLEX STREET South from Mount View Avenue to its terminus
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 39
RICKYVAL STREET South from Ryan Amy Drive to its terminus
RIPPLING CREEK DRIVE East from its terminus to Antelope Drive
RIVER BEND ROAD South from Ross Avenue to Trotzer Lane
RIVERFRONT PLACE East from west terminus to east terminus
RIVER MEADOW DRIVE North from Louann Drive to Winding Creek Road
RIVER PINES COURT South from Ross Avenue to its terminus
RIVER POINTE LANE East from Caribou Lane to Peninsula Lane
ROBIN STREET South from Douglas Lane to East Everest Avenue
ROCK RAPIDS ROAD South from Hewitt Avenue to Wenonah Drive
RODNEY STREET South from East Jelinek Avenue to Douglas Lane
RODS WAY East from County Highway J to Caribou Lane
ROGAN LANE East from Fuller Street to Heather Street
ROSE STREET South from Mount View Avenue to its terminus
ROSSENBACH AVENUE West from Pine Street to its terminus
ROXANN DRIVE West from Michael Drive to Jacob Street
RUDOLPH DRIVE North from Eau Claire Avenue to Deer Street
RYAN AMY DRIVE East from Randylyn Street to Rickyval Street
RYAN STREET South from Lang Lane to Schofield Avenue
SANDGATE COURT West from Windsor Drive to its terminus
SANDHILL DRIVE East from Alderson Street to Brolta Lane
SANDY LANE North from Ross Avenue to its terminus
SARUS LANE East from Alderson Street to Siberian Drive
SAXON AVENUE East from Fuller Street to Regent Street
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 40
SCENIC DRIVE East from its west terminus to its east terminus
SCHMUTZLER STREET East from Bayington Street to Camp Phillips Road (County Road X)
SCHOONOVER ROAD South from Alan Lane to Ross Avenue
SCOTT STREET South from Corozalla Drive to Lee Avenue
SERVICE LANE West from Zinser Street to its terminus
SETTER ROAD South from Boxer Lane to Labrador Road
SHAWN DRIVE South from Alex Street to Heath Street
SHAWNA STREET South from Lora Lee Lane to Feith Avenue
SHEPHERD LANE South from Park Ridge Drive to Park Ridge Drive
SHIRLEY AVENUE East from Von Kanel Street to Heeren Street
SHOREY AVENUE East from Alderson Street to Camp Phillips Road (County Road X)
SIBERIAN DRIVE West from Brolta Lane to its terminus
SILVER HAWK WAY South from its terminus to Rippling Creek Drive
SKI LANE South from Kostuck Lane to its terminus
SOLAR AVENUE East from Dusk Street to Dawn Street
STANDING OAK DRIVE South from Howland Avenue to its terminus
STELLA AVENUE East from Municipal Street to Old Costa Lane
STERNBERG AVENUE East from Alderson Street to Fox Street
STERNBERG AVENUE East from Fox Street to Municipal Street
STONE RIDGE DRIVE North from Weston Avenue to its terminus
SUNSET STREET North from Holly Avenue to its terminus
SYNERGY COURT South from Venture Circle to its terminus
TANYA STREET South from Tricia Avenue to Heather Street
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 41
TAPPE DRIVE North from Isaiah Street to Quentin Street
TAPPE DRIVE South from its terminus to Quentin Street
TEAGAN LANE South from Schofield Avenue to Feith Avenue
TERRIER LANE East from Birchwood Lane to Birch Street
THOMAS AVENUE East from Chadwick Street to Heather Street
SOUTH TIMBER STREET South from Ross Avenue to Holly Avenue
TRANSPORT WAY East from Camp Phillips Road (County Road X) to its terminus
TRICIA AVENUE East from Fuller Street to its terminus
TROTZER LANE West from Kramer Lane to Apache Lane
TWIN PINES LANE South from Babl Lane to Morning View Lane
VERN LANE East from Random Lane to Wendy Lane
VOLKMAN STREET North from Mc Intyre Avenue to BR US 51
VON KANEL STREET South from Corozalla Drive to its terminus (State Highway 29)
WALLEYE DRIVE North from Creel Drive to Isaiah Street
WALNUT STREET South from Cedar Avenue to Acre Avenue
WARWICK DRIVE West from Windsor Drive to its terminus
WEILAND AVENUE East from Fox Street to Birch Street
WENDY LANE South from Vern Lane to Beverly Lane
WENONAH DRIVE South from Hewitt Avenue to Rock Rapids Road
WESTFAIR AVENUE East from Prairie Street to Hilgemann Street
WESTON PINES LANE West from Camp Phillips Road (County Road X) to its terminus
WESTVIEW BOULEVARD West from Camp Phillips Road (County Road X) to Stone Ridge Drive
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 42
WINDING RIDGE WAY West from Camp Phillips Road (County Road X) to its terminus
WILLOW STREET South from Schofield Avenue to Bloedel Avenue
WINDEMERE PLACE North from Shorey Avenue to its terminus
WINDING CREEK DRIVE East from River Meadow Drive to Sandy Lane
WINDSOR DRIVE South from Warick Drive to Birch Street
WOODLAND DRIVE South from Shorey Avenue to Howland Avenue
ZADRA STREET South from Sternberg Avenue to Acre Avenue
ZINSER STREET South from Callon Avenue to Schofield Avenue
(2) The maximum permissible speed for all vehicles on the following described village highway, road or street in the Village of Weston shall be 30 miles per hour:
CAMP PHILLIPS ROAD South from Schofield Avenue to State Highway 29
ZINSER STREET South from State Highway 29 to Weston Ave.
(3) The maximum permissible speed for all vehicles on the following described village highway, road or street in the Village of Weston shall be 35 miles per hour:
ADVENTURE WAY East from County Road J to its terminus
ALDERSON STREET South from Weston Avenue to Howland Avenue
BIRCH STREET South from Weston Avenue to Shorey Avenue
BR US 51 South from north village limits to 100' north of Volkman Street
CALLON AVENUE East from Schofield Avenue to County Road J
CAMP PHILLIPS ROAD North from Ross Avenue to North Village limits
CAMP PHILLIPS ROAD South from State Highway 29 to Weston Avenue
COMMERCE DRIVE East from Ryan Street to its terminus
COUNTY HIGHWAY J North from Schofield Avenue to North Village limits
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 43
ENTERPRISE WAY South from Schofield Avenue to its terminus
HARNEY AVENUE East from Heeren Street to its terminus
HOWLAND AVENUE East from Alderson Street to County Road X
KRAMER LANE South from Ross Avneue to Trotzer Lane
KOSTUCK LANE East from Willard Lane to its terminus
MALLARD COURT East from Alderson Street to Puffer Street
NORTHWESTERN AVENUE West from Camp Phillips Road (County Road X) to west village limits
ROSS AVENUE East from Metro Drive to Powers Street
RYAN STREET South from Schofield Avenue to Feith Avenue
SCHOFIELD AVENUE East from BR US 51 to .1 mile east of Von Kanel Street
TECHNOLOGY DRIVE West from Enterprise Way to its terminus
VENTURE CIRCLE South from Enterprise Way to Enterprise Way
VOLKMAN STREET North from south village limits to Mc Intyre Avenue
VON KANEL STREET South from its north terminus (State Highway 29) to Weston Avenue
WESENECK STREET West from County Road J to its terminus
WESTON AVENUE East from Alderson Street to Camp Phillips Road (County Road X)
WILLARD LANE North from Callon Avenue to Kostuck Lane
ZINSER STREET South from Schofield Avenue to State Highway 29
(4) The maximum permissible speed for all vehicles on the following described village highway, road or street in the Village of Weston shall be 40 miles per hour:
SCHOFIELD AVENUE East from .1 mile west of Von Kanel Street to County Road J
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 44
(5) The maximum permissible speed for all vehicles on the following described village highway, road or street in the Village of Weston shall be 45 miles per hour:
CAMP PHILLIPS ROAD South from Weston Avenue to South Village limits
COUNTY HIGHWAY J North from 200 feet south of State Highway 29 to Schofield Avenue
HEEREN STREET South from Weston Avenue to Nick Avenue
ROSS AVENUE East from Powers Street to Kramer Lane
RYAN STREET South from Feith Avenue to Shorey Avenue
SHOREY AVENUE East from Camp Phillips Road (County Road X) to Zinser Street
WESTON AVENUE East from Camp Phillips Road (County Road X) to County Road J
ZINSER STREET South from Weston Avenue to Shorey Avenue
(6) The maximum permissible speed for all vehicles on the following described village highway, road or street in the Village of Weston shall be 55 miles per hour:
COUNTY HIGHWAY J South from 200' south of State Highway 29 to south village limits
KEMIECIK STREET South from Shorey Avenue to its terminus
NICK AVENUE West from Heeren Street to its terminus
SCHOFIELD AVENUE East from County Road J to east village limits
WESTON AVENUE East from County Road J to east village limits
(7) The maximum permissible speed for all vehicles on the following described village highway, road or street in the Village of Weston shall be 65 miles per hour:
STATE HIGHWAY 29 East from west village limits to east village limits
(a) In the absence of a specific speed limit for newly constructed highways, roads or streets in essentially residential and commercial subdivisions, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour. A traffic survey shall be conducted in order to determine the appropriateness of that
Chapter 82 Traffic and Vehicles Page 45
limit when the subdivision is completed. In light of that traffic survey the speed limit may be adjusted by ordinance for specific highways, roads or streets.
(Ord. Of 4-19-04, Ord. Of 9-20-04, Ord. Of 4-9-05, Ord. of 6-6-05, Ord. of 11-11-05, Ord. Of 8-25-06, Ord. of 3-5-10, Ord. of 6-10-10; Ord. of 12-23-11, Wis. Stats. §§ 346.57 and 349.11) [Amended via Ord. 15-016, 9/10/2015; Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 18-006, 3/27/2018; Renumbered via Ord. 18-017, 7/19/2018]
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 1
Chapter 86
UTILITIES*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Section 86.1.000. Penalty.
Section 86.1.010. Protection of wells, septic tanks, similar structures.
ARTICLE II. WATER UTILITY
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Section 86.2.102. Adoption of state plumbing code.
Section 86.2.103. Supplementary nature of article.
Section 86.2.104. Discontinuance of service for violation of article.
Section 86.2.105. Name.
Section 86.2.106. Management.
Section 86.2.107. Failure to repair leaky or broken pipes.
Section 86.2.108. Thawing frozen services.
Section 86.2.109. Refreezing and rethawing.
Section 86.2.110. Charges for water used to prevent refreezing.
Section 86.2.111. Stop boxes.
__________
* Cross References--Any ordinance prescribing utility rates and fees saved from repeal, § 1.110(11); any ordinance regarding water, sewer, solid waste, and electric rates, rules and regulations and sewer and water main construction saved from repeal, § 1.110(22); Administration, Chapter 2; Buildings and Building Regulations, Chapter 14; Businesses, Chapter 18; Health and Sanitation, Chapter 38; Manufactured and Mobile Home Communities, Chapter 46; water supply, sewage disposal and related facilities in mobile home parks, § 46.111; Nuisances, Chapter 50; Planning Commission, Chapter 62; Solid Waste, Chapter 66; Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places, Chapter 70; Subdivision Regulations, Chapter 74; required subdivision improvements, § 74.112 et seq.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 2
Section 86.2.112. Outside hydrants.
Section 86.2.113. Turning on water.
Section 86.2.114. Service piping.
Section 86.2.115. Electrical grounding.
Section 86.2.116. Water emergency.
Section 86.2.117. Cross connections.
Section 86.2.118. Immediate discontinuance of service.
Section 86.2.119. Curb stops.
Section 86.2.120. Deposit and guarantee rules.
DIVISION 2. OPERATING RULES
Section 86.2.221. Applicability of state rules.
Section 86.2.222. Tampering with system prohibited.
Section 86.2.223. Water for construction use.
Section 86.2.224. Taking water from a consumer's premises.
Section 86.2.225. Failure of supply.
Section 86.2.226. Vacation of premises.
DIVISION 3. SERVICE RULES
Section 86.2.327. Handling water mains and service pipe in sewer or other trenches.
Section 86.2.328. Repairs to mains.
Section 86.2.329. Tapping mains.
Section 86.2.330. Permit.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 3
Section 86.2.331. Service connections.
Section 86.2.332. One structure for each connection.
Section 86.2.333. Corrections.
Section 86.2.334. Laying service.
Section 86.2.335. Repair to services.
Section 86.2.336. Permanently Installed In-ground Sprinkler Systems.
DIVISION 4. METERS
Section 86.2.436. Installation.
Section 86.2.437. Repairs.
Section 86.2.438. Complaint meter tests.
DIVISION 5. CONNECTIONS, FEES AND CHARGES
Section 86.2.539. Definitions.
Section 86.2.540. Mandatory hookup.
Section 86.2.541. Failure to connect.
Section 86.2.542. Water utility rates.
Section 86.2.543. Consumer's premises with several buildings.
Section 86.2.544. Public service.
Section 86.2.545. Building and construction water service.
Section 86.2.546. Private fire protection service.
ARTICLE III. WELLS
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 4
Section 86.3.147. Definitions.
Section 86.3.148. Purpose.
Section 86.3.149. Applicability.
Section 86.3.150. Definitions.
Section 86.3.151. Abandonment required.
Section 86.3.152. Well operation permit.
Section 86.3.153. Well Abandonment procedures.
Section 86.3.154. Penalties.
ARTICLE IV. SEWERAGE UTILITY *
Section 86.4.101 General Provisions.
Section 86.4.102 Definitions.
Section 86.4.103 Sewer Service Area.
Section 86.4.104 Obligations of Contract Communities.
Section 86.4.105 Connections to Village Sewage Collection System.
Section 86.4.106 Private Sewage Disposal.
Section 86.4.107 Limitations on Discharges to the Sewers Applicable to All Users.
Section 86.4.108 Additional Prohibitions and Requirements for Industrial Users.
Section 86.4.109 Special Requirements for Dental Clinics.
Section 86.4.110 Wastewater Discharge Permits.
Section 86.4.111 Limitations on Discharges of Hauled Wastes.
Section 86.4.112 Determination of Sewer Service Charges In General.
Section 86.4.113 Sewer Service Charges and Rates.
Section 86.4.114 Billing and Collections.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 5
Section 86.4.115 Enforcement, Abatement, and Penalties.
Section 86.4.116 Appeals.
ARTICLE V. STORMWATER UTILITY
DIVISION 1. STORMWATER UTILITY
Section 86.5.100. Creation.
Section 86.5.101. Authority.
Section 86.5.102. Definitions.
Section 86.5.103. Rates and Charges.
Section 86.5.104. Alternative Method to Collect Stormwater Charges.
Section 86.5.105. Budget Excess Revenues
Section 86.5.106. Penalty.
Section 86.5.107 through 86.5.110 Reserved.
DIVISION 2. POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 86.5.200. Creation.
Section 86.5.201. Authority.
Section 86.5.202. Findings of Fact.
Section 86.5.203. Purpose and Intent.
Section 86.5.204. Applicability and Jurisdiction.
Section 86.5.205. Definitions.
Section 86.5.206. Technical Standards.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 6
Section 86.5.207. Performance Standards.
Section 86.5.208 Permitting Requirements, Procedures and Fees.
Section 86.5.209 Stormwater Management Plan (SWMP).
Section 86.5.210. Maintenance Agreement.
Section 86.5.211. Financial Guarantee.
Section 86.5.212. Fee Schedule.
Section 86.5.213. Enforcement.
Section 86.5.214. Appeals.
Section 86.5.215. Severability.
Section 86.5.216. Effective Date.
DIVISION 3. CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION
Section 86.5.300. Creation.
Section 86.5.301. Authority
Section 86.5.302. Findings of Fact.
Section 86.5.303. Purpose and Intent.
Section 86.5.304. Applicability and Jurisdiction.
Section 86.5.305. Definitions.
Section 86.5.306. Technical Standards.
Section 86.5.307. Performance Standards for Construction Sites Under an Acre.
Section 86.5.308 Performance Standards for Construction Sites of One Acre or More.
Section 86.5.309 Permitting Requirements, Procedures, and Fees.
Section 86.5.310. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, Statement and Amendments.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 7
Section 86.5.311. Fee Schedule.
Section 86.5.312. Inspection.
Section 86.5.313. Enforcement.
Section 86.5.314. Appeals.
Section 86.5.315. Severability.
Section 86.5.316. Effective Date.
DIVISION 4. ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION
Section 86.5.400. Purpose and Intent.
Section 86.5.401. Definitions.
Section 86.5.402. Applicability.
Section 86.5.403. Responsibility for Administration.
Section 86.5.404. Severability.
Section 86.5.405. Ultimate Responsibility.
Section 86.5.406. Discharge Prohibitions.
Section 86.5.407. Suspension of MS4 Access.
Section 86.5.408 Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges.
Section 86.5.409 Monitoring of Discharges.
Section 86.5.410. Requirement to Prevent, Control and Reduce Stormwater Pollutants by the use of Best Management Practices.
Section 86.5.411. Watercourse Protection.
Section 86.5.412. Notification of Spills.
Section 86.5.413. Enforcement.
Section 86.5.414. Appeal of Notice of Violation.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 8
Section 86.5.415. Enforcement Measures after Appeal.
Section 86.5.416. Cost of Abatement of the Violation.
Section 86.5.417. Injunctive Relief.
Section 86.5.418. Compensatory Action.
Section 86.5.419. Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance.
Section 86.5.420. Prosecution.
Section 86.5.421. Remedies Not Exclusive.
Section 86.5.422. Effective Date.
ARTICLE VI. REFUSE AND RECYCLING UTILITY
Section 86.6.100. Declaration of Purpose.
Section 86.6.101. Definitions within Ordinance.
Section 86.6.102. Authority of Refuse Utility.
Section 86.6.103. Establishment of Refuse Utility Fee.
Section 86.6.104. Dedication of Refuse Utility Fee.
Section 86.6.105. Collection of Refuse Utility Fee.
Section 86.6.106. Enforcement of Utility Fee Collection.
Section 86.6.107. Administrative Review and Appeals.
Section 86.6.108. Notice of Decision for Review and Appeals of Utility Fees.
Section 86.6.109. Disposition of Fees and Charges.
Section 86.6.110. Exemptions from Utility Fees and Charges.
Section 86.6.111. Severability.
Section 86.6.112. Obstruction.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 9
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Section 86.1.000. Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter for which no specific penalty is provided shall upon conviction, be subject to Section 1.111.
(Code 1982, § 15.17) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.1.010. Protection of wells, septic tanks, similar structures. (a) All wells, septic tanks and similar structures being used within the village shall be protected by an adequate sound covering of sufficient strength to prevent injury to any human being or animal. All wells, septic tanks and similar structures in the village that are abandoned and have not been used for six months or more shall be filled to grade by the owner of the land upon which situated with properly tamped backfilling with adequate provision for settling so as to remove such abandoned well as a hazard to human and animal life and limb. (b) The building inspector may at any time order any well in the village to be adequately covered or filled to grade as the facts warrant. Such order shall be in writing and be served upon the owner or any lienholder on the land, if any, in the same manner as provided for excavations in Section 14.306(b). (c) Should the owner fail within 15 days after service of such order to properly cover or fill such well, the building inspector shall cause the same to be done; and the cost shall be a lien on the real estate on which such well is situated and entered upon the next succeeding tax roll as a special tax and shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum from the date of the building inspector's report of the cost.
(Code 1982, § 4.156(2)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 10
ARTICLE II WATER UTILITY*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Section 86.2.102. Adoption of state plumbing code.
The village adopts by reference the state plumbing code, being Wisconsin Administrative Code SPS Chapters 380 through 387.
(Ord. of 6-19-1984, § 15.18) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.103. Supplementary nature of article.
This article does not supersede the state plumbing code or any other provision of the village but is supplementary to them.
(Ord. of 6-19-1984, § 15.18) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.104. Discontinuance of service for violation of article.
The water utility is authorized and directed to discontinue water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of this article exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water system. Water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing under Wis. Stats. Chapter 68, except as provided in Section 86.2.118. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. of 6-19-1984, § 15.18) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.105. Name.
The water utility shall be known as the Weston Water Utility.
(Code 1982, § 15.01(2)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
__________
* Editors Note--The village, on May 21, 1968, filed an application with the state public service commission for authority under Wis. Stat. § 196.49 and Wis. Admin. Code PSC Chapter 184, to operate as a water public utility and construct facilities in the village and under Wis. Stat. § 196.19 to establish rates. Pursuant to due notice, hearing was held on June 24, 1968, on the application and by order dated August 6, 1968, the commission, pursuant to the aforementioned statutes, ordered the establishment of the Weston Water Utility.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 11
Section 86.2.106. Management.
The water utility shall be owned by the village and shall be operated under the direction of the board.
(Code 1982, § 15.01(3)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.107. Failure to repair leaky or broken pipes.
If a consumer fails to repair a leaky or broken pipe from the curb to the house within such time as may appear reasonable to the board after notification has been served on the consumer by the board, the water will be shut off and will not be turned on again until the repairs have been completed.
(Code 1982, § 15.04(10)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.108. Thawing frozen services.
Frozen services shall be thawed out by and at the expense of the utility, except where the freezing was caused by contributory fault or negligence on the part of the consumer, such as reduction of the grade or undue exposure of the piping in the building or on a consumer's property, or failure to comply with the utility's specifications and requirements as to depth of service, lack of sufficient or proper backfill, etc.
(Code 1982, § 15.04(11)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.109. Refreezing and rethawing.
Following the freezing of a service, the utility shall take such steps and issue such instructions as may be necessary to prevent the refreezing of the same service. No charge shall be made for rethawings if the instructions are followed. If it is necessary to allow the water to flow to prevent refreezing, the consumer must make provisions for proper disposal of the wastewater.
(Code 1982, § 15.04(12)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.110. Charges for water used to prevent refreezing.
For the period in which the water is allowed to run, the consumer will be billed according to such owner's meter readings, but in no event, to exceed the average amount paid in the corresponding
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 12
billing periods of the previous two years. A new consumer will be charged the average bill for other consumers of the same class receiving service under comparable conditions.
(Code 1982, § 15.04(13)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.111. Stop boxes.
The consumer shall protect the stop box in his terrace and shall keep it free from dirt and other obstructions. The utility shall not be liable for failure to locate a stop box and shut off the water in case of a leak on the consumer's premises. Any curb stops 1 1/4 inch diameter or larger shall be Teflon coated and have the impregnated ball type of valve.
(Code 1982, § 15.04(14)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.112. Outside hydrants.
Outside hydrants after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall not be installed by consumers unless they are connected to the pipe system of the building used as the residence or business place of the consumer. If the use of such hydrant produces a serious water hammer, the owner shall correct this condition at such owner's expense by effective means such as the connection of an air chamber to form an air cushion or by changing the type of hydrant.
(Code 1982, § 15.04(15)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.113. Turning on water.
The water cannot be turned on for a consumer except by a duly authorized employee of the utility. When a plumber has completed a job, he must leave the water turned off. This does not prevent the plumber from testing the work.
(Code 1982, § 15.04(16)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.114. Service piping.
In installing new service piping if meters are to be set, the consumer shall, at his own expense, provide the proper connections for the meter. Proper connections shall include the use of gate valves before and after the meter. No piping other than copper ductile iron, or high-density
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 13
polyethylene meeting the utility’s specifications, shall be used on services from the curb stop to the meter. Where it is possible to set meters in the basement, a short nipple shall be inserted at the proper length. The nipple attached to the union and coupling shall be cut to a standard length provided by the plans of the utility, which may later be removed for the insertion of the meter into the supply line. No permit will be given to change from metered to flat rate service.
(Code 1982, § 15.04(17), Ord. Of 8-24-2006) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.115. Electrical grounding.
Any electrical grounding to the municipal water system shall be made on the curb side of the water meter and shall be exposed and visible. If the customer’s service lateral is of non-metallic material, the electrical system shall be grounded in accordance with Wisconsin Electrical Code, SPS 316, and the National Electrical Code Article 250.
(Code 1982, § 15.04(18), Code Of 8-24-2006) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.116. Water emergency. (a) Board authority. The board shall declare a water emergency within the areas of the village serviced by the utility when in its opinion, a water shortage exists. A water shortage shall be deemed to exist when the water level in the village's elevated water storage tank cannot be maintained at a constant level due to a low groundwater table, mechanical failures or for any other reason. (b) Notice of water emergency; termination. A water emergency shall not be deemed to be in effect until the board shall pass a resolution declaring the existence of such emergency at a regular or special meeting of the board and upon publication of a notice of such resolution as a class 1 notice as provided by law. Such an emergency shall remain in effect until publication of notice by the board that the emergency no longer exists. (c) Restrictions on use of water during water emergency. Except as otherwise provided, no person shall, during the existence of a water emergency, use any water except water from private sources, for sprinkling of lawns, gardens and other vegetation; nor shall any such person use any such water for the private washing of vehicles. Such uses shall be permitted only on even-numbered days of the month for those premises bearing an even-numbered house number and on the odd-numbered days of the month for those premises bearing an odd-numbered house number.
(Code 1982, § 15.151) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 14
Section 86.2.117. Cross connections. (a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: Cross connection, means any physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable water from the water utility water system and the other water from a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases or chemicals, whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure differential between the two systems. (b) Authority. Wisconsin Administrative Code NR Chapter 811 and other applicable regulations require protection of the public water system from contaminants due to backflow of contaminants through the water service connection; and because the state departments of natural resources and health and social services require the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control that will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination of all potable water systems. (c) Control and maintenance of connections. No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross connection. No interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the water utility may enter the supply or distribution system of the village unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the water utility and by the department of natural resources in accordance with Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 811.09(2). (d) Inspections. It shall be the duty of the water utility to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water system where cross connections with the public water system is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the water utility and as approved by the department of natural resources. (e) Inspection of private property served by a connection. Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the water utility shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time to examine any property served by a connection to the public water system of the water utility for cross connections and at least annually for unmetered taps for waste or unnecessary use of water. If entry is refused, such representative shall obtain a special inspection warrant under Wis. Stat. § 66.0119. On request, the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 15
(Code 1982, § 15.18(1), (3)--(5)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.118. Immediate discontinuance of service.
If it is determined by the water utility that a cross connection or any emergency endangers public health, safety or welfare and requires immediate action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the village clerk/treasurer and delivered to the customer's premises, service may immediately be discontinued. The customer shall have an opportunity for hearing under Wis. Stats. Chapter 68 within ten days of such emergency discontinuance.
(Code 1982, § 15.03(2), (7)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.119. Curb stops. (a) Charges. There shall be assessed and levied against the property and premises to be served thereby the cost per lateral at the rate on file with the clerk of the water utility, for installation of curb stops tapped to water mains of the water utility. Deferred curb stops shall be charged at the current rate in effect at the time they are placed in service. (b) Application for service. Applications shall be made in writing for the installation of curb stops on such form as shall be prescribed by the water utility and must be signed by the plumber making the connection. The connection must be inspected at the point of connection prior to backfilling by a representative of the water utility. (c) Utility installation. The water utility may, as it deems desirable, install such curb stops at such place as may appear to be necessary to serve the present use or future possible or probable use of any premises situated in the village and abutting upon water mains in or upon streets in which such mains are installed. (d) Charges to be special assessments. Such utility charges shall constitute special assessments against the premises so served or to be served or which may be served by such curb stops. It shall be the duty of the water utility to certify a list of such installations to the property owner, and such special assessments shall be entered in the tax roll against the premises so served and may be collected as general taxes are collected. If the owner of the premises makes written application within 60 days after the completion of installation of curb stops, the assessment may be paid in not more than five annual installments, each of which shall be so entered on the tax roll if such application is made; and deferred installments in such case shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum. However, in any event, the curb stop charge must be paid within 60 days from the billing date.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 16
(Code 1982, § 15.02) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.120. Deposit and guarantee rules. (a) For renters. A deposit may be required of all renters using water service to guarantee the payment of the water bill by the renter. (b) Guarantee. The utility may accept, in lieu of a cash deposit, a contract signed by a guarantor satisfactory to the utility, whereby payment of a specified sum not exceeding the cash deposit requirement is guaranteed. The term of such contract shall be indeterminate, but it shall automatically terminate when the customer gives notice to the utility of discontinuance of service at the location covered by the guarantee agreement or six months after discontinuance of service, or at the guarantor's request upon 30 days' written notice to the utility. (c) Termination of guarantee. Upon termination of a guarantee contract or whenever the utility deems the guarantee insufficient as to the amount or surety, a cash deposit or a new or additional guarantee may be required upon reasonable written notice to the consumer. The water service of any consumer who fails to comply with these requirements may be discontinued upon five days' written notice. (d) Due or unpaid bills for water service. The guarantor shall receive copies of all final discount notices sent to the consumer whose account the guarantor has guaranteed. Any due and unpaid bill for water service may be put upon the tax roll as provided in Wis. Stat. § 66.069 and shall be a lien upon the real estate to which such water was furnished as provided in such statute.
(Code 1982, § 15.08) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
DIVISION 2. OPERATING RULES
Section 86.2.221. Applicability of state rules.
The “Standard Rules” published by the state public service commission shall be applicable to the operation of the water utility.
(Code 1982, § 15.15) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 17
Section 86.2.222. Tampering with system prohibited.
Any person who shall, without authority of the board, operate any valve connected with the street or supply mains, or open any fire hydrant connected with the distribution system, except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, or who shall wantonly injure or impair the valve or hydrant, shall be in violation of this division and shall upon conviction be subject to Section 1.111. Permits for the use of hydrants for filling sprinkler carts apply only to such hydrants as are designated for such use.
(Code 1982, § 15.03(1)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.223. Water for construction use.
Water used for construction work must be covered by a written permit, which can be obtained only from the water utility. In no case will any employee of the utility turn on water for construction work unless the contractor first presents a permit. Upon completion of the construction work, the contractor must return the original permit to the water utility, together with a statement of the actual amount of construction work performed.
(Code 1982, § 15.03(2)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.224. Taking water from a consumer's premises.
Consumers shall not allow contractors, masons or other persons to take water from their premises without first showing a permit from the water utility. Any consumer failing to comply with this provision shall have water service discontinued and be deemed in violation of this division. Upon conviction, such consumer shall be subject to a fine as set forth in Section 86.2.222.
(Code 1982, § 15.03(3)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.225. Failure of supply.
Consumers taking water for supplying boilers for generating steam or for other general uses and depending upon the water pressure for supply will do so at their own risk, and the utility shall not be liable for any damages because of the lack of pressure or failure of supply.
(Code 1982, § 15.03(4)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 18
Section 86.2.226. Vacation of premises.
When premises are to be vacated, the utility shall be notified in writing at once so that it may remove the meter and shut off the supply at the curb stop. The owner of the premises shall be liable to prosecution for any damage to the property of the water department by reason of failure to notify the utility of vacancy.
(Code 1982, § 15.03(6)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
DIVISION 3. SERVICE RULES
Section 86.2.327. Handling water mains and service pipe in sewer or other trenches.
Where excavating machines are used in digging sewers, all water mains shall be maintained at the expense of the contractor. Contractors must ascertain for themselves the existence and location of all service pipes. Where they are removed, cut or damaged in the construction of a sewer, the contractor must, at his own expense, cause them to be replaced or repaired at once. He must not shut off the water service pipes from any consumer for a period exceeding six hours. Permission must be first obtained in writing from the water utility before any excavation is made. All of the provisions of Section 70.115 shall be fully complied with by any such contractor or other person who shall excavate or cause any excavation for the purposes set forth in this division.
(Code 1982, § 15.04(1)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.328. Repairs to mains.
The utility reserves the right to shut off the water in the mains temporarily, to make repairs, alterations or additions to the plant or system. When the circumstances will permit of sufficient delay, the utility will give notification by newspaper publication or otherwise of the discontinuance of the supply. No rebate or damages will be allowed to consumers for such temporary suspension of supply.
(Code 1982, § 15.04(2)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.329. Tapping mains.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 19
No persons, unless authorized by the utility, shall be permitted to tap or make any connection with any street main or distribution pipe. This work shall be done in accordance with the rules of the utility.
(Code 1982, § 15.04(3)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.330. Permit.
No water shall be taken without proper permit. Parties desiring to introduce water on their premises must make formal application to the water utility office and sign an application card or permit constituting a contract for water supplied and its specific use, which contract embodies this division as part of the contract.
(Code 1982, § 15.04(4)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.331. Service connections.
Each applicant for water service shall, at the time of making application for such service, execute and deliver to the utility a contract for such water service, agreeing to put in the service pipe from the curb line to each piece of water-using property existing at that point and owned by him where such water is desired, at the expense of such applicant, and to commence the payment for such water service when a bill is rendered. For all duplexes constructed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, a separate service pipe from the curb line shall be provided for each living unit in the duplex; and each such living unit shall have a separate water meter and remote external reader. Multiple-family units larger than duplexes may install separate meters at the discretion of the owner.
(Code 1982, § 15.04(5); Ord. of 12-7-1987, § 1) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.332. One structure for each connection.
Any permit given for water service shall require that not more than one dwelling house, apartment building, hotel, business house or factory shall be served by one connection. Any duplex constructed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be required to have a separate connection extending from the curb line to each living unit.
(Code 1982, § 15.04(6); Ord. of 12-7-1987, § 1) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 20
Section 86.2.333. Corrections.
Whenever service pipes have to be replaced when conditions contrary to the provisions of Section 86.2.332 exist, they shall be corrected. Whenever permanent street improvements are made and conditions contrary to the provisions of Section 86.2.332 exist, they shall be corrected.
(Code 1982, § 15.04(7)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.334. Laying service.
Plumbers shall not connect two services to one tap, but each building must have one distinct and separate tap and service pipe laid not less than six feet below the surface after the street is brought to grade. Each service must be provided with a stop cock and metal extension stop box outside of the premises connected with the service. Supply pipes shall not be laid across the connecting adjoining premises, whether owned by the same or different parties. Every service pipe where it enters the cellar shall be furnished with a stop and waste cock so situated below the action of frost that the water can be completely shut off and drained from the pipes when necessary to prevent freezing.
(Code 1982, § 15.04(8)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.335. Repair to services.
The service pipe from the main to and including the curb cock at the curb will be maintained and kept in repair at the expense of the utility. However, it is the duty of the consumer to maintain the service pipe from the curb to the point of use, and the utility cannot be called upon to stand liable for the loss of water which has not passed through the meter but has been wasted by leakage of defective pipes and fixtures.
(Code 1982, § 15.04(9)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.336. Permanently installed in-ground sprinkler systems.
(a) Permit required. All permanently installed in-ground sprinkler / irrigation systems require a Village of Weston in-ground sprinkler system permit and inspection.
(b) Permit fees. The application for in-ground sprinkler system permit must be accompanied by the fees as defined in the Village Fee Schedule http://westonwi.gov/documentcenter/view/931.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 21
(c) Right of way. The Village of Weston or any other party authorized to work in village rights of way are not responsible for damage to sprinkler pipes or sprinkler heads, installed in village right of way or within 18” of any village right of way. Property lines must be established by applicant before the installation of any in-ground sprinkler system. It is the applicant’s responsibility to have all underground utilities located prior to the installation of the in-ground sprinkler system.
(d) Connection. All sprinkler systems connected to the villages water distribution system must comply with Section 86.2.117 of this ordinance and Wisconsin Administrative Code § SPS 382.41 cross connection control.
(e) Site plan. The applicant must provide a drawing of the site and proposed sprinkler system to the village at the time of permit application. Sprinkler systems should not spray on or across public sidewalks, or on to any paved surfaces.
(f) Watering ban. The Village of Weston reserves the right to order any sprinkling / irrigation system shut off in the event of a water emergency or shortage.
(g) Inspection required. The permit applicant shall notify the building inspector when installation is complete and ready for final inspection.
(h) Violations. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall upon conviction thereof, be subject to the forfeitures and penalties provided under Section 1.111 of the Village of Weston Ordinances.
(Ord. 4-24-2009) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 16-024, 4/20/2016; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
DIVISION 4. METERS
Section 86.2.436. Installation.
Meters will be furnished and placed by the water utility and are not to be disconnected or interfered with by the consumer. All meters shall be so located that they shall be preserved from obstructions and allow easy access for reading and inspection, such location to be designated by the utility. All piping within the building must be supplied by the consumer. If additional meters are desired by the consumer, he shall pay for all piping in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of maintenance and depreciation as set by the board.
(Code 1982, § 15.05) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 22
Section 86.2.437. Repairs. (a) Utility to repair. Meters will be repaired by the water utility, and the cost of such repairs caused by ordinary wear and tear will be borne by the utility. (b) Damage caused by owner. Any damage to a meter resulting from the carelessness of the owner of the premises, his agent or tenant, or from the negligence of any one of them to properly secure and protect the meter, including any damage that may result from allowing a water meter to become frozen, to become injured from the presence of hot water or steam in the meter shall be paid for by the consumer or the owner of the premises. (c) Interfering with proper metering. When the utility has reasonable evidence that a consumer is obtaining his supply of water, in whole or in part, by means of devices or methods used to stop or interfere with the proper metering of the utility service being delivered to his equipment, the utility reserves the right to estimate and present immediately a bill for service unmetered as a result of such interference; and such bill shall be payable subject to a 24-hour disconnection of service. When the utility shall have disconnected the consumer for any such reason, the utility will reconnect the consumer upon the following conditions:
(1) The consumer will be required to deposit with the utility an amount sufficient to guarantee the payment of the consumer's bills for utility service to the utility.
(2) The consumer will be required to pay the utility for any damages to its equipment of the consumer's premises due to such stoppage or interference with its metering.
(3) The consumer must further agree to comply with reasonable requirements to protect the utility against further losses.
(Code 1982, § 15.06) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.438. Complaint meter tests.
If a consumer demands that a test be made of his meter in addition to the periodic or installation test, he shall pay a test fee set by the village board in the village fee schedule per inch of nominal size or fraction thereof. If the meter is found fast in excess of two percent, the payment for the test will be refunded and the usual adjustment made in the past bills.
(Code 1982, § 15.07) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 23
DIVISION 5. CONNECTIONS, FEES AND CHARGES
Section 86.2.539. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: Roominghouses, means homes and apartments having suites of one, two or more rooms with toilet facilities, but without kitchen for cooking. Suites, in houses or apartments where complete housekeeping functions such as cooking are not exercised, means "roominghouses." Unit of service, means any residential or small commercial aggregation of space or area occupied for a distinct purpose, such as a residence, apartment, flat, store or office, which is equipped with one or more fixtures for rendering water service, separate and distinct from other users. Each unit of service shall be regarded as one consumer, with the surcharge for additional consumers on a meter assessed accordingly.
(Code 1982, § 15.11(1), (2)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
__________
Cross References--Definitions Generally, § 1.101.
Section 86.2.540. Mandatory hookup.
The owner of each parcel of land adjacent to a water main on which there exists a building usable for human habitation, which parcel is located in a block through which the water system is extended, or where the water system is otherwise available to such parcel, shall connect to the water system within one year from the date of a written connection notice from the water utility. Upon failure to do so, the water utility shall cause the connection to be made; and the property owner shall be responsible for all connection costs. If such costs are not paid within 30 days of written demand for payment, the costs shall be assessed against the property of the owner and collected in the same manner that real estate taxes are collected. However, the owner may, within 30 days after the completion of the connection, file a written request with the water utility for the payment of such costs in ten equal monthly installments, together with interest at a rate to be determined by the utility. The unpaid balance shall constitute a special tax lien against the property pursuant to the requirements of Wis. Stat. § 281.45.
(Ord. of 4-11-1988, § 1) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
State Law References--Authority to order house connections, Wis. Stat. § 281.45.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 24
Section 86.2.541. Failure to connect. (a) Standby charge.
(1) Each lot or equivalent parcel of land shall pay a charge prescribed in the village fee schedule or public service commission order for water facilities available but not connected. Where more than one lot or equivalent is used as a unit and a customer is connected, the total charge for general water service to such customer shall be not less than the standby charge applicable to the several lots.
(2) An equivalent parcel of land shall be each full 120 feet where unplotted, except that any isolated parcel of less than 120 feet shall be equivalent to a lot. (b) Billing. Standby service shall be billed annually unless the customer requests quarterly billing. Annual standby charges will be certified to the village clerk/treasurer each year, and the village clerk/treasurer will insert such charges as a tax against such lot or parcel of real estate. Charges under quarterly billing will be subject to the same billing rule as a general service customer. (c) Penalty. Upon failure to connect as provided in subsection (a) of this section, a forfeiture shall be payable in the sum of $100.00 per month per equivalent meter. The term "equivalent meter" is defined in Section 86.3.151. Each month wherein the owner of property fails to connect to the water system shall constitute a separate offense. The owner shall also be chargeable with the costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days for each offense.
(Ord. of 7-16-1990, § 1) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.542. Water utility rates. (a) Rates of service. The rates for water used in the village are the current rates as established by the most recent public service commission ruling, on file with the clerk of the water utility. (b) Payment of bills. Bills for metered water service are rendered quarterly and become due and payable on the first day of the month following the period for which service is rendered. A penalty of five percent will be added to any bill not paid within 15 days from the date of the bill. If the bill is not paid within 20 days, the customer will be given written notice that the bill is delinquent and that, unless payment or satisfactory arrangement for payment is made within the next five days, service will be discontinued without further notice, and a reconnection charge prescribed in the village fee schedule shall be paid before water service is restored.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 25
(Code 1982, § 15.10) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.543. Consumer's premises with several buildings.
When a consumer's premises has several buildings, each supplied with service and metered separately, the full service charge will be billed for each meter separately, and the readings not cumulated. If these buildings are all used in the same business and are not connected by the consumer, they can be metered in one place. If the utility, for its own convenience, installs more than one meter, the readings will be cumulated for billing.
(Code 1982, § 15.11(3)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.544. Public service. (a) Municipal purposes. Water service supplied to village buildings, schools, etc., shall be metered and regular service rates applied. (b) Water used for flushing sewers, similar services. Water used for flushing sewers, street sprinkling, flooding skating rinks, drinking fountains, filling swimming pools, etc., shall be metered where meters can be set to measure the service. Where it is impossible to measure the service, the department of public works shall estimate the gallons of water used, based on the pressure, size of opening, and period of time water is allowed to flow. The estimated quantity shall be billed at the rate as set by current public service commission ruling, on file with the water utility clerk.
(Code 1982, § 15.12) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.545. Building and construction water service.
Metered service rates shall apply to all building and construction water service.
(Code 1982, § 15.13) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.2.546. Private fire protection service. (a) Private fire protection service shall consist of connections for automatic sprinkler systems, standpipes (where they are connected permanently or continuously to the mains), and private hydrant systems.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 26
(b) Quarterly demand charges for private fire protection service are as outlined by the public service commission, on file with the water utility clerk.
(Code 1982, § 15.14) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
ARTICLE III. WELLS
Section 86.3.147. Authority.
Whereas, Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 810.16, directs suppliers of water for municipal water systems to require the abandonment of all unused, unsafe or noncomplying wells located on the premises served by their system, and to provide a permit system to allow retention of safe and code complying wells, by local ordinance or water utility rule, to eliminate sources of unsafe water and to prevent such wells from becoming channels for vertical movement of contaminated water and to eliminate all existing cross-connections and prevent all future cross-connections.
[Created via Ord. No 16-024, 4/20/2016; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.3.148. Purpose.
To protect public health, safety and welfare and to prevent contamination of groundwater by assuring that unused, unsafe or noncomplying wells or wells which may act as conduits for contamination of groundwater or wells which may be illegally cross-connected to the municipal water system, are properly maintained or abandoned.
[Created via Ord. No 16-024, 4/20/2016; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.3.149. Applicability.
This Ordinance applies to all wells located on premises served by the Weston Water Utility municipal water system. Utility customers outside the jurisdiction of the municipal system may be required under contract agreement, or utility rule, to adopt and enforce equivalent ordinances within their jurisdictions for purpose stated in Section 86.3.147 above.
[Created via Ord. No 16-024, 4/20/2016; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.3.150. Definitions.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 27
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Municipal water system means a community water system owned by a city, village, county, town, town sanitary district, utility district, public inland lake and rehabilitation district, municipal water district or a federal, state, county, or municipal owned institution for congregate care or correction, or a privately-owned water utility serving the foregoing. Noncomplying, means a well or pump installation which does not comply with Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 812.42, Standards for Existing Installations, and which has not been granted a variance pursuant to Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 812.43. Pump installation, means the pump and related equipment used for withdrawing water from a well, including the discharge piping, the underground connections, pit less adapters, pressure tanks, pits, sampling faucets and well seals or caps. Unsafe, means a well or pump installation which produces water which is bacteriologically contaminated or contaminated with substances which exceed the drinking water standards of Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters NR 140 or NR 809, or for which a Health Advisory has been issued by the Department of Natural Resources. Unused, means a well or pump installation which is not used or does not have a functional pumping system. Well, means a drill hole or other excavation or opening deeper than it is wide that extends more than 10 feet below surface, constructed for the purpose of obtaining groundwater. Well abandonment, means the proper filling and sealing of a well according to the provisions of Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter § NR 812.26.
(Ord. of 7-1-1991, § 1(3)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 16-024, 4/20/2016; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
_________
Cross References--Definitions generally, § 1.101.
Section 86.3.151. Abandonment required.
All wells on premises served by the municipal water system shall be properly abandoned in accordance with Section 86.3.153 of this ordinance by April 20, 2016, or not later than 30 days from the date of connection to the municipal water system, unless a valid well operation permit has been issued to the well owner by Weston Municipal Utilities under the terms of Section 86.3.152 of this ordinance.
[Created via Ord. No 16-024, 4/20/2016; Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 28
Section 86.3.152. Well operation permit.
Owners of wells on premises served by the municipal water system wishing to retain their wells for any use shall make application for a well operation permit for each well no later than 30 days after connection to the municipal water system. Weston Municipal Utilities shall grant a permit to a well owner to operate a well for a period not to exceed 5 years providing all conditions of this section are met. A well operation permit may be renewed by submitting an application verifying that the conditions of this section are met. Weston Municipal Utilities, or its agent, shall conduct inspections and water quality tests, or require inspections and water quality tests, to be conducted at the applicant’s expense to obtain or verify information necessary for consideration of a permit application or renewal. Permit applications and renewals shall be made on forms provided by the Utility Clerk.
(a) The following conditions must be met for issuance or renewal of a well operation permit:
(1) The well and pump installation shall meet the Standards for Existing Installations described in Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 812.42,. The well and pump system shall be evaluated by a licensed well driller or pump installer and certified on the Wisconsin Well and Pressure System Inspection Form 3300-221 to comply with Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 812 Subchapter. IV, prior to issuing the initial permit and no less than every 10 years afterwards.
(2) The well and pump shall have a history of producing safe water evidenced by at least 1 coliform bacteria sample. In areas where the Department of Natural Resources has determined that groundwater aquifers are contaminated with substances other than bacteria, additional chemical tests may be required to document the safety of the water.
(3) There shall be no cross-connections between the well’s pump installation or distribution piping and the municipal water system.
(4) The water from the private well shall not discharge into a drain leading directly to a public sewer utility unless properly metered and authorized by the sewer utility.
(5) The private well shall have a functional pumping system.
(6) The proposed use of the private well shall be justified as reasonable in addition to water provided by the municipal water system. (b) A property owner may request issuance of a well operation permit for a newly constructed drilled or driven-point well, for a period not to exceed five years, provided the following conditions are met:
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 29
(1) The owner of the proposed private well must provide evidence of the DNR issued well notification number; and
(2) Following completion of the new private well construction, the well owner must furnish a copy of the DNR approved well construction report, which also indicates the assigned Wisconsin Unique Well Number (WUWN) and the owner must comply with all conditions described in (a)(1) through (a)(6) of this section.
(Ord. of 7-1-1991, § 1(5); Ord. of 2-18-2002, § 1; Ord. of 4-9-2008; Ord. of 4-10-2009) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No 16-024, 4/20/2016][Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.3.153. Well abandonment procedures.
(a) All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of this section shall be abandoned according to the procedures and methods of Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter § NR 812.26(3) . All debris, pump, piping, unsealed liners and any other obstructions which may interfere with sealing operations shall be removed prior to abandonment.
(b) The owner of the well, or the owner's agent, shall notify the Weston Municipal Utilities at least 48 hours in advance of any well abandonment activities. The abandonment of the well may be observed or verified by personnel of the municipal system.
(c) An abandonment report form, supplied by the Department of Natural Resources, shall be submitted to the Utility Clerk and the Department of Natural Resources within 30 days of the completion of the well abandonment. The form must be completed by the licensed well driller, pump installer, or certified operator performing the abandonment.
(Ord. of 7-1-1991, § 1(1), (2), (6)) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 16-024, 4/20/2016][Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.3.154. Penalties.
(a) Violations, Injunctions, Abatement, and Removal. It shall be unlawful to violate any of the provisions of this section. In case of any violation, the Village Board may institute appropriate legal action or proceedings to enjoin a violation of this section, or seek abatement or removal. In addition, those actions commenced by the Village may seek a forfeiture or penalty as outlined in this section.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 30
(b) Any person, firm, or corporation, or agent, employee, or contractor of such, who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists enforcement of any provision of this section, shall upon conviction, pay forfeiture not to exceed $500.00 for each offense, together with the costs of prosecution. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. of 7-1-1991, § 1(7); Ord. of 4-9-2008; Ord. of 4-10-2009) [Amended via Ord. No 16-024, 4/20/2016] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
ARTICLE IV. SEWERAGE UTILITY*
Section 86.4.101 General Provisions.
1. Purpose. The Village of Weston has provided facilities for the collection and conveyance of wastewater to promote the health, safety, and convenience of its people and to safeguard public water resources. The Village of Weston does not operate a wastewater treatment facility. Wastewater from the northwest part of the Village flows through the City of Schofield prior to being treated at the Wausau Wastewater Treatment facility (WWTF). The balance of the wastewater produced by the Village flows to the Rib Mountain Metropolitan Sewerage District (RMMSD). This Ordinance promotes the standards set forth by the Wausau WWTF and RMMSD.
In furtherance of these goals, this Ordinance regulates the use of public and private sewers and drains, disposal of holding tank wastes into the public sewers, and the discharge of waters and wastes into the Village of Weston Sewage Collection System. It provides information regarding wastewater treatment service charges, sets uniform requirements for dischargers into the Weston Sewage Collection System and sets requirements for connections to sanitary sewers within the Village. This Ordinance provides a means for determining wastewater volumes, constituents, and characteristics; the setting of charges and fees; and the issuing of permits to certain Users. Revenues derived from the application of this Ordinance shall be used to defray the Village’s costs of operating and maintaining the wastewater collection system and contribute to the operation and maintenance of the Wausau WWTF and RMMSD wastewater treatment facilities as per the contracts/agreements between the Village and these two entities. These revenues also provide sufficient funds for capital outlay, debt service costs, and capital improvements. This money enables the Village/Wausau WWTF and RMMSD to comply with administrative provisions, water quality requirements, toxic and pretreatment effluent standards, and other discharge criteria which are required or authorized by the State of Wisconsin and/or Federal law.
The primary objectives of this Article are:
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 31
(a). To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Weston Sewage Collection System which will interfere with normal operation of the system and cause violation of the Wausau WWTF or RMMSD’s Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) permits or contaminate the resulting municipal bio-solids;
(b). To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Weston Sewage Collection System which do not receive adequate treatment in the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) and which will pass through the system into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
(c). To protect both Village, Wausau WWTF and RMMSD personnel who may be affected by wastewater and bio-solids from the Weston collection system;
(d). To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and bio-solids from the Weston Sewage Collection System;
(e). To prevent physical damage to the Weston Sewage Collection System, Wausau WWTF and RMMSD treatment systems;
(f). To enable Weston to comply with the Wausau WWTF WPDES permit and RMMSD WPDES permit conditions, bio-solids use, and disposal requirements, and any other Federal or State laws to which the Weston Sewerage System is subject.
This Article shall apply to all persons in the Village and to persons outside of the Village who are, by contract or agreement with the Village or Users of the Village collection system or convey wastewater through any portion of the collection system owned and operated by the Village of Weston. Except as otherwise provided in this Article, the commissioners and its employees of the Weston Municipal Utilities as appointed by the Village Board of the Village of Weston shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Article.
Per the Wausau WWTF Wastewater System User Ordinance and the RMMSD Wastewater System User Ordinance, every connection to these wastewater collection and treatment facilities shall be subject to the respective ordinances; this includes those Users served by the Village Sewage Collection System.
All persons now receiving service from the Weston Municipal Utilities or who may hereafter make application therefore, are deemed to be bound by rules and regulations of the Utility, and such State and Federal statutes and administrative rules as are applicable.
2. Right of Entry and Access.
(a) General Right of Entry. Any duly authorized employee or representative of the Village, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be allowed access to
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 32
all property serviced by the Weston Municipal Utilities, for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing of discharges to the wastewater collection facilities and for the purpose of inspection, repair, or maintenance of any portion of the Village, Wausau WWTF and/or RMMSD’s wastewater facilities.
(b) Right to Enter Easements. Any duly authorized employee or representative of the Village bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the Village holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the Sewerage System lying within said easement, all subject to the terms, if any, of such easement.
(c) Safety. While performing the necessary work on private premises referred to in subs 1. and 2. above, the duly authorized employee or representative of the Village or its representatives shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the User. The User shall be held harmless for injury or death to the Village’s duly authorized employees or representatives. The Village shall indemnify the User against loss or damage to its property by said duly authorized employees or representatives and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the User and growing out of the work being performed, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the User to maintain safe conditions.
3. Obstructions to Village Facilities.
(a) All persons, firms, or corporations lawfully having buildings, structures, works, conduits, mains, pipes, tracks, or other physical obstructions in, over or under the public lands, avenues, streets, alleys or highways which block or impede the progress of Village facilities when in the course of construction, establishment, or repair shall upon reasonable notice by the Village, promptly so shift, adjust, accommodate, or remove the same at the cost and expense of such persons, firms, or corporations, as fully to meet the exigency occurring such notice.
(b) Any person, firm, or corporation who shall fail to comply with the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 86.4.117.
4. General Rules of Interpretation.
(a) Superseding Previous Ordinances. This Ordinance supersedes all previous regulations and Ordinances of the Village which are in conflict herewith.
(b) The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this Ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other part of this Ordinance which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 33
(c) Amendment. The Village reserves the right to amend this Ordinance in whole or in part whenever it may deem necessary, but such right will be exercised only after due notice to all persons concerned and proper hearing on the proposed amendment.
(d) The Village shall be responsible for the interpretation and execution of the provisions of this Ordinance.
[Repealed, recreated and renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section. 86.4.102 Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this Ordinance shall be as follows:
(1) Act or “the Act”: shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Act, also known as the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.) as amended.
(2) Applicable Pretreatment Standard: shall mean the most restrictive provisions contained in any pretreatment limitations or prohibitive standards (enacted by any Federal, State or local governmental entity) and incorporated in this Ordinance, which Applicable Pretreatment Standard shall be complied with by non-domestic wastewater Users of the Sewerage System.
(3) Approving Authority: shall mean the Public Works and Utility Committee that manages the Weston Municipal Utilities.
(4) Authorized Representative of the User; shall mean:
(a) If the User is a corporation:
(i) The president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
(ii) The manager of one or more manufacturing facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make decisions which govern the operation of the facility, make major capital investment recommendations, initiate and direct comprehensive measures to assure long-term compliance with environmental laws, can ensure the necessary systems are established to gather complete and accurate information for the report and where authority to sign documents has been delegated to the manager according to the corporation’s procedures.
(b) If the User is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 34
(c) If the User is a Federal, State, or local government facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee.
(d) An authorized representative of the individual designated above if:
(i) Such representative is responsible for overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge into the collection system originates;
(ii) The authorization is in writing; and,
(iii) The written authorization is submitted to the Weston Director of Utilities.
(5) Best Management Practices (BMPs): shall mean structural or non-structural measures, practices, operating procedures, schedules of activities, treatment requirements, techniques or devices employed to minimize or treat the discharge of pollutants into the Sewerage System; to implement prohibitions listed in Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 211.10(1) or (2); or to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage areas. BMPs may be specified:
(i) by EPA and/or DNR categorical regulations, or
(ii) by the Village for non-significant Industrial Users Section 86.4.102(31), Public Authority Users Section 86.4.102(55), and Commercial Users Section 86.4.102(12) Users.
(6) Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD5): shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions in five days at 20oC, expressed in milligrams per liter. Determination of BOD5 shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. Acceptable test method(s) shall be as indicated in Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 219.
(7) Building Drain (sanitary): shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from all soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer.
(8) Building Sewer: shall mean the extension from the building drain beginning at the immediate outside foundation wall to its connection with the sewage collection system or other point of disposal that conveys sanitary and/or industrial wastewater. See also “Lateral”.
(9) Bypass: shall mean the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user’s treatment facility.
(10) Categorical Pretreatment Standard: shall mean National Pretreatment Standards specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 35
discharged or introduced into a sanitary sewer collection system by specific industrial discharges.
(11) Clear Water: shall mean wastewater other than storm water, having no impurities or where impurities are below a minimum concentration considered harmful by the Village, including but not limited to noncontact cooling water and potable water discharged to the Sewerage System to prevent freezing of underground pipes in the water system.
(12) Commercial User: shall mean a business, not-for-profit organization, or other institution that provides goods or services and that takes service for non-residential purposes. churches, private schools, private colleges and universities, co-op, and associations are non-governmental entities and are considered commercial users Public Service Commission PSC 185.12(3u).
(13) Compatible Pollutant: shall mean BOD, suspended solids, phosphorus, pH, or fecal coliform bacteria, and such additional pollutants as are now or may be in the future specified and controlled in the WPDES permit issued to the Wausau WWTF or RMMSD.
(14) Contract Community. A city, village, town, sanitary or utility district, or a county, State, or Federal agency which is billed by the Village for sewerage services.
(15) Cooling water: shall mean the water discharged from any use such as air-conditioning, cooling or refrigeration whose character undergoes no chemical change during such use.
(16) Debt Service Charge: shall mean the annual payment of principal and interest for the retirement of debt issued to finance the cost of capital improvements to the Sewerage System. This shall include the administrative costs associated with the debt retirement.
(17) Detrimental Effect: shall mean a discharge to the Sewerage System that either alone or in combination with other discharges would pass through or interfere with the operation of the Sewerage System, cause the Wausau WWTF or RMMSD to violate its WPDES permit, or create or constitute a hazard to human health or the environment.
(18) Discharger: means any person, municipality, or other entity that discharges anything, without limitation, directly or indirectly into a sewer system or any part thereof. Also, see definition for “User”.
(19) DNR: shall mean the State of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(20) Domestic Wastewater: shall mean the combination of liquid and water carried wastes discharged from toilets and other sanitary plumbing facilities in the amount of approximately 100 gallons per capita per day from residential users and 15 to 20 gallons per employee per day from a place of business or industry and in which five-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5), total suspended solids (TSS), total kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN), and total phosphorus meet the following levels:
(a) A BOD5 concentration less than or equal to 250 mg/l;
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 36
(b) A TSS concentration less than or equal to 250 mg/l;
(c) A TKN concentration less than or equal to 40 mg/l as N;
(d) A Total Phosphorus concentration less than or equal to 8 mg/l as P.
(21) Effluent: shall mean wastewater, water or other liquid after some degree of treatment flowing out of any wastewater treatment facility.
(22) Environmental Protection Agency (EPA): shall mean the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director or other duly authorized official of said agency.
(23) Equivalent Meter: shall mean one unit per meter. One unit is defined as one residential housing unit or 175 gallons per day and which utilizes a meter size of either five-eighths inch or three-fourths inch.
(24) Fats, Oils, and Grease: shall mean a group of substances including fats, waxes, free fatty acids, calcium and magnesium soaps, mineral oils, and certain other non-fatty materials as analyzed in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. Acceptable test method(s) shall be as indicated in Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 219.
(25) Floatable Oil: shall mean fat, oil, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered to be free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated to the extent that it does not result in increased maintenance requirements for the sewerage system.
(26) Garbage: shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooling, and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
(27) Grant: shall mean Federal and/or State financial assistance for the construction of improvements to the sewerage system.
(28) Hauled Waste: shall mean wastewater or waste sludges transported to and discharged to the collection system. This includes but is not limited to Holding Tank Wastes and Septage.
(29) Holding Tank Wastes: shall mean the liquid or solid contents of holding tanks or portable restrooms.
(30) Incompatible Pollutants: shall mean wastewater with pollutants that will adversely affect or disrupt the transmission of wastewater in the collection system and the quality of wastewater treatment if discharged to the sewerage system.
(31) Industrial User: shall mean a user who engages in the manufacture or production of goods and discharges wastewater other than sanitary sewage into the Sewage System. Public Service Commission PSC 185.12(10e).
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 37
(32) Industrial Wastewater: shall mean any trade or process wastewater as distinct from domestic wastewater.
(33) Infiltration: shall mean the water entering a sanitary sewer system and service connections from the ground through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls.
(34) Inflow: shall mean the water discharged into a sanitary sewer system and service connections from such sources as, but not limited to; roof leaders, cellar, yard, and area drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm sewers and combined sewers, catch basins, storm waters, surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage.
(35) Interceptor: shall mean any sewer which receives flow from a number of sanitary sewers or outlets, except as defined separately within the context of the Ordinance.
(36) Interference: a discharge that alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the flow of sewage in the sewerage system, and/or inhibits or disrupts the sewage treatment plant, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the Wausau WWTF and RMMSD’s WPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any and all applicable Federal, State and local regulations.
(37) Lateral: shall mean the extension from the building drain beginning at the immediate outside foundation wall to its connection with the sewage system or other point that conveys sanitary and/or industrial wastewater. See also “Building Sewer.”
(38) Main: shall mean the principal pipe or conduit in the Sewerage System that collects and conveys sanitary and/or industrial sewage.
(39) May: shall be permissive.
(40) Multi-Family Residential User: shall mean a user taking service for a building that is intended primarily for residential purposes, has three or more dwelling units, and if served by a single water meter Public Service Commission PSC 185.12(11m).
(41) Natural Outlet: shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pool, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.
(42) Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Cost: shall mean all cost associated with the operation and maintenance of the sewerage system, as well as the cost associated with periodic equipment replacement necessary for maintaining capacities and performance of the sewerage system.
(43) Ordinance: shall mean a statute or regulation enacted by a governing authority.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 38
(44) Pass Through: A discharge which exits the sewage treatment plant into the waters of the State of Wisconsin in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of Wausau WWTF or RMMSD’s WPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
(45) Person: shall mean any individual, firm, company, partnership, municipality, association, private or public, society, corporation, cooperative, institution, enterprise, government agency, group, or other entity.
(46) pH: shall mean the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration in moles per liter of solution. Determination of pH shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. Acceptable test method(s) shall be as indicated in Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 219.
(47) Pollutant: shall mean any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive substance, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water.
(48) PPM (Parts Per Million): shall mean a ratio by weight as the parts per million value (or milligram per liter value) multiplied by the factor 8.345 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
(49) Pretreatment: shall mean reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to, or in lieu of, discharging such pollutants into the sewerage system.
(50) Pretreatment Program: shall mean a program administered by the Village of Weston, City of Wausau WWTF or RMMSD that follows the criteria established in Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 211.
(51) Pretreatment Standards: shall mean all applicable Federal, State and local statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations which apply to Industrial Users or which contain pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the DNR in accordance with Wis. Stats. Chapter 283. This term shall include both prohibited discharge standards set forth in or established under Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 211 and categorical pretreatment standards set forth in Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 211 and in Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters NR 221 through NR 297.
(52) Properly Shredded Garbage: shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely with the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in dimension.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 39
(53) Private Interceptor Main Sewer: Private Interceptor Main Sewer: shall mean a sewer serving two or more buildings and not part of the municipal sewer system per Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 110.03(26m).
(54) Private Sewage System: shall mean a system comprised of a septic tank and effluent absorption area designed for the purpose of on-site processing of sewage. This term shall also include holding tanks and other private sewage storage or disposal systems.
(55) Public Authority User: shall mean a user that is a department, agency, or entity of the local, state, or federal government, including a public school, college, or university Public Service Commission § PSC 185.12(17m).
(56) Replacement Costs: shall mean expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the sewerage system to maintain the capacity and performance for which the sewerage system facilities were designed and constructed.
(57) Residential User: shall mean a user taking service for residential or domestic purposes but does not include a multi-family residential customer Public Service Commission PSC § 185.12(20g).
(58) RMMSD: shall mean the Rib Mountain Metropolitan Sewerage District.
(59) Wausau WWTF: shall mean the Wausau Wastewater Treatment Facility.
(60) Sanitary Sewer: shall mean the sewers which carry sewage, and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
(61) Septage: shall mean the liquid or solid contents of septic tanks, dosing chambers, seepage beds, seepage pits, seepage trenches, or privies. Septage does not include waste from a grease trap or grease interceptor.
(62) Sewage: shall mean any combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residential, multi-family residential, commercial, public authority, and industrial users, together with unintentionally admitted infiltration/inflow; also referred to as “wastewater”.
(63) Sewage Collection System: shall mean a system of sanitary sewer mains owned, maintained, operated, and controlled by the Village of Weston, City of Schofield, City of Wausau and RMMSD. The facilities which convey wastewater from individual structures, from private property to the street right-of-way, or its equivalent, are specifically excluded from the definition, with the exception of pumping units and pressurized lines for individual structures or groups of structures when such units are owned and maintained by the Village. See Sewerage System Section 86.4.102(65) below.
(64) Sewage Treatment Plant: shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures used by The Wausau WWTF and/or RMMSD for treating sewage from various municipalities, including the Village of Weston.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 40
(65) Sewerage System: shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage, except plumbing inside and in connection with building served, and service lateral, from building to street right-of-way. See Sewage Collection System Section 86.4.102(63) above.
(66) Sewer Service Charge: shall mean a service charge levied on users of the sewerage system and shall include the User Charge Section 86.4.102(76) and the Debt Service Charge Section 86.4.102(16) as defined in this Ordinance.
(67) Shall: shall mean mandatory. See also “May”.
(68) Slugs: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharges of this Ordinance. Slugs are any discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause Interference or Pass Through, or in any other way violate the Wausau WWTF’s or RMMSD’s WPDES Permit conditions.
(69) Standard Methods: shall mean Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater as published by American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation, latest edition.
(70) Storm Drain (sometimes termed Storm Sewer): shall mean a Village sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage but excludes domestic and industrial wastewaters, other than unpolluted cooling water.
(71) Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN): shall mean the total of organic and ammonia nitrogen present in a wastewater sample. Determination of TKN shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. Acceptable test method(s) shall be as indicated in the Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 219.
(72) Total Phosphorus: shall mean total phosphorus in wastewater which may be present in any of three principle forms: orthophosphate, polyphosphate, and organic phosphate. Determination of total phosphorus shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. Acceptable test method(s) shall be as indicated in theWisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 219.
(73) Total Suspended Solids (TSS): shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that are removable by laboratory filtering. Determination of TSS shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. Acceptable test method(s) shall be as indicated in the Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 219.
(74) Toxic Pollutant: shall mean those pollutants or combination of pollutants, including disease-causing agents, which after discharge and upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation or assimilation into any organism, either directly from the environment or indirectly by
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 41
ingestion through food chains, will, on the basis of information available to the DNR, cause death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutations, or physiological malfunctions in such organisms or their offspring.
(75) User: shall mean any person, owner, occupant, firm, partnership, corporation, municipality, cooperative organization, governmental agency, political entity, etc., discharging wastewater to the sewerage system and is the party billed for the use of utility service at a given premises Public Service Commission § PSC 185.12(6).
(76) User Service Charge: shall mean a charge levied on users of the Village of Weston sewerage system for the cost of operation and maintenance of the Village of Weston’s collection and conveyance system, Wausau WWTF sewerage system and RMMSD sewerage system as defined in Section 86.4.114 of this Ordinance. The user charge shall be contained within the Sewer Service Charge as created by this Ordinance. The User Charge shall also include Replacement Costs as defined in Section 86.4.102(57) of this Ordinance, administrative costs associated with operation and maintenance of the sewerage system, and sewer service charge billing costs.
(77) User Classes: shall mean residential, multi-family residential, commercial, industrial and public authority categories of Users.
(78) Unaltered Water: shall mean waters which are not changed chemically or physically as a result of use.
(79) Village: shall mean the governing authority of the Village of Weston, or their duly authorized deputies, agents, or representatives.
(80) Wastewater: shall mean any discharge from any residential, multi-family residential, commercial, public authority, or industrial user into the sewerage system. See also Domestic Wastewater Section 86.4.102(20) and Industrial Wastewater Section 86.4.102(32).
(81) Watercourse: shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(82) Wisconsin Administrative Code: shall mean the published rules of executive agencies having rule-making authority for the State of Wisconsin, latest edition.
(83) WPDES: shall mean Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit as issued by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(84) WWTP: shall mean any wastewater treatment works and the sewers and associated appurtenances discharging thereto that are owned and operated by the Wausau WWTF and/or RMMSD.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 42
NOTE: Singular or plural: when permitted by the context, use or the singular shall be constructed to include the plural and of the plural to include the singular.
[Repealed, recreated and renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017, Amended Ord. No 18-001, 01/20/2018]
Section 86.4.103 Sewer Service Area.
The service area of the Village of Weston shall include those areas inside the corporate limits of the Village and those areas currently contracting with the Village for service that are located outside of the Village boundaries. A current map of the Village’s service area shall be maintained by the Village. The sewer service area referenced in this Ordinance is limited to those areas currently being served by the Village.
[Repealed, recreated and renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.4.104 Obligations of Contract Communities.
(1) In the event of a bypass or spill of wastewater from any sanitary sewer owned or operated by a Contract Community which results in a sanitary sewer overflow or building backup, the Contract Community shall notify the Village and the Department of Natural Resources immediately upon becoming aware of the situation. The notification shall include the location of the bypass/spill, the reason for the bypass/spill, when the situation is expected to be corrected, and an estimate of the volume or rate of the bypass/spill in accordance with Wisconsin Administrative. Code § NR 210.21 (4) to (6). A corrective action plan and other necessary requirements to eliminate future sanitary sewer overflows at this location shall be developed by the Contract Community which complies with Wisconsin Administrative. Code § NR 210.23(4)(f).
(2) Contract Communities shall submit applicable parts of the Compliance Maintenance Annual Report (CMAR) to the Village for review upon request.
(3) Contract Communities and their Users shall follow Best Management Practices applicable to their particular discharge which may be developed or cited by the Village for the discharge of any constituents, substances, materials, waters, or waste where the Village determines that following these BMPs is necessary to meet the objectives of this Section or the conditions of the Wausau WWTF WPDES Permit and/or the RMMSD WPDES permit.
(4) Contract Communities may be required to submit a system evaluation and capacity assurance plan should any of the conditions exist as defined in Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 210.24.
[Repealed, recreated and renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.4.105 Connections to Village Sewage Collection System.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 43
(1) Connections Required:
(a) Persons owning dwellings or other buildings used for manufacturing or trade within the jurisdiction of the Village, that generate domestic and/or industrial wastewater, shall cause such buildings to be connected to the Village Sewage Collection System within one year after the Sewage Collection System is accessible thereto, except as stated in paragraphs (b) and (c) below.
(b) Persons owning dwellings or other buildings with pre-existing functioning private sewage systems fronted by a sewer main are not required to connect to the Village Sewage Collection System until 1) said system fails; or 2) upon sale of the property; or 3) 10 years after the property has been fronted by a main extension.. The persons owning and operating the failing private sewage system shall notify the Director of Utilities within 24 hours of system failure and abandon said system in accordance with State, Federal and local regulations and connect to the Village Sewage Collection System within 30 days of system failure.
(c) Persons owning dwellings or other buildings not fronted by a main may be required to connect. The Village will determine the availability of sewer service. If it is determined that sewer service is not available, connection to the Sewage Collection System will not be required to connect and said persons shall install, maintain and operate functioning private sewage systems. However if it is determined that sewer service is available, said persons shall be required to connect to the Sewage Collection System and pay such costs as the Village determines are associated with providing service to said person’s property under terms as the Village sets forth.
(d) Upon determination of non-compliance, the Village shall issue an order requiring such person to connect to the Sewage Collection System. Such an order shall be delivered to the person by registered mail. The person shall report the day of the completion thereof to the Village. In the event that the person does not comply with such order, the Village may bring an action for the violation of this Ordinance or proceed to have such connections made by a licensed plumber, under the direction of the Village, and charge the cost of such work as a special charge against such property.
(e) The person, or the person’s contractor, shall obtain the necessary Village permits prior to commencing work required to make said connection.
(f) The Village shall maintain sewer mains and service laterals within the street right-of-way within the boundaries of the sanitary sewer service area without expense to the Users, except when they are damaged as a result of negligence, intentional conduct, or an Ordinance violation on the part of the User. All sewer services from the street right-of-way line, to and throughout the User’s premises, must be maintained free of defective conditions, by and at the expense of the User.
(2) General Requirements for Sewer Connections:
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 44
(a) New connections to the Sewage Collection System will be allowed only if there is available capacity in all of the downstream Sewerage System.
(b) No unauthorized person shall alter, disturb, or uncover any connections with or opening into any sewerage system facility without first obtaining written permission from the Village.
(c) Each separate cut or opening in any street, alley, or public thoroughfare shall require payment of a minimum fee as specified by the Village. Fees are to be paid upon application for permit. An excavation permit shall be applied for and received before excavating in any street, alley, or other public way to repair, alter, or make any installation below the surface, or whenever opening surfaces are necessitated to accommodate installations.
(d) A user’s lateral shall be directly connected to utility-owned facilities, and there shall be no other user connections to that lateral prior to the utility-owned sewer main. This does not apply to multi-occupancy premises, such as apartments, condominiums and shopping centers Public Service Commission § PSC 185.52(2)(b) In the case of multi-occupancy premises, a private interceptor main sewer may be installed to connect all buildings on a single lot. Each lot must be provided with a separate connection to the utility-owned sewer main.
(i) All building sanitary and storm sewer piping extending from the service lateral or other disposal terminal to within three to five feet of the outside foundation walls of any building must consist of schedule 40 PVC pipe or other materials approved by the Director of Utilities with a minimum coverage of four feet and conforming to the standards established in Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters SPS 382 and SPS 384.
(ii) All sanitary and storm drains inside the building and to a point three to five feet of the outside foundation walls of any building must consist of schedule 40 PVC Pipe or other materials approved by the Director of Utilities with adequately sealed joints and conforming to the standards established in Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters. SPS 382 and SPS 384.
(iii) No master plumber or other authorized person shall lay and connect with any sanitary and/or storm sewer pipe that is cracked, damaged, or of an inferior grade or quality, under penalty as is herein provided.
(e) All Users shall keep their own building sewers, located outside the street right-of-way, and building drains in good repair and protected from frost, at their own risk and expense, and shall prevent any unnecessary overburdening of those facilities.
(f) The Village and its duly authorized representatives shall not be liable for damages occasioned by reason of the breaking, clogging, stoppage, or freezing of any building
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 45
sewers or building drains; nor from any damage arising from repairing mains, making connections or extensions or any other work that may be deemed necessary. The Village reserves the right to cut off the sanitary sewer service at any time for the purpose of repairs, or any other necessary purpose, and permit granted or regulation to the contrary notwithstanding. Whenever it shall become necessary to shut off the sanitary sewer service, the Village shall, if practicable, give notice to each and every consumer affected.
(g) No User shall allow others or other services to connect to the Sewage Collection System through the User’s building sewers and building drains.
(3) New Building Sewer Connections.
(a) All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the User. The User shall indemnify the Village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. Once the new building sewer is constructed to the satisfaction of the Village and all associated costs are paid in-full by the User, the building sewer within the street right-of-way is contributed to the Sewage Collection System.
(b) Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found on examination and tested by the Village to meet all requirements of this Ordinance.
(c) The size, slope, alignment, materials for construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter SPS 382. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in Standard Specification for Sewer & Water Construction in Wisconsin, latest edition, shall apply.
(d) Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the sanitary sewer, wastewater carried by such a building drain shall be lifted and discharged to the building sewer by facilities conforming to Wisconsin Administrative Code § SPS 382(4)(b)2. “Pressurized Sewers” and § SPS 382 (10) “Basic Plumbing Principles”.
(e) No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, basement sump pumps, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a sanitary sewer.
(f) The connection of the building sewer into the sanitary sewer shall conform to the requirements of this Section.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 46
(g) The person applying for the building sewer permit shall notify the Village when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the sanitary sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Village.
(h) All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to minimize the hazard to the public welfare and safety. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Village.
(i) Except upon application made with written permission of the Village, ample width of roadway shall be maintained at all times for the continuous safe use and passage of one lane of traffic. Flagpersons shall be provided when the amount of traffic on the street requires it as determined by the Village. The traveled portion of the street shall be kept free from machinery, tools, excavated materials, or other obstruction at all times. All hot mixed bituminous and concrete surfaces shall be machine cut. Balling of concrete and hot mix bituminous is prohibited.
(j) No plumber, pipe fitter, or other person will be permitted to do any plumbing or pipe fitting work in connection with the sewage collection system without first receiving a license (Wisconsin Administrative Code § SPS 305.91) from the State of Wisconsin, and posting an appropriate bond as specified by the Village, except in cases where State Law permits persons owning buildings to do their own work without being licensed.
(4) Connection of New Sewers to Existing Sewerage System.
(a) Any person located within the sanitary sewer service area desiring to connect a proposed new sanitary sewer extension to the Sewerage System shall make a written application to the Village for permission to make such connection or use. The application shall include a statement of the location or locations at which it is desired to connect, and a statement of the character of the wastewater to be transmitted.
(b) The Village shall be responsible for review and approval of all proposed sanitary sewer extensions. All costs and expenses incident to the design and bidding including engineering, permits and other fees associated with the connection or hookup to the Sewerage System shall be borne by the person requesting the extension. Prior to the design of a sanitary sewer extension, the person requesting the extension shall secure and furnish proof of an escrow account for the estimated amount of the design costs, the amount to be determined by the Village. The account shall be so arranged and an escrow agreement executed between the person, the financial institution and the Village to allow the latter to withdraw amounts from the account. The account shall be sufficient to cover payments to all parties under contract with the Village for the design of the sanitary sewer extension. This money will not be refunded if the project does not proceed to construction.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 47
(c) The person requesting the sanitary sewer extension shall assist in securing all required utility easements, the location and width of which shall be determined by the Village. The Village will furnish blank easement forms to the person who will be responsible for the proper legal description of the easement parcel and for the proper execution of the easement by the grantor. All completed easements shall be submitted to the Village, designated as the grantee for its review, and shall be recorded at the County Register of Deeds office by the Village.
(d) The person requesting the sanitary sewer extension shall also execute any other special agreements deemed necessary by the Village.
(e) Prior to permitting such connection or use, the Village may investigate, or cause to be investigated, the sanitary sewer extension for which such connection or use is requested. If the Village finds such system to be in a satisfactory condition, it will grant a permit for such connection or use. If the Village finds such system to be defective in operation, construction, design, or maintenance, the Village will so notify the person and will advise the person that upon completion of specified alterations, new construction, or changes in supervision or operation, a permit will be granted. Should the plans or specifications not be approved, one copy will be returned to the applicant who will be informed as to the reason for non-approval.
(f) During the construction of any sanitary sewer extension which the Village has approved, the Approving Authority for the wastewater treatment plant receiving wastewater from the extension may, from time to time, observe construction of the same to see that said work is being done in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. Failure to make such observations shall not nullify the rights of said Approving Authority to require reconstruction should non-adherence to approved plans and specifications be subsequently discovered. Every person in the construction of laterals or sanitary sewer extensions, within its jurisdiction, shall require that such construction be under the direction of a Wisconsin Registered Professional Engineer or Licensed Master Plumber, as applicable, if plan approval was obtained under their license. The Professional Engineer or Master Plumber shall keep accurate records of the location, depth, and length of the sewers as built, and of the location of the Y-branches or slants.
(g) All proposed sanitary sewer connections shall be made at a manhole with the flow lines of the connecting sewer being at or below the manhole shelf or the connection shall be made through an approved drop. At least 24 hours before connection is to be made, notice of such intent must be given to the Village. When the actual connection is made, it must be done in the presence of a construction observer representing the Village.
(5) Connection of Grinder Pumps Wisconsin Administrative Code § SPS 382.30(10)
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 48
(a) Gravity sewer laterals shall be installed whenever feasible. In the event that connection of a building sewer to the main cannot be made using a gravity pipe, a grinder pump and low pressure sewer lateral may be installed.
(b) Each User connecting to the Sewerage System shall install a separate grinder pump station. Multiple users may not use a single grinder pump station unless the property on which they are located is owned by a single entity (i.e. Manufactured and Mobile Home Communities).
(c) The size of the sump, number of pumping units, and installation shall conform to Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter SPS 382, and § SPS 382.30 (10).
(d) The size of the low pressure building sewer pipe shall conform to Wisconsin Administrative Code§ SPS 382.30 (4) (b) 2.. Materials shall conform to Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter SPS 384.
(e) The grinder pump station shall be located a minimum of 25 feet Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 811.12(5)(d) from any water well.
(f) The grinder pump station, associated appurtenances, controls and low pressure lateral shall be owned by the property owner. The cost of designing, installing operating and maintaining the grinder pump station and low pressure lateral shall be the responsibility of the property owner. This includes all operation, maintenance and electrical costs.
[Repealed, recreated and renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.4.106 Private Sewage Disposal.
1. Sewer Collection Unavailable. Where sewage collection is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage system complying with the following provisions.
2. Permits Required. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage system, persons shall first obtain a written permit under Marathon County Code of Ordinances Chapter 15 signed by Marathon County and plans approved by Marathon County in accordance with Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter SPS 383. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by Marathon County which the person shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and/or other information as is deemed necessary by Marathon County.
3. Effective Date and Inspection. A permit for a private sewage system shall not become effective until the installation is completed and approved by Marathon County. Marathon County shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and in any event, the person applying for the permit shall notify Marathon County when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 49
4. Compliance with State Law. The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private sewage system shall comply with Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter SPS 383. The person shall operate and maintain the private sewage system in accordance with Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter SPS 383. No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with, or contradict, any requirements that may be imposed by Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter SPS 383.
5. Sewer Connections Available. At such time as the Sewage Collection System becomes available to a property served by a private sewage system, a direct connection shall be made to such sewage collection system in compliance with Section 86.4.105 (1), and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage systems shall be abandoned in accordance with Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter SPS 383.
[Repealed, recreated and renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.4.107 Limitations on Discharges to the Sewers Applicable to All Users.
All Users shall comply with the requirements of this section.
(1) General Requirements.
(a) No Person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water or clear water drains of any kind, including subsoil and building drain tile drains, into a sewer designed or designated as a sanitary sewer. If storm water or clear water is being discharged into a sanitary sewer, the Village shall give the person offending 15 days' notice to disconnect. Failure to disconnect after such notice shall authorize the Village to disconnect and assess the costs of such disconnection against the property involved. The Village shall have the alternative right at the end of such notice to institute action for violation of this Ordinance.
(b) Discharges to the public Sewerage System of substances, materials, waters or waste shall be limited to concentrations or quantities that will not harm the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment; will not have an adverse effect on receiving waters; will not have an adverse effect on the receiving wastewater treatment plant’s biosolids management program; will not endanger persons or property; will not cause adverse environmental effects; and will not constitute a public nuisance.
(c) No person shall discharge pollutants into the Sewerage System which pass through or interfere with the operation or performance of the receiving wastewater treatment plant and thereby cause or significantly contribute to a violation of the receiving wastewater treatment plant’s WPDES permit and any modification or re-issuance thereof.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 50
(d) Users shall follow Best Management Practices (BMPs) developed or cited by the Village for the discharge of any constituents, substances, materials, waters, or waste where the Village determines that following these BMPs is necessary to meet the objectives of this Ordinance or the conditions of the receiving wastewater treatment plant’s WPDES permit.
(e) The Village reserves the right to refuse or accept any and all industrial wastewaters from an industry or combination of industries as may be necessary to insure proper operation of the Sewerage System.
(2) Prohibited Discharges.
(a) General Prohibitions. No Person shall introduce or cause to be introduced any substances or wastes which cause, or are capable of causing either alone or in combination with other substances:
1. Obstruction of flow in the collection system or damage to the wastewater facility;
2. Danger to life or safety or welfare of any persons;
3. Prevention of effective maintenance or operation of the wastewater facility;
4. Any product of the receiving wastewater treatment plant’s treatment processes or any of the receiving wastewater treatment plant’s residues or biosolids to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with reclamation processes;
5. A Detrimental Effect, a public nuisance, or any condition unacceptable to any public agency having regulatory jurisdiction over the District;
6. Any sanitary sewer or the receiving wastewater treatment plant’s wastewater facilities to be overloaded.
(b) Specific Prohibitions. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced in to the Sewerage System any of the following:
1. Explosive Mixtures. Liquids, solids or gases, which either alone or by interaction with other substances could cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the Sewerage System or Wastewater Treatment System or to personnel working on or at these facilities. Prohibited materials include but are not limited to gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 51
2. Toxic Substances. Any substances containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage Treatment Plant.
3. Corrosive Wastes. Any substance having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel operating the sewage system. This includes but is not limited to acids, sulfides, and concentrated chloride and fluoride compounds and substances.
4. Noxious Material. Pollutants which result in the presence of gases, vapors, or fumes within the Sewerage System in a quantity which may cause acute worker health or safety problems when present for maintenance or repair.
5. Solid or Viscous Waste. Solids or viscous substances which will cause or contribute to obstruction to the flow in the sewers or have a detrimental effect on the operation of the treatment plant. Such substances include, but are not limited to ashes, cinders, clay, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, disposable dishes, cups, milk containers, and similar materials, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
6. Pesticides/Fertilizers. Wastewater that contains organo-sulfur or organo-phosphate pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizers.
7. Heated Wastewater. Heat in amounts which will inhibit or contribute to the inhibition of biological activity in the Treatment Plant resulting in Interference or causing damage to the Treatment Plant but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature exceeds 40°C (104°F) at the influent to the receiving wastewater treatment plant unless the DNR at the request of the receiving wastewater treatment plant operating authority, has approved alternate temperature limits.
8. Radioactive Waste. Radioactive wastes which, alone or with other wastes, result in releases which violate rules or regulations of any applicable state or federal agency.
9. Non-Polar Oils. Wastewater containing more than 50 milligrams per liter of non-polar petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oils, or products of mineral oil origin as measured by the silica gel treated hexane extractable material (SGT-HEM) analytical method.
10. Polar Oils and Greases. Wastewater containing more than 300 mg/l of polar oil or grease of animal or vegetable origin as determined by subtraction of non-
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 52
polar (SGT-HEM) analytical results from hexane extractable material (HEM)
analytical results.
11. PCBs. Wastewater containing polychlorinated biphenyls.
12. Improperly Shredded Garbage. Garbage that has not been ground up to a
degree that all particles will be suspended freely under normal flow conditions
in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any
dimension.
13. Unpolluted Water. Any unpolluted water including but not limited to clear
water from cooling systems or storm water, including roof, surface, and/or
subsurface drainage.
14. Discolored Material. Any substance or liquid with objectionable color that
cannot be removed by the Treatment System, including but not limited to dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solution.
15. Excessive Discharge Rate. Wastewater which in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than
fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour
concentration or flows during normal operation.
16. Pollutants which create or contribute to a fire or explosion hazard in the
sewerage system and the receiving wastewater treatment plant, including but not
limited to waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140°F or 60°C
using the test methods in Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 661.21.
17. Any trucked or hauled pollutants.
(c) Discharges Subject to Permission of the Village and the receiving wastewater
treatment facility. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described substances, without the specific written permission of the Village
and the receiving wastewater treatment facility. Such permission is subject to
termination at any time upon written notice. In forming its opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the Village and the receiving wastewater treatment
facility will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sanitary sewers, materials or construction of the
sanitary sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of receiving
Treatment Plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
1. Wastewater containing more than 25 mg/l of petroleum oil, non-biodegradable
cutting oils, or products of mineral oil origin.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 53
2. Any liquid containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32oF and 150oF.
3. Wastewater from an industrial user containing floatable excess fats, oils, or grease.
4. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded or solid material having any dimension greater than one-half inch.
5. Substances containing any toxic pollutant including, but not limited to, those toxic pollutants listed in Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 215.
6. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by state or federal regulations.
7. Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as but not limited to, fullers earth, clay, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids detrimental to the treatment process.
b. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.)
c. Unusual BOD5, chemical oxygen demand or disinfection requirements in such quantities in excess of that found in domestic wastewater.
d. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined in Section 86.4.102(68).
e. Substances which are not treatable by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are untreatable to such a degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction.
f. Any substance containing odor-producing compounds, in excess of that associated with domestic wastewater, and exceeding limits which may be established by the Village.
(3) Separators and Interceptors. Grease and oil separators and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Village they are necessary for the proper handling of liquids containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable fluid, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors and separators shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All separators and interceptors shall be of the type and capacity approved by the DNR and/or Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter § SPS
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 54
382.34, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The introduction of grease or fat emulsifiers into a grease separator is prohibited.
(4) New Construction. An exterior grease interceptor shall be installed in the plumbing system for newly constructed buildings to receive the entire waste discharge from kitchens or food processing areas. All exterior interceptors shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter§ SPS 382.34(5)(c), so as to constitute and individual structure.
(5) Obligation to Report Discharges. In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, a Slug Discharge or Slug Load, that might cause potential problems for the sewerage system and/or Treatment Plant, the User shall immediately notify the Village by telephone and email of the incident. The Village will relay information regarding the discharge to the receiving wastewater treatment plant operating authority. This notification from the User shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the User. Within fifteen (15) days of such discharge, a detailed written statement describing the cause of the discharge and the measures taken to prevent a future occurrence shall be submitted to the Village. The Village will forward this correspondence to the receiving wastewater treatment plant operating authority. A notice shall be permanently posted on the User’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described above. Users shall ensure that all of its employees who could cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. Such reporting shall not relieve the person causing the accidental discharge from any penalties imposed by this Ordinance. Where the Village deems necessary, Industrial Users shall provide facilities to prevent accidental discharges or spills of wastes or wastewaters prohibited under this Ordinance.
(6) Dilution Prohibited. No User shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable Pretreatment Standard or Requirement. The Village may impose mass limitations on Users who are using dilution to meet applicable Pretreatment Standards or Requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(7) Response by the Village. If any wastewater is discharged, or proposed to be discharged to the Sewerage System which contains the substances or possesses the characteristics enumerated in this Section and which in the judgment of the Village may have a deleterious effect upon the Sewerage System, receiving wastewater treatment plant, receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Village may in writing:
(a) Reject the wastes;
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 55
(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition prior to discharge to the Sewerage System;
(c) Require control over quantities and rate of discharge;
(d) Require flow equalization of rate of discharge, and/or
(e) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the waste not covered by sewer charges under the provisions of Section 86.4.114.
The cost for the Village, Wausau WWTF and/or RMMSD to evaluate the potential effects of a proposed wastewater discharge on the Sewerage System, in which one or more of the substances or characteristics enumerated in this Section have a reasonable probability of being present in the proposed discharge, shall be born entirety by the proposed discharger. If the Village, Wausau WWTF or RMMSD permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, plans and specifications shall be submitted to the DNR for review and approval. Where pre-treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory condition and effectively operated by the User at the User’s expense.
[Repealed, recreated and renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.4.108 Additional Prohibitions and Requirements for Industrial Users.
(1) Discharge Prohibitions. All Industrial Users shall be subject to the following prohibitions:
(a) Wastewater which contains in excess of the specified concentrations of any of the following constituents in a twenty-four (24) hour flow proportionate sample made up of an aggregate of the total discharge from all of the outfalls of an Industrial User is prohibited.
Milligrams. /Liter
Constituent
Milligrams. /Liter
Constituent
0.40
Arsenic
40.00
Manganese
0.20
Boron
0.40
Mercury
0.69
Cadmium
3.98
Nickle
2.77
total Chromium
0.43
Silver
3.38
total Copper
500.00
Sulfate
1.20
total Cyanide
2.61
Zinc
0.69
Lead
For the purposes of this subsection, samples shall be collected over the period of discharge if the discharge is less than twenty-four (24) hours in duration and in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance and applicable State and Federal law.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 56
(b) Dilution of an industrial discharge for purposes of reducing the pollutant characteristics or concentrations to meet the limitations established in this Section, any applicable Pretreatment Standards, or any other Section of this Ordinance or a local, state, or federal law, is prohibited.
(2) Monitoring Facilities.
(a) The Village may require an Industrial User to construct a sampling manhole or other monitoring facility to facilitate collection of a Representative Sample of wastewater being discharged to the Sewerage System. Construction of such facility must be completed within ninety (90) days after the User has been notified of the requirement, unless the Village grants an extension of time. In the event that the Industrial User fails to construct such a facility, the Village may do so and shall assess the cost to the Industrial User.
(b) All monitoring facilities shall be constructed at the User’s expense, in accordance with the plans approved by the Village. The monitoring facility shall contain the necessary flow monitoring and sampling equipment to facilitate the observation, sampling, and measurement of wastes; and shall be maintained by the User so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(3) Industrial Request to Discharge Form. All new Industrial Users and all other Industrial Users shall upon request of the Village or the receiving wastewater treatment facility submit to the Village an Industrial Request to Discharge Form as established from time to time by the Village’s Director of Utilities that provides information on volume and constituents of the Wastewater.
(4) Change in Operations. All Industrial Users shall notify the Village in advance of any change in industrial operations that may have an effect upon the waste and wastewaters generated or of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge.
(5) Standard Methods. All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of fluids and solids to which reference is made in this Ordinance shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods. Acceptable methods for wastewater analysis shall be in accordance with Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 219.
[Repealed, recreated and renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.4.109 Special Requirements for Dental Clinics.
(1) Intent. This section applies to discharges from dental clinics where amalgam is placed or removed. This section does not apply to the specialties orthodontics, periodontics, oral and maxillo-facial surgery, endodontics, prosthodontics or to other clinics that do not place or remove amalgam, or which are identified by the Village as de-minimus contributors. For the purpose of this section, a dental clinic is defined as a non-mobile facility dedicated to
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 57
the examination and treatment of patients by healthcare professionals specializing in the care of teeth, gums, and oral tissues.
(2) Implementation of BMPs. Dental clinics that place or remove amalgam shall implement Best Management Practices for amalgam as established by the Wisconsin Dental Association.
(3) Amalgam Separators. Dental clinics shall install, operate and maintain an amalgam separator meeting the criteria of the International Standards Organization (ISO 11143) for every vacuum system receiving amalgam waste. Amalgam separators shall be installed, operated, and maintained according to instructions provided by the manufacturer. The amalgam separator shall have a design and capacity appropriate for the size and type of vacuum system.
(4) Reporting. Dental clinics will annually submit reporting information to the Village using forms provided by the Village. Reporting information shall include:
(a) The date the amalgam separator was installed.
(b) The manufacturer name and model number for the separator.
(c) Certification that the amalgam separator is operated and maintained in accordance with instructions provided by the manufacturer.
(d) Certification that Best Management Practices for amalgam as established by the Wisconsin Dental Association are being implemented.
(e) Any other information deemed relevant by the Village.
(5) Records. Dental clinics shall obtain recycling records for each shipment showing the volume or mass of amalgam waste shipped, the name and address of the destination, and the name and address of the contractor. Dental clinics shall maintain these records for a minimum of three (3) years. Dental clinics shall make these records available to the Village for inspection and copying upon request.
(6) Inspection. Dental clinics shall allow the Village to inspect the vacuum system, amalgam separator, amalgam waste storage areas, and other areas deemed necessary by the Village to determine compliance with this Section. Inspections shall occur during the normal operating hours of the dental clinic.
[Repealed, recreated and renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.4.110 Wastewater Discharge Permits.
(1) Permits Required. The Village or the receiving wastewater treatment facility may require a permit under this Section for Commercial or Industrial Users that discharge or have the
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 58
potential to discharge wastewater containing toxic pollutants to the Sewerage System or whose discharges have the potential individually or cumulatively to adversely affect the Sewerage System or to impact the ability of the receiving wastewater treatment plant to meet its WPDES Permit requirements. Such wastes and wastewaters include but are not limited to:
(a) Chloride.
(b) Stormwater, groundwater, rain water, street drainage, roof runoff, and subsurface drainage.
(c) Unpolluted water, including but not limited to, cooling water, process water or blow down from cooling towers or evaporative coolers, or swimming pool waters.
(d) Temperature or thermal loads.
(e) Pharmaceuticals.
(f) Mercury or other toxic chemicals.
(2) Permit Process.
(a) The Village shall notify a User if the Village and the receiving wastewater treatment facility determines that a permit is necessary.
(b) The receiving wastewater treatment facility shall specify the information required to be submitted to process the permit application and any applicable fees. The User shall provide such information to both the Village and the receiving wastewater treatment facility within sixty (60) days of the information request.
(c) Proposed new users shall submit a permit application at least 90 days prior to connecting to and discharging to the Sewerage System.
(3) Permit Content. Permits under this Section may require the following provisions:
(a) A written application containing the name, address, and telephone number of the User, and the identity of an authorized representative to act on its behalf.
(b) The imposition of average and/or maximum limits of various wastewater constituents which may be discharged by such User.
(c) The requirement to use Best Management Practices, source reduction or treatment as appropriate.
(d) The description of any sampling, monitoring or reporting requirements.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 59
(e) A compliance schedule for construction of pretreatment facilities, if required.
(f) A statement concerning the Village’s and the receiving wastewater treatment facility right to inspect the industry’s facilities.
(g) Other terms and conditions deemed necessary by the Village and the receiving wastewater treatment facility to effectively regulate the discharge of concern.
(h) A time limit for the permit not to exceed five (5) years.
(4) Permit Implementation.
(a) Any permit issued under this Section shall be effective for a period not to exceed five (5) years. Any User holding a permit shall apply for a permit reissuance or renewal at least one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration date of the User’s existing permit.
(b) Upon issuance of such permit, the User shall faithfully comply with all provisions of the permit and as contained in this Ordinance, and as amended from time to time.
(c) Any existing User shall notify the Village and the receiving wastewater treatment facility in writing of the following changes at least ninety (90) days prior to initiating such a change:
1. Any proposed discharge of pollutants previously not being discharged by the User;
2. Any proposed increase in existing discharges of pollutants, where the increase is greater than twenty-five percent (25%) of existing pollutant levels.
(d) The Village or the receiving wastewater treatment facility reserves the right to amend from time to time any such permit so issued by adding or deleting therefrom such provisions, requirements, and conditions as it deems appropriate. The Village shall notify the User of any changes in the permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of such change. Any change or new condition in the permit shall allow for a reasonable period of time for compliance by the User.
(e) Any permit issued under this Section shall be revocable by the Village or the receiving wastewater treatment facility summarily for violation of its terms or conditions. In addition, any violation of the conditions of any such discharge permit or this Ordinance shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of Section 86.4.116.
(f) Permits issued under this Section are personal as to the User/holder and may not be subsequently assigned or transferred by operation of law or otherwise, to any successor or assignee, without the prior written approval of the Village and the receiving wastewater treatment facility.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 60
(g) The Village or the receiving wastewater treatment facility may in its discretion impose mass limitations on Users or grant a request for a mass limitation by the User in accordance with Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 211.11(3) where the Village or the receiving wastewater treatment facility determines that imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(h) The Village or the receiving wastewater treatment facility may convert mass limitations of categorical pretreatment standards in Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters NR 233, NR 235 and NR 279 into equivalent concentrations limits in accordance with Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 211.11(3) where the Village or the receiving wastewater treatment facility determines that imposition of concentration limitations is appropriate.
(i) The Village or the receiving wastewater treatment facility in its discretion may impose concentration limitations on Users or grant a request for concentration limitations by the User in accordance with Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 211.11(3) where the Village or the receiving wastewater treatment facility determines the imposition of concentration limitations is appropriate. Dilution to meet a concentration limitation is prohibited.
(j) When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of pollutant concentrations, the Village or the receiving wastewater treatment facility may convert concentration limits to mass limits in accordance with Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 211.11(3).
(5) Expired Permit. An expired permit will continue to be effective and enforceable until reissued.
(6) General Permit. The Village or the receiving wastewater treatment facility may utilize a General Permit to address a category of dischargers with similar discharge characteristics. General Permits may include limitations on concentration and mass of pollutants, may specify Best Management Practices and include other conditions necessary to ensure compliance with applicable limits.
[Repealed, recreated and renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.4.111 Limitations on Discharges of Hauled Wastes.
(1) Discharges Prohibited. No Person shall discharge Hauled Waste, including Septage or Holding Tank Wastes into the Sewage Collection System.
[Repealed, recreated and renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.4.112 Determination of Sewer Service Charges in General.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 61
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish the basis for reasonable charges for the cost of collecting and treating domestic wastewater and industrial wastewater. All revenues raised by the sewer service charges shall be utilized for payment of the cost of treatment, sewerage system maintenance, facility upgrades and replacements, and debt service. Any revenue not spent in any budget year shall be placed in a non-lapsing account and carried forward to pay the next year's expenses and to defer the need for rate increases.
(2) Applicability. A sewer service charge is imposed upon each lot, parcel of land, building or premises fronted by a public sewer and/or served by wastewater facilities or otherwise discharging sewage, including industrial wastes, into the public sewerage and wastewater facilities. A sewer service charge will not be imposed upon undevelopable land, as determined by the Village, which is fronted by a pubic sewer main.
(3) Annual Review. Sewer service charges shall be reviewed periodically to determine their adequacy to offset the cost of treatment, sewerage system maintenance, facility upgrades and replacements, and debt service charge costs. Accordingly, the Village reserves the right to adjust the sewer service use charges periodically to assure their continued adequacy.
(4) Determination of Charges.
(a) Sewer service charges to all Users will be based on a metered water volume from the Village water meter when Village water is the only source of wastewater discharged from the User’s premises into the Sewerage System. In addition, there will be a surcharge for wastewater discharged with concentrations of BOD5, TSS, TKN, and/or total phosphorus in excess of the concentrations defined in Section 86.4.102 for domestic wastewater.
(b) When a User discharging wastewater into the Sewerage System is a User of water not supplied by the Village, the amount of water used shall be measured by a meter acceptable to the Village or determined by the Village in such manner and by such method as it may find practicable under the conditions and attendant circumstances of the case, in order to determine the sewer service charge. Such determination may be appealed to the Village. As an alternative, the Village may establish a flat rate for sewer service, or authorize the installation, at the user’s expense, of a control manhole with metering facilities.
(c) When a User utilizes metered water in an industrial process or for other purposes which prevents the discharge of all water purchased into the Village Sewerage System, the User may be eligible for a proportionate sewer service charge reduction. It shall be the responsibility of the User to install adequate metering facilities to properly identify all water not discharged into the Sewerage System. The Village reserves the right to inspect all installations of this nature and may require the user to monitor the wastewater discharge volume to verify actual discharge rates.
(d) Sampling of industrial wastewaters may be made on a regular basis or as needed to verify sewer service charges.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 62
(e) Each new Industrial User shall file with the Village an initial written statement for each separate connection to the Sewerage System giving the daily volume, surge rate, peak rate, pounds of TSS, pounds of BOD5, pounds of total phosphorus, and pounds of TKN of the wastewater. Initial sewer service charges shall be developed on the basis of this statement. Changes in operations or use shall be reported by the Industrial User and it shall be the Industrial User’s sole responsibility to have such changes made to the original statement to remain in compliance with this Ordinance.
(f) The Village may sample and test, at any time, any industrial wastewater discharge to verify the accuracy of any statement filed by an Industrial User. If the results of the wastewater tests indicate wastewater with measured parameters less than, or equal to, the values listed in the Industrial User’s statement, then the cost of the testing shall be at the Village’s expense. If the results of the wastewater tests indicate wastewater with measured parameters more than 5% greater than the values listed in the Industrial User’s statement, then the cost of the testing shall be at the Industrial User’s expense.
(5) Billing Frequency. The Sewerage Utility will invoice Users quarterly.
[Repealed, recreated and renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.4.113 Sewer Service Charges and Rates.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish the method of setting sewer service charges and rates for Users of the Sewerage System. Rates shall be set by the Village Board. The new rate shall become effective on the date set forth in the ordinance establishing the rate change.
(2) Wastewater Strength Categories. There are two categories defining wastewater strength: Category ‘A’ and Category ‘B’.
(a) Category ‘A’ is defined as domestic strength wastewater, as defined in Section 86.4.102 of this Ordinance. Users discharging Category ‘A’ strength wastewater shall pay the Total Sewer Service Charge as defined in Section 86.4.113 (3).
(b) Category ‘B’ is defined as wastewater exhibiting BOD5, TSS, Total Phosphorus, and/or TKN concentrations in excess of those values defined for domestic wastewater, as defined in Section 86.4.102 of this Ordinance. Users discharging Category ‘A’ strength wastewater shall pay the basic sewer service charge as defined in Section 86.4.113 (3) and surcharges as defined in Section 86.4.113(4).
(3) Total Service Charge.
(a) The sewer service charge for all Users shall include a minimum fixed meter/unit charge plus a volumetric charge. The volumetric charge will be determined by multiplying the metered water volume by the base volume rate.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 63
(b) The minimum fixed meter/unit charge (UC) shall be determined by either the equivalent water meter table (Table 1) or the number of units (customers) served by the meter, whichever is greater. When the number of units served by a meter is greater than the number of equivalent units for that meter size as listed in Table 1, the meter/unit charge shall be based upon the number of units served by that meter. The charge would then be determined by multiplying the number of units by the meter/unit charge for a five-eighths-inch and three-fourths-inch water meter.
(c) The meter/unit charge for commercial customers not serving living quarters shall be determined by the equivalent water meter table (Table 1) or the Calculated Equivalent Unit (EUC), whichever is greater. EUC is determined by dividing the daily average water use by one residential housing unit (175 gallons per day per unit). When EUC is greater than the number of equivalent units for that meter size listed in Table 1, the charge would then be determined by multiplying EUC by the meter/unit charge for a five-eighths-inch and three-fourths-inch water meter.
(d) The meter/unit charge based on size of water meter is listed in the Village of Weston’s Fee Schedule for Municipal Utilities. The meter/unit charges for each meter size listed in Table 1 shall be set by the Village Board. Said charges shall be reviewed periodically and adjusted as necessary by the Board.
TABLE 1 – EQUIVALENT METER TABLE
Meter Size (Inches)
Equivalent Units
5/8 and 3/4
1.0
1
2.5
1 1/4 and 1 1/2
5
2
8
3
15
4
25
6
50
(e) The sewer service charge shall be determined as follows:
SC = UC + CV x V
Where:
SC = Total Sewer Service Charge
UC = Meter/Unit Charge
CV = Volume Unit Price ($/1000 gallons)
V = Total volume of water used during a billing period in 1,000 gallons
(f) For any User required under this Ordinance to install wastewater flow measuring facilities, the total volume of water used during a billing period (V) used for the purposes of calculating the volumetric sewer service charge (CV x V) shall be based on readings from the installed wastewater flow meter.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 64
(g) Minimum monthly sewer service charges shall be based on ensuring collection of sufficient funds for repayment of sewerage system debt retirement and other fixed costs. The minimum monthly sewer service charge shall be calculated based on the debt retirement payment for the year divided by the number of Equivalent Meters as defined in this Ordinance. At the discretion of the Village, the minimum charge for multi-family residential, commercial, Public Authority, and industrial users may be determined based on annual metered flow for the said user divided by the Equivalent Meter value.
(4) Surcharges
(a) In addition to the Total Sewer Service Charge as determined in Section 86.4.113 (3), all Users discharging Category ‘B’ wastewater shall pay a surcharge for BOD5, TSS, TKN, and/or total phosphorus concentrations in excess of those values defined for domestic wastewater. The Surcharge shall be determined by the formula in paragraph (d) below.
(b) The surcharge rates for BOD5, TSS, TKN, and total phosphorus shall be determined by the receiving wastewater treatment facility. Using said surcharge rates, the average surcharge per billing period for BOD5, TSS, TKN, and total phosphorus shall be determined.
(c) At a minimum, Users discharging Category ‘B’ wastewater shall sample their wastewater monthly to determine BOD5, TSS, TKN, and total phosphorus concentrations for the purpose of determining a surcharge.
(d) Surcharges shall be determined in accordance with the following formula:
CT = [(B-250)*Vw*CB*8.34/1000]
+ [(S-250)*VW*CS*8.34/1000]
+ [(P-8.0)*VW*CP*8.34/1000]
+ [(N-40)*VW*CN*8.34/1000]
Where:
CT = Total Sewer Surcharge
VW= Wastewater volume in million gallons
B = Concentration of BOD5 in milligrams per liter (mg/l)
S = Concentration of TSS in milligrams per liter (mg/l)
P = Concentration of total phosphorus, as P, in milligrams per liter (mg/l)
N = Concentration of TKN, as N, in milligrams per liter (mg/l)
CB = Surcharge rate per 1000 pounds of BOD5
CS = Surcharge rate per 1000 pounds of TSS
CP = Surcharge rate per 1000 pounds of total phosphorus
CN = Surcharge rate per 1000 pounds of TKN
Surcharge rates for BOD5, TSS, TKN, and total phosphorus surcharge determination shall be as indicated in Section 86.4.113(4)(b).
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 65
(5) Users outside the Village limits. In addition to the Total Service Charge and Surcharges set forth in paragraphs (3) and (4) above, a surcharge shall be levied on all Users located outside Village limits. Said surcharge shall be determined by the Village Board and adjusted from time to time as determined by the board. Service shall not be given to any Users outside of the Village boundaries without specific approval of the Village Board.
(6) Intergovernmental Sewer Use Agreements. This Section does not preclude the Village from billing for the conveyance of wastewater as specified in intergovernmental sewer use agreements.
[Repealed, recreated and renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.4.114. Billing and Collections.
(1) Billing and Payment. Sewer service charges shall be billed on a quarterly basis, unless circumstances require a delayed billing. Such charges shall be payable to the Village on or before the fifteenth (15) day of the month after the month of such billing, unless the Village has extended the time for payment.
(2) Delinquent Payments.
(a) Any person failing to pay the sewer charge within 20 days of the billing date will be subject to a late payment charge of three (3) percent of the most recent past due charges.
(b) Any person failing to pay the sewer service charge one month after due date shall pay an interest charge of 1% per month on the unpaid balance. Interest, at 1% per month, will be collected in one month increments beginning one month after the due date.
(c) All charges established by this Ordinance shall be a lien against the property served pursuant to Wis. Stat. §§ 66.0809(1) to (4), 66.0813, and 66.0821.
[Repealed, recreated and renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.4.115. Enforcement, Abatement, and Penalties.
(1) Violations Prohibited.
(a) No User shall violate any provision of this Ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, an order issued under this Ordinance, or any pretreatment standard or requirement. Any person violating any provision of this Ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, an order issued under this Ordinance, or any pretreatment standard or requirement shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of this Ordinance.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 66
(b) No person shall knowingly make any false statement, representation, record, report, plan or other document filed with the Village or falsify, tamper with, or knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this Ordinance.
(c) No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the Sewerage System. Any person violating this provision will be subject to the penalty provisions of this Section and enforcement of any other applicable local, State, or Federal law.
(2) Notice of Noncompliance. When the Village finds that a User has violated or continues to violate any provision of this Ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, an order issued herein, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, the Village or its designee may serve upon the User a written notice of noncompliance.
(a) Any notice of noncompliance issued by the Village shall:
1. Be in writing, personally served or delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested;
2. State the nature of the violation, the approximate date and time of the violation, and the consequences of further violation; and
3. Describe the administrative procedures that are available to review the Village’s determination.
(b) As appropriate to the circumstances, a notice of noncompliance may require the User to take the following actions, within thirty (30) days of issuance of the notice of noncompliance:
1. Identify in a written document to the Village the nature and cause of the violation and provide a description and plan of the remedy action and compliance schedule;
2. Undertake any additional sampling, information, and corrective action required by the Village.
3. Attend a meeting with the Village.
(c) Nothing in this subsection shall limit the authority of the Village to take any action, including emergency actions or other enforcement actions, without first issuing a notice of noncompliance.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 67
(d) Submission of the requirements under this subsection in no way relieves the User of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of noncompliance.
(3) Notice of Violation. When the Village or its authorized designee finds that a User has violated or continues to violate any provision of this Ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, an order issued herein, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, and has failed to provide an acceptable plan for corrective action as required in Subsection (2), the Village or its designee may serve upon that User a written notice of violation.
(a) Any notice of noncompliance issued by the Village shall:
1. Be in writing, personally served or delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested;
2. State the nature of the violation, the approximate date and time of the violation, and the consequences of further violation; and
3. Describe the administrative procedures that are available to review the Village’s determination.
(b) As appropriate to the circumstances, a notice of noncompliance may require the User to take the following actions, within thirty (30) days of issuance of the notice of noncompliance:
1. Identify in a written document to the Village the nature and cause of the violation and provide a description and plan of the remedy action and compliance schedule;
2. Undertake any additional sampling, information, and corrective action required by the Village.
3. Attend a meeting with the Village.
(c) Nothing in this subsection shall limit the authority of the Village to take any action, including emergency actions or other enforcement actions, without first issuing a notice of violation.
(d) Submission of the requirements under this subsection in no way relieves the User of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
(4) Orders. If the Village has determined that a User has violated or is violating any provision of this Ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, an order issued herein, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, the Village may order the User to take certain action by a certain date to remedy or otherwise address the violation. The Village need not
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 68
proceed with notices under subsection (2) or (3) prior to issuing an order under this section. Orders shall:
(a) Be in writing and personally served or delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested;
(b) State the reasons and actions required by the User to comply with the order;
(c) Describe the administrative procedures that are available to review the order.
(5) Orders to Show Cause. When the Village finds that a User has violated or continues to violate any order or enforcement action issued herein, the Village may order the User to appear before the Director of Utilities to show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
(a) Any order to show cause shall:
1. Be in writing, personally served or delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested;
2. State the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for the proposed enforcement action, the time and place for the hearing, and a request that the User show cause why the enforcement action should not be taken.
3 Describe the administrative procedures that are available to review the Village’s determination.
(b) Hearing Process.
1. The Village will serve notice of the hearing on the User no less than 10 (ten) days before the hearing date.
2. Service of the hearing notice may be made on any agent, officer, or authorized representative of the appellant User.
3. The hearing to show cause shall be before the Director of Utilities or a hearing examiner as designated by the Director of Utilities.
4. The Director of Utilities or designated hearing examiner shall take evidence on the reasons why the enforcement action should not be taken.
5. The User shall have the burden of proof as to why the enforcement action should not be taken.
6. Any testimony taken must be under oath. A transcript will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon request and payment
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 69
of the usual chargers thereof. Such request must be made within ninety (90) days of the hearing.
(c) Appeals.
1. A person aggrieved by a decision of the Director of Utilities or designated hearing examiner in an order-to-show-cause proceeding may seek review of the decision before the Public Works and Utility Committee.
2. Review shall be limited to the record before the Director of Utilities or hearing examiner at the order to show cause hearing.
(d) The provisions regarding judicial review in Section 86.4.117(5) of this Ordinance shall be applicable to final determinations arising out of proceedings under this Subsection (5).
(6) Emergency Actions Regarding Industrial Dischargers. The Village may suspend wastewater treatment service to an Industrial User whenever it appears to the Village that an actual or threatened industrial discharge presents or threatens an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons; a substantial danger to the environment; an interference with the operation of the sewerage system; or violates any pretreatment limits imposed by State or Federal law or this Ordinance.
(a) The Village shall notify such Industrial User in the event of a determination to suspend wastewater treatment service hereunder.
(b) Such User shall cease all such discharges immediately.
(c) The Village may reinstate the wastewater treatment service pending proof by the User and judged sufficient by the Village that the conditions creating threat of imminent or substantial danger have been eliminated.
(7) Judicial Proceedings. Following entry of any order by the Village with respect to the conduct of a User contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance, the Village may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the appropriate local court. The Village may take further action pursuant to this Section or Section 86.4.117 or as otherwise allowed by law.
(8) Penalties for Violations.
(a) Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance or any order of the Village shall forfeit an amount not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 per day for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 70
(b) Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall become liable to the Village for any expense, loss or damage incurred by the Village by reason of such violation. The Village shall be held harmless as a result of any expense, loss or damage incurred as a result of a violation to this Ordinance.
(c) Any person found to be responsible for allowing discharge of a deleterious substance into the sewerage system which causes damage to the sewerage system and/or receiving body of water shall, in addition to a forfeiture, pay the amount to cover damage, both values to be established by the Village.
(d) The forgoing penalties are cumulative and not exclusive. Imposition of any penalty pursuant to this Section does not protect a violator from enforcement by any other unit of government.
[Repealed, recreated and renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017, Amended Ord. No 18-001, 1/20/2018]
Section 86.4.116 Appeals.
(1) Notice of Appeal. Any User directly aggrieved by any decision of the Village other than a decision arising out of a hearing to show cause under Section 86.4.116(5) may file a notice of appeal with the Public Works and Utility Committee.
(a) The notice shall state the grounds upon which the aggrieved User contends the decision should be modified or reversed.
(b) The notice shall be received by the Public Works and Utility Committee within thirty (30) days of the decision of the Village.
(c) The filing of the notice of appeal shall stay enforcement of the decision pending resolution of the appeal.
(d) A fee of $100 shall accompany any appeal. This fee may be refunded if the appeal is sustained in favor of the appellant.
(2) Notice of Hearing. Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Village will schedule a hearing before the Public Works and Utility Committee and will serve notice of the hearing on the aggrieved User no less than ten (10) days before the hearing date.
(a) The hearing notice shall specify the time and place of the hearing.
(b) Service of the hearing notice may be made on any agent, officer, or authorized representative of the appellant User.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 71
(3) Authority of Property and Infrastructure Committee. The Public Works and Utility Committee shall have the authority to:
(a) Issue notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearings;
(b) Take evidence;
(c) Issue a decision based on its review of the hearing evidence provided. The Public Works and Utility Committee may set such terms and conditions in its decision as are necessary and appropriate to protect the Sewerage System.
(4) Hearing Process.
(a) The Public Works and Utility Committee shall preside over a hearing under this subsection and shall take evidence.
(b) The User shall have the burden of proof as to why the challenged decision should not be upheld.
(c) Any testimony taken must be under oath. A transcript will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon request and payment of the usual chargers thereof. Such request must be made within ninety (90) days of the hearing.
(5) Judicial Review. Any party to a proceeding under this Section resulting in a final determination may seek review thereof by certiorari within 30 days of receipt of the final determination.
(6) Relation to Wis. Stat. Chapter. 68. The Village elects not to be governed by Wis. Stat. Chapter. 68 with respect to this Ordinance. Accordingly, the procedures set forth in this section apply in lieu of those in Wis. Stat. §§ 68.01 to 68.12.
[Repealed, recreated and renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017, Amended Ord. No 18-001, 1/20/2018]
ARTICLE V STORMWATER UTILITY
DIVISION 1. STORMWATER UTILITY
Section 86.5.100. Creation.
There is hereby established a stormwater utility in the Village of Weston. The operation of the stormwater utility shall be under the supervision of the Director of Public Works.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 72
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.101. Authority.
The Village, acting through the stormwater utility, may without limitation due to enumeration, acquire, construct, lease, own, operate, maintain, extend, expand, replace, clean, dredge, repair, conduct, manage and finance such facilities, operations and activities, as are deemed by the Village to be proper and reasonably necessary for a system of storm and surface water management. These facilities may include, without limitation due to enumeration, surface and underground drainage facilities, sewers, watercourses, retaining walls, ponds, streets, roads, ditches and such other facilities as will support a stormwater management system.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.102. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the content clearly indicates a different meaning:
Equivalent Runoff Unit (ERU), means one unit per 3,338 sq. ft. One unit is defined as one single family residential housing unit with a statistical average impervious area equal to 3,338 square feet. The number of ERU’s for non-single family residential units shall be determined by the Director of Public Works or the designee.
Ord. of 1-18-1988(1), §1-101.1 [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.103. Rates and charges.
(a) The basis for computation of the charge for stormwater services to all lots and parcels of land within the Village is established under this section. The amount of charge to be imposed, the establishment of formulas for the calculation of charges, the creation of customer classifications for the imposition of charges, and changes in such charges, formulas and customer classifications may be made by further resolution of the Village Board. All charges established pursuant to this Section shall be fair and reasonable. A schedule of current charges shall be maintained and on file in the office of the Village Clerk. (b) Charges shall be imposed to recover all or a portion of the costs of the stormwater utility. Such charges, which shall be established pursuant to further resolution of the Village of Weston Village Board, may include the following components:
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 73
1. Base charge. A base charge may be imposed on all property in the Village. The base charge is established in recognition of the fact that all properties in the Village receive services from the stormwater management activities of the Village and that all property contributes to some degree to the stormwater discharge that must be managed by the Village. The base charge shall be assessed to collect the administrative costs of the stormwater utility and may include capital, operating and maintenance costs of the stormwater utility, which are not recovered by other means. The base charge may be based on the size of a lot or parcel of land.
2. Equivalent runoff unit charge (ERU). An equivalent runoff unit charge may be imposed on all property that has an impervious area. The ERU charge shall be assessed based upon the impervious area as reasonably determined by the Village for a typical residential unit of property. Other units of property will be charged multiples of the ERU based on the impervious area of the property.
3. Special charge (SC). The special charge which may be imposed on property that is in an area specially benefited by a particular stormwater management facility. This charge will be developed to reflect the benefits in a particular area that may not be appropriate to allocate to property throughout the Village, and will be calculated on an ERU basis.
(c) The property owner shall be responsible for completing the stormwater utility service application form any time a building permit is issued, exclusive of those issued to existing single family residences, or when a site plan review is conducted. The form shall be provided by the Building Inspector/Zoning Administrator with each application for a building permit or application for site plan review. Failure to submit a completed stormwater utility service application form or providing false information on said form, shall result in denial of both the building permit and stormwater utility service applications and imposition of the penalty as provided in this Section. In addition to any other penalties, the owner shall also be liable for stormwater charges, under this Section, for the improvement from the date construction of the improvement began. (d) The Village Board may establish rates and classifications by further resolution as will be likely to provide a reasonable and fair distribution of the costs of the stormwater utility. In the event the owner and nonowner users of a particular property are not the same, the liability for the charges attributable to that property shall be joint and several.
(1.) Adjustments for Nonresidential Property ERU measurement.
Requests for adjustments of the ERUs allocated to a parcel of property shall be limited to the non-residential customer class. All such requests shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works, who shall have the authority to develop and administer the procedures and standards for the adjustment of
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 74
ERUs as established in this Section. Requests for adjustment to the user fees shall be governed by this subsection. Any nonresidential customer may, subject to the limitations set forth in this subparagraph (a), submit an adjustment request seeking an adjustment of the ERUs allocated to a parcel of property at any time. Requests shall be in writing and set for in detail the grounds upon which relief is sought. The nonresidential customer requesting the adjustments may be required, at his, her or its own expense, to provide supplemental information to the Director of Public Works, including but not limited to survey data approved by a registered land surveyor (R.P.L.S.) and engineering reports approved by a professional engineer (P.E.). Failure to provide such information within the time limits established by the Director, as may be reasonably extended, may result in denial of the adjustments request.
(i) Once a completed adjustment request and all required information is fully submitted, the Director shall have thirty (30) calendar days within which to render a written decision. Concurrent payment of any charges based on the ERUs allocated to the property is not required as a condition precedent to this request for review. In considering an adjustment request, the Director shall consider whether the calculation of the ERUs for the property is correct.
(ii) The Director’s decision shall be mailed to the address provided on the adjustments request and service shall be complete upon mailing.
(iii) Appeals from the Director’s decisions concerning ERUs adjustment requests shall be governed by subsection (h) below, except that no concurrent payment of any fees is required. All appeals must be in writing and shall specify the grounds for challenging the Director’s decision. The appeal must specifically address the Director’s conclusions and shall not merely repeat the bases for the initial adjustments request. All appeals shall be submitted within thirty (30) calendar days after the date of mailing the Director’s decision. Failure to timely and properly appeal shall deprive the Village Administrator of jurisdiction to hear the appeal.
(2) Adjustments for special site conditions.
The Village shall establish a written credit policy to account for properties with unique stormwater characteristics. The policy will allow for an adjustment to the stormwater utility fee based on criteria defined in the policy. The written policy will be available through the Department of Public Works prior to the initial billing.
(e) The charges established will be billed to the utility customer at the same time and in the same manner as the sanitary sewer or water bill. Unless otherwise provided elsewhere, such charges shall not be payable in installments. Bills for stormwater utility charges shall be mailed to the recipient designated by the owner of the property
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 75
to which the bill relates, provided that such mailing shall not relieve the owner of any property from liability for the charges in the event payment is not made. The owner of any property which is occupied by tenants shall have the right to examine the appropriate records of the Village to determine whether such rates and charges have been paid by such tenants, provided that such examination shall be made at the office at which the records are kept during normal business hours.
(f) A late payment charge as established by further resolution of the Village Board will be added to bills not paid within 20 days of issuance.
(g) All stormwater service charges shall be taxed and collected, and shall be a lien upon the property served in the same manner as water service charges are taxed and collected under the provisions of Wis. Stat § 66.0809.
(h) The Village of Weston elects not to be subject to the administrative review procedure provisions contained within Wisconsin Statutes Chapter 68 , and establishes the following as its municipal review procedure: As a condition precedent to challenging any stormwater utility charge, the charge must be timely paid in full under protest to the Village. An appeal shall be to the Village Public Works and Utility Committee and can be undertaken only by filing a written appeal with the Village Clerk concurrent with the date of payment. The written appeal shall specify all grounds for challenge to the amount of the charge and shall state the amount of charge that the appellant considers to be appropriate. Failure to timely and properly appeal shall deprive the Village Public Works and Utility Committee of jurisdiction to hear the appeal.
(1) In considering an appeal, the Village Public Works Committee shall determine whether the stormwater utility charge is fair and reasonable and, in the event the appeal is granted, whether or not a refund is due the appellant and the amount of the refund. The Village Public Works and Utility Committee shall conduct a formal hearing at such time and place as designated in a hearing notice to the appellant, providing a minimum of five (5) business days notice to the appellant. The decision shall be based upon the evidence presented. The Director of Public Works shall notify the appellant in writing of the determination by first class mail addressed to the individual and at the address listed within the appeal. Service is conclusive upon mailing.
(i) An aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the Village Public Works and Utility Committee to the Village Board by filing a written appeal with the Village Clerk no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date of mailing the decision of the Public Works and Utility Committee. The written appeal shall specify all grounds for challenge to the Village Public Works and Utility Committee decision and shall again state the amount of charge that the appellant considers to be appropriate. The appeal must specifically address the Village Public Works and Utility Committee’s conclusions and shall not merely repeat the bases for the initial appeal. Failure to timely and properly appeal shall deprive the Board of jurisdiction to hear the appeal.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 76
In considering an appeal, the Village Board shall determine whether the stormwater utility charge is fair and reasonable and, in the event the appeal is granted, whether or not a refund is due the appellant and the amount of the refund. The Village Board shall consider the appeal in the same manner as a new resolution, pursuant to its rules for procedure in existence at the time of consideration. The Village Clerk shall provide written notice no later than five (5) business days to the address listed within the appeal of the time and place of the Board’s consideration of the appeal. The Board shall base its decision upon the information presented at its meeting. The Village Clerk shall notify the appellant in writing of the Board’s determination by first class mail addressed to the individual and at the address listed within the appeal. Service is conclusive upon mailing.
(j) If the result of any appeal is that a refund is due the appellant, the refund will be applied as a credit on the appellant’s next stormwater bill.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017][Amended Ord. No 18-001, 1/20/2018]
Section 86.5.104. Alternative method to collect stormwater charges.
In addition to any other method for collection of the charges established under this Section, or subsequent resolution, may be, and are hereby authorized to be levied and imposed on property as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.0627. The mailing of the bill for stormwater utility charges to a property owner shall serve as notice to the property owner that failure to pay the charges when due may result in the charges being imposed pursuant to the authority of Wis. Stat. § 66.0627. The procedures contained in Wis. Stat. § 66.0627, shall govern such notice and further collection procedures.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.105. Budget excess revenues.
The stormwater utility finances shall be accounted for in a separate Stormwater Utility Fund by the Village. The Finance Director or designee, shall prepare an annual budget, which is to include all operation and maintenance costs, debt service and other costs related to the operation of the stormwater utility. The budget is subject to approval by the Village Board. The costs shall be spread over the rate classifications as determined by the Board. Any excess of revenues over expenditures in a year will be retained by the Fund for subsequent years’ needs.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 77
Section 86.5.106. Penalty.
A person violating any provision of this Section shall, upon conviction, pay a forfeiture not to exceed $75.00 for each offense, in addition to the costs of prosecution which are allowed by law. Each day during which a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. of 03/15/2004, §86.0821) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.107 through 110 Reserved
DIVISION 2. POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section 86.5.200. Creation.
The intent of this ordinance is to reduce the amount of post-construction storm water and associated pollutants reaching waters of the state from new development and redevelopment contained in Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 151 Subchapters III and IV.
The Village Board of the Village of Weston does hereby ordain that Section 86.5.200 of the ordinance of the Village of Weston is created to and adheres to the following subsections.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.201. Authority.
(1) This ordinance is adopted by the Village Board under the authority granted by Wis. Stat. § 61.354. This ordinance supersedes all provisions of an ordinance previously enacted under Wis. Stat. § 61.35, that relate to storm water management regulations. Except as otherwise specified in Wis. Stats. §§ 61.354, and 61.35, applies to this ordinance and to any amendments to this ordinance.
(2) The provisions of this ordinance are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of the Village.
(3) The Village of Weston Board hereby designates the Director of Public Works, or his designee, to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
(4) The requirements of this ordinance do not pre-empt more stringent storm water management requirements that may be imposed by any of the following:
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 78
(a) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules, permits or approvals including those authorized under Wis. Stats. §§ 281.16 and 283.33.
(b) Targeted non-agricultural performance standards promulgated in rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR § 151.004.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.202. Findings of Fact.
The Village of Weston Board finds that uncontrolled, post-construction runoff has a significant impact upon water resources and the health, safety and general welfare of the community and diminishes the public enjoyment and use of natural resources. Specifically, uncontrolled post-construction runoff can:
(1) Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion, increasing streambed scour, diminishing groundwater recharge, diminishing stream base flows and increasing stream temperature.
(2) Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life, recreational and water supply uses by increasing pollutant loading of sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals, bacteria, pathogens and other urban pollutants.
(3) Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by increasing pollutant loads.
(4) Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading.
(5) Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by overtaxing storm sewers, drainage ways, and other minor drainage facilities.
(6) Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by increasing major flood peaks and volumes.
(7) Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence and levels of flooding.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.203. Purpose and Intent.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 79
(1) Purpose. The general purpose of this ordinance is to establish long-term, post-construction runoff management requirements that will diminish the threats to public health, safety, welfare and the aquatic environment. Specific purposes are to:
(a) Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions.
(b) Prevent and control the adverse effects of storm water; prevent and control soil erosion; prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth.
(c) Control exceedance of the safe capacity of existing drainage facilities and receiving water bodies; prevent undue channel erosion; control increases in the scouring and transportation of particulate matter; and prevent conditions that endanger downstream property.
(2) Intent. It is the intent of the Village of Weston Board that this ordinance regulates post-construction storm water discharges to waters of the state. This ordinance may be applied on a site-by-site basis. The Village of Weston Board recognizes, however, that the preferred method of achieving the storm water performance standards set forth in this ordinance is through the preparation and implementation of comprehensive, systems-level storm water management plans that cover hydrologic units, such as watersheds, on a municipal and regional scale. Such plans may prescribe regional storm water devices, practices or systems, any of which may be designed to treat runoff from more than one site prior to discharge to waters of the state. Where such plans are in conformance with the performance standards developed under Wis. Stat. § 281.16 for regional storm water management measures and have been approved by the Village of Weston Board, it is the intent of this ordinance that the approved plan be used to identify post-construction management measures acceptable for the community.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.204. Applicability and Jurisdiction.
(1) Applicability.
(a) Where not otherwise limited by law, this ordinance applies after final stabilization to a site of land disturbing construction activity meeting any of the criteria in this paragraph, unless the site is otherwise exempt under paragraph (b).
1. A post construction site that had one or more acres of land disturbing construction activity.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 80
(b) A site that meets any of the criteria in this paragraph is exempt from the requirements of this ordinance.
1. A post-construction site with less than 10% connected imperviousness based on complete development of the post-construction site, provided the cumulative area of all parking lots and rooftops is less than one acre.
2. Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices.
3. Underground utility construction but not including the construction of any above ground structures associated with utility construction.
(c) Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in paragraph (a), this ordinance applies to post-construction sites of any size that, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, or the designee, is likely to result in runoff that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water, that causes undue channel erosion, that increases water pollution by scouring or the transportation of particulate matter or that endangers property or public safety.
(2) Jurisdiction. This ordinance applies to [post construction sites within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the Village of Weston, as well as all lands located within the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the Village of Weston, even if plat approval is not involved.
(3) Exclusions. This ordinance is not applicable to activities conducted by a state agency, as defined under Wis. Stat. § 227.01(1), but also including the office of district attorney, which is subject to the state plan promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered into under Wis. Stat. § 281.33(2).
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.205. Definitions.
(1) “Administering authority,” means a governmental employee, or a regional planning commission empowered under Wis. Stat. § 61.354 that is designated by the Village of Weston Board to administer this ordinance.
(2) “Agricultural facilities and practices” has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. § 281.16.
(3) “Average annual rainfall,” means a typical calendar year of precipitation as determined by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources for users of models such as SLAMM, P8, or equivalent methodology. The average annual rainfall is chosen from a department publication for the location closest to the municipality.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 81
(4) “Best management practice” or “BMP,” means structural or non-structural measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state.
(5) “Business day,” means a day the office of the Director of Public Works, or the designee, is routinely and customarily open for business.
(6) “Cease and desist order,” means a court-issued order to halt land disturbing construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit.
(7) “Combined sewer system,” means a system for conveying both sanitary sewage and storm water runoff.
(8) “Connected imperviousness," means an impervious surface connected to the waters of the state via a separate storm sewer, an impervious flow path, or a minimally pervious flow path.
(9) “Design storm,” means a hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency, and total depth of rainfall.
(10) “Development,” means residential, commercial, industrial or institutional land uses and associated roads.
(11) “Division of land,” means the creation from one parcel of two or more parcels or building sites of one or fewer acres each in area where such creation occurs at one time or through the successive partition within a 5-year period.
(12) “Effective infiltration area,” means the area of the infiltration system that is used to infiltrate runoff and does not include the area used for site access, berms or pretreatment.
(13) “Erosion,” means the process by which the land’s surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
(14) "Exceptional resource waters," means waters listed in Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR § 102.11.
(15) “Extraterritorial,” means the unincorporated area within 3 miles of the corporate limits of a first, second, or third class city, or within 1.5 miles of a fourth class city or village.
(16) "Final stabilization," means that all land disturbing construction activities at the construction site have been completed and that a uniform, perennial, vegetative cover has been established, with a density of at least 70% of the cover, for the unpaved
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 82
areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or employment of equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
(17) “Financial guarantee,” means a performance bond, maintenance bond, surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantees submitted to the Director of Public Works, or the designee, by the responsible party to assure that requirements of the ordinance are carried out in compliance with the storm water management plan.
(18) “Governing body,” means town board of supervisors, county board of supervisors, city council, village board of trustees or village council.
(19) “Impervious surface,” means an area that releases as runoff all or a large portion of the precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen soil. Rooftops, sidewalks, driveways, gravel or paved parking lots and streets are examples of areas that typically are impervious.
(20) “In-fill area,” means an undeveloped area of land located within existing development.
(21) “Infiltration,” means the entry of precipitation or runoff into or through the soil.
(22) “Infiltration system,” means a device or practice such as a basin, trench, rain garden or swale designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but does not include natural infiltration in pervious surfaces such as lawns, redirecting of rooftop downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration from practices, such as swales or road side channels designed for conveyance and pollutant removal only.
(23) “Karst feature,” means an area or surficial geologic feature subject to bedrock dissolution so that it is likely to provide a conduit to groundwater, and may include caves, enlarged fractures, mine features, exposed bedrock surfaces, sinkholes, springs, seeps or swallets.
(24) “Land disturbing construction activity,” means any man-made alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or existing vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of the state. Land disturbing construction activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading activities.
(25) “Maintenance agreement,” means a legal document that provides for long-term maintenance of storm water management practices.
(26) “MEP” or “maximum extent practicable,” means a level of implementing best management practices in order to achieve a performance standard specified in this chapter which takes into account the best available technology, cost effectiveness, geographic features, and other competing interests such as protection of public safety
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 83
and welfare, protection of endangered and threatened resources, and preservation of historic properties. MEP allows flexibility in the way to meet the performance standards and may vary based on the performance standard and site conditions.
(27) “New development,” means development resulting from the conversion of previously undeveloped land or agricultural land uses.
(28) “Off-site,” means located outside the property boundary described in the permit application.
(29) “On-site,” means located within the property boundary described in the permit application.
(30) "Ordinary high-water mark," has the meaning given in Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR § 115.03(6).
(31) “Outstanding resource waters,” means waters listed in Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR § 102.10.
(32) “Percent fines,” means the percentage of a given sample of soil, which passes through a # 200 sieve.
(33) “Performance standard,” means a narrative or measurable number specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
(34) “Permit,” means a written authorization made by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, to the applicant to conduct land disturbing construction activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the state.
(35) “Permit administration fee,” means a sum of money paid to the Director of Public Works, or the designee, by the permit applicant for the purpose of recouping the expenses incurred by the authority in administering the permit.
(36) “Pervious surface,” means an area that releases as runoff a small portion of the precipitation that falls on it. Lawns, gardens, parks, forests or other similar vegetated areas are examples of surfaces that typically are pervious.
(37) “Pollutant,” has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. § 283.01(13).
(38) “Pollution,” has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. § 281.01(14).
(39) “Post-construction site," means a construction site following the completion of land disturbing construction activity and final site stabilization.
(40) “Pre-development condition,” means the extent and distribution of land cover types present before the initiation of land disturbing construction activity, assuming that all
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 84
land uses prior to development activity are managed in an environmentally sound manner.
(41) “Preventive action limit,” has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. § 160.01(6).
(42) “Redevelopment,” means areas where development is replacing older development.
(43) “Responsible party,” means any entity holding fee title to the property or other person contracted or obligated by other agreement to implement and maintain post-construction storm water BMPs.
(44) “Runoff,” means storm water or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
(45) “Separate storm sewer,” means a conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all of the following criteria:
(a) Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff.
(b) Is not part of a combined sewer system.
(c) Is not part of a publicly owned wastewater treatment works that provides secondary or more stringent treatment.
(d) Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
(46) “Site,” means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land disturbing construction activity occurred.
(47) “Stop work order,” means an order issued by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, which requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped.
(48) “Storm water management plan,” means a comprehensive plan designed to reduce the discharge of pollutants from storm water after the site has under gone final stabilization following completion of the construction activity.
(49) “Storm water management system plan,” is a comprehensive plan designed to reduce the discharge of runoff and pollutants from hydrologic units on a regional or municipal scale.
(50) “Technical standard," means a document that specifies design, predicted performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material, device or method.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 85
(51) “Top of the channel,” means an edge, or point on the landscape, landward from the ordinary high-water mark of a surface water of the state, where the slope of the land begins to be less than 12% continually for at least 50 feet. If the slope of the land is 12% or less continually for the initial 50 feet, landward from the ordinary high-water mark, the top of the channel is the ordinary high-water mark.
(52) “TR-55,” means the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service), Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Second Edition, Technical Release 55, June 1986.
(53) “Type II distribution,” means a rainfall type curve as established in the “United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Technical Paper 149, published 1973”. The Type II curve is applicable to all of Wisconsin and represents the most intense storm pattern.
(54) “Waters of the state,” has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. § 283.01 (20).
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.206. Technical Standards.
The following methods shall be used in designing the water quality, peak flow shaving and infiltration components of storm water practices needed to meet the water quality standards of this ordinance:
(1) Technical standards identified, developed or disseminated by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 151 Subchapter V.
(2) Where technical standards have not been identified, or developed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, other technical standards may be used provided that the methods have been approved by the Director of Public Works, or the designee.
(3) In this ordinance, the following year and location has been selected as average annual rainfall: Green Bay, 1969 (Mar. 29-Nov. 25).
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.207 Performance Standards.
(1) Responsible Party. The landowner of the post-construction site or other person contracted or obligated by other agreement with the landowner to implement and
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 86
maintain post-construction storm water BMPs is the responsible party and shall comply with this ordinance.
(2) Plan. A written storm water management plan in accordance with Section 86.309 shall be developed and implemented for each post-construction site.
(3) Requirements. The plan required under sub. (2) shall include the following:
(a) Total Suspended Solids. BMPs shall be designed, installed and maintained to control total suspended solids carried in runoff from the post-construction site as follows:
1. BMPs shall be designed in accordance with Table 1., or to the maximum extent practicable as provided in sub. (3). The design shall be based on an average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff management controls.
Table 1. TSS Reduction Standards
Development Type
TSS Reduction
New Development
80 percent
In-fill development
80 percent
Redevelopment
40 percent of load from parking areas and roads
2. Maximum Extent Practicable. If the design cannot meet a total suspended solids reduction performance standard of Table 1., the storm water management plan shall include a written, site-specific explanation of why the total suspended solids reduction performance standard cannot be met and why the total suspended solids load will be reduced only to the maximum extent practicable. No person shall be required to exceed the applicable total suspended solids reduction performance standard to meet the requirements of maximum extent practicable.
3. Off-Site Drainage. When designing BMPs, runoff draining to the BMP from off-site shall be taken into account in determining the treatment efficiency of the practice. Any impact on the efficiency shall be compensated for by increasing the size of the BMP accordingly.
(b) Peak Discharge.
1. By design, BMPs shall be employed to maintain or reduce the 1-year, 2- year, 10-year, and 100-year 24-hour, post-construction peak runoff discharge rates to the 1-year, 2-year, 10-year and 100-year 24-hour pre-development peak runoff discharge rates respectively, or to the maximum extent practicable. The runoff curve numbers in Table 2. Shall be used to represent the actual pre-development conditions
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 87
Table 2 – Maximum Pre-Development Runoff Curve Numbers
Pre-development condition
Hydrologic Soil Group
A
B
C
D
Woodland
30
55
70
77
Grassland
39
61
71
78
Cropland
55
69
78
83
2. This subsection of the ordinance does not apply to any of the following:
a. A post-construction site where the discharge is directly into a lake over 5,000 acres or a stream or river segment draining more than 500 square miles.
b. A redevelopment post-construction site.
c. An in-fill development area less than 5 acres.
(c) Infiltration.
1. BMPs shall be designed, installed, and maintained to infiltrate runoff in accordance with the following or to the maximum extent practicable:
a. Low imperviousness. For development up to 40 percent connected imperviousness, such as parks, cemeteries, and low density residential development, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume shall be at least 90 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than one percent of the post-construction site is required as an effective infiltration area.
b. Moderate imperviousness. For development with more than 40 percent and up to 80 percent connected imperviousness, such as medium and high density residential, multi-family development, industrial and institutional development, and office parks, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume shall be at least 75 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than 1 percent of the post-construction site is required as an effective infiltration area.
c. High imperviousness. For development with more than 80 percent connected imperviousness, such as commercial strip malls, shopping centers, and commercial downtowns, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume shall be at
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 88
least 60 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than 2 percent of the post-construction site is required as an effective infiltration area.
2. Pre-development. Pre-development condition shall be the same as specified in Table 2 of the Peak Discharge section of this ordinance.
3. Source areas.
a. Prohibitions. Runoff from the following areas may not be infiltrated and may not qualify as contributing to meeting the requirements of this section unless demonstrated to meet the conditions of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources groundwater standards in Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 151.124(6):
i. Areas associated with a tier 1 industrial facility identified in Wisconsin Department of Natural Resource in Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 216.21(2)(a), including storage, loading and parking. Rooftops may be infiltrated with the concurrence of the regulatory authority.
ii. Storage and loading areas of a tier 2 industrial facility identified in Wisconsin Department of Natural Resource, Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 216.21(2)(b).
iii. Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Rooftops of fueling and vehicle maintenance areas may be infiltrated with the concurrence of the regulatory authority.
b. Exemptions. Runoff from the following areas may be credited toward meeting the requirement when infiltrated, but the decision to infiltrate runoff from these source areas is optional:
i. Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for commercial development.
ii. Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for industrial development not subject to the Prohibitions under par a. of this ordinance.
iii. In-fill development areas less than 5 acres
iv. Roads on commercial, industrial and institutional land uses, and arterial residential roads.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 89
4. Location of Practices.
a. Prohibitions. Infiltration practices may not be located in the following areas:
i. Areas within 1,000 feet upgradient or within 100 feet downgradient of direct conduits to groundwater.
ii. Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as specified in Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources in Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 811.16(4) or within the separation distances listed in Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources in Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 812.08 for any private well or non-community well for runoff infiltrated from commercial, including multi-family residential, industrial and institutional land uses or regional devices for one- and two-family residential development.
iii. Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources in Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 720.03(2), are present in the soil through which infiltration will occur.
b. Separation distances.
i. Infiltration practices shall be located so that the characteristics of the soil and the separation distance between the bottom of the infiltration system and the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock are in accordance with Table 3:
Table 3. Separation Distances and Soil Characteristics
Source Area
Separation Distance
Soil Characteristics
Industrial, Commercial, Institutional Parking Lots and Roads
5 feet or more
Filtering Layer
Residential Arterial Roads
5 feet or more
Filtering Layer
Roofs Draining to Subsurface Infiltration Practices
1 foot or more
Native or Engineered Soil with Particles Finer than Coarse Sand
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 90
Roofs Draining to Surface Infiltration Practices
Not Applicable
All Other Impervious Source Areas
3 feet or more
Filtering Layer
ii. Notwithstanding par. b., applicable requirements for injection wells classified under Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources in Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 815 shall be followed.
c. Infiltration rate exemptions. Infiltration practices located in the following areas may be credited toward meeting the requirements under the following conditions, but the decision to infiltrate under these conditions is optional:
i. Where the infiltration rate of the soil measured at the proposed bottom of the infiltration system is less than 0.6 inches per hour using a scientifically credible field test method.
ii. Where the least permeable soil horizon to 5 feet below the proposed bottom of the infiltration system using the U. S. Department of Agriculture method of soils analysis is one of the following: sandy clay loam, clay loam, silty clay loam, sandy clay, silty clay, or clay.
5. Alternate Use. Where alternate uses of runoff are employed, such as for toilet flushing, laundry, or irrigation or storage on green roofs where an equivalent portion of the runoff is captured permanently by rooftop vegetation, such alternate use shall be given equal credit toward the infiltration volume required by this section.
6. Groundwater Standards.
a. Infiltration systems designed in accordance with this section shall, to the extent technically and economically feasible, minimize the level of pollutants infiltrating to groundwater and shall maintain compliance with the preventive action limit at a point of standards application in accordance with Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources in Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 140. However, if site specific information indicates that compliance with a preventive action limit is not achievable, the infiltration BMP may not be installed or shall be modified to prevent infiltration to the maximum extent practicable.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 91
b. Notwithstanding par. a., the discharge from BMPs shall remain below the enforcement standard at the point of standards application.
7. Pretreatment. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for parking lot runoff and for runoff from new road construction in commercial, industrial and institutional areas that will enter an infiltration system. The pretreatment shall be designed to protect the infiltration system from clogging prior to scheduled maintenance and to protect groundwater quality in accordance with sub. 6. Pretreatment options may include, but are not limited to, oil and grease separation, sedimentation, biofiltration, filtration, swales or filter strips.
8. Maximum Extent Practicable. Where the conditions of subs. 3. and 4. limit or restrict the use of infiltration practices, the performance standard of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources in Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 151.124 shall be met to the maximum extent practicable.
(d) Protective Areas.
1. Definition. In this section, “protective area” means an area of land that commences at the top of the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary of wetlands, and that is the greatest of the following widths, as measured horizontally from the top of the channel or delineated wetland boundary to the closest impervious surface. However, in this section, “protective area’ does not include any area of land adjacent to any stream enclosed within a pipe or culvert, so that runoff cannot enter the enclosure at this location.
a. For outstanding resource waters and exceptional resource waters, 75 feet.
b. For perennial and intermittent streams identified on an U.S. Geological Survey 7.5-minute series topographic map, or a county soil survey map, whichever is more current, 50 feet.
c. For lakes, 50 feet.
d. For wetlands not subject to par. e. or f., 50 feet.
e. For highly susceptible wetlands, 75 feet. Highly susceptible wetlands include the following types: calcareous fens, sedge meadows, open and coniferous bogs, low prairies, coniferous swamps, lowland hardwood swamps, and ephemeral ponds.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 92
f For less susceptible wetlands, 10 percent of the average wetland width, but no less than 10 feet nor more than 30 feet. Less susceptible wetlands include: degraded wetland dominated by invasive species such as reed canary grass; cultivated hydric soils; and any gravel pits, or dredged material or fill material disposal sites that take on the attributes of a wetland.
g. In pars. d. to f., determinations of the extent of the protective area adjacent to wetlands shall be made on the basis of the sensitivity and runoff susceptibility of the wetland in accordance with the standards and criteria in Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, Wisconsin Administrative Code NR 103.03.
h. Wetland boundary delineation shall be made in accordance with current Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources procedures. This paragraph does not apply to wetlands that have been completely filled in compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations. The protective area for wetlands that have been partially filled in compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations shall be measured from the wetland boundary delineation after a fill has been placed. Where there is a legally authorized wetland fill, the protective area standard need not be met in that location.
i. For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas greater than 130 acres, 10 feet.
j. Notwithstanding pars. a. to i., the greatest protective area width shall apply where rivers, streams, lakes and wetlands are contiguous.
2. Applicability. This section applies to post-construction sites located within a protective area, except those areas exempted pursuant to sub 4.
3. Requirements. The following requirements shall be met:
a. Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective area entirely or to the maximum extent practicable. If there is no practical alternative to locating an impervious surface in the protective area, the storm water management plan shall contain a written, site-specific explanation.
b. Where land disturbing construction activity occurs within a protective area, adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover of 70 percent or greater shall be established and maintained where no impervious surface is present. The adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover shall be sufficient to provide for bank stability, maintenance of fish habitat, and filtering of pollutants from upslope
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 93
overland flow areas under sheet flow conditions. Non-vegetative materials, such as rock riprap, may be employed on the bank as necessary to prevent erosion such as on steep slopes or where high velocity flows occur.
c. Best management practice such as filter strips, swales, or wet detention ponds, that are designed to control pollutants from non-point sources, may be located in the protective area.
4. Exemptions. This section does not apply to any of the following:
a. In-fill development areas less than 5 acres.
b. Structures that cross or access surface water such as boat landings, bridges, and culverts.
c. Structures constructed in accordance with Wis. Stat. § 59.692(1v).
d. Areas of post-construction sites from which the runoff does not enter the surface water, including wetlands, without first being treated by a BMP to meet the local ordinance requirements for total suspended solids and peak flow reduction, except to the extent that vegetative ground cover is necessary to maintain bank stability.
(e) Fueling and Vehicle Maintenance Areas.
Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas shall have BMPs designed, installed, and maintained to reduce petroleum within runoff, so that the runoff that enters waters of the state contains no visible petroleum sheen, or to the maximum extent practicable
(f) Swale Treatment for Transportation Facilities.
1. Requirement. Except as provided in sub 2., transportation facilities that use swales for runoff conveyance and pollutant removal are exempt from the requirements of local ordinance requirements for peak flow control, total suspended solids control, and infiltration, if the swales are designed to do all of the following or to the maximum extent practicable:
a. Swales shall be vegetated. However, where appropriate, non-vegetative measures may be employed to prevent erosion or provide for runoff treatment, such as rock riprap stabilization or check dams.
b. Swales shall comply with the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources technical standard 1005 “Vegetated Infiltration Swales”, dated May 2007, or a superseding document.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 94
2. Other requirements.
a. Notwithstanding sub 1., the Director of Public Works, or the designee, may, consistent with water quality standards, require that other requirements, in addition to swale treatment, be met on a transportation facility with an average daily traffic rate greater than 2,500 and where the initial surface water of the state that the runoff directly enters is an of the following:
i. An outstanding resource water.
ii. An exceptional resource water.
iii. Waters listed in the http://water.epa.gov/lawsregs/guidance/303.cfm Federal Clean Water Act Section 303 (d) that are identified as impaired in whole or in part, due to non-point source impacts.
iv. Water where targeted performance standards are developed pursuant to Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources in Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 151.004.
b. The transportation facility authority shall contact the Director of Public Works, or the designee, to determine if additional BMPs beyond a water quality swale are needed under this subsection.
(4) General Considerations for On-Site and Off-Site Storm W Management Measures. The following considerations shall be observed in managing runoff:
(a) Natural topography and land cover features such as natural swales, natural depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity, and natural groundwater recharge areas shall be preserved and used, to the extent possible, to meet the requirements of this section.
(b) Emergency overland flow for all storm water facilities shall be provided to prevent exceeding the safe capacity of downstream drainage facilities and prevent endangerment of downstream property or public safety.
(5) Location and Regional Treatment Option.
(a) The BMPs may be located on-site or off-site as part of a regional storm water device, practice or system.
(b) Post-construction runoff within a non-navigable surface water that flows into a BMP, such as a wet detention pond, is not required to meet the performance
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 95
standards of this ordinance. Post-construction BMPs may be located in non-navigable surface waters.
(c) Except as allowed under par. (d), post-construction runoff from new development shall meet the post-construction performance standards prior to entering a navigable surface water.
(d) Post-construction runoff from any development within a navigable surface water that flows into a BMP is not required to meet the performance standards of this ordinance if:
1. The BMP was constructed prior to the effective date of this ordinance and the BMP either received a permit issued under Wis. Stats. Chapter 30, or the BMP did not require a Wis. Stats. Chapter 30, permit; and
2. The BMP is designed to provide runoff treatment from future upland development.
(e) Runoff from existing development, redevelopment and in-fill areas shall meet the post-construction performance standards in accordance with this paragraph.
1. To the maximum extent practicable, BMPs shall be located to treat runoff prior to discharge to navigable surface waters.
2. Post-construction BMPs for such runoff may be located in a navigable surface water if allowable under all other applicable federal, state and local regulations such as Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources in Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 103, and Wis. Stats. Chapter 30.
(f) The discharge of runoff from a BMP, such as a wet detention pond, or after a series of such BMPs is subject to this chapter.
(g) The Director of Public Works, or the designee, may approve off-site management measures provided that all of the following conditions are met:
1. The Director of Public Works, or the designee, determines that the post-construction runoff is covered by a storm water management system plan that is approved by the Village of Weston and that contains management requirements consistent with the purpose and intent of this ordinance.
2. The off-site facility meets all of the following conditions:
a. The facility is in place.
b. The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a level of storm water control equal to or greater than that which would be
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 96
afforded by on-site practices meeting the performance standards of this ordinance.
c. The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its long-term operation and maintenance.
(h) Where a regional treatment option exists such that the Director of Public Works, or the designee, exempts the applicant from all or part of the minimum on-site storm water management requirements, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount determined in negotiation with the Director of Public Works, or the designee. In determining the fee for post-construction runoff, the Director of Public Works, or the designee, shall consider an equitable distribution of the cost for land, engineering design, construction, and maintenance of the regional treatment option.
(6) Alternate Requirement. The Director of Public Works, or the designee, may establish storm water management requirements more stringent than those set forth in this section if the Director of Public Works, or the designee, determines that an added level of protection is needed to protect sensitive resources.
(7) Maintenance of Effort: For redevelopment sites where the redevelopment will be replacing older development that was subject to post-construction performance standards of Wisconsin Administrative Code NR 151 in effect on or after October 1, 2004, the responsible party shall maintain the existing level of control for TSS, infiltration and peak flow reduction, or meet the redevelopment standards of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources in Wisconsin Administrative Code §§ NR 151.122 through 151.125, whichever is more stringent.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.208. Permitting Requirements, Procedures and Fees.
(1) Permit Required. No responsible party may undertake a land disturbing construction activity without receiving a post-construction runoff permit from the Director of Public Works, or the designee, prior to commencing the proposed activity.
(2) Permit Application and Fees. Unless specifically excluded by this ordinance, any responsible party desiring a permit shall submit to the Director of Public Works, or the designee, a permit application made on a form provided by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, for that purpose.
(a) Unless otherwise excepted by this ordinance, a permit application must be accompanied by a storm water management plan, a maintenance agreement and a non-refundable permit administration fee.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 97
(b) The storm water management plan shall be prepared to meet the requirements of Section 86.5.207 and Section 86.5.209, the maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet the requirements of Section 86.5.210, the financial guarantee shall meet the requirements of Section 86.5.211, and fees shall be those established by the Village of Weston Board as set forth in Section 86.5.212.
(3) Review and Approval of Permit Application. The Director of Public Works, or the designee, shall review any permit application that is submitted with a storm water management plan, maintenance agreement, and the required fee. The following approval procedure shall be used:
(a) Within 30 business days of the receipt of a complete permit application, including all items as required by sub. (2), the Director of Public Works, or the designee, shall inform the applicant whether the application, plan and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved based on the requirements of this ordinance.
(b) If the storm water permit application, plan and maintenance agreement are approved, or if an agreed upon payment of fees in lieu of storm water management practices is made, the Director of Public Works, or the designee, shall issue the permit.
(c) If the storm water permit application, plan or maintenance agreement is disapproved, the Director of Public Works, or the designee, shall detail in writing the reasons for disapproval.
(d) The Director of Public Works, or the designee, may request additional information from the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the Director of Public Works, or the designee, shall have 15 business days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the plan and maintenance agreement are either approved or disapproved.
(e) Failure by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, to inform the permit applicant of a decision within 15 business days of a required submittal shall be deemed to mean approval of the submittal and the applicant may proceed as if a permit had been issued.
(4) Permit Requirements. All permits issued under this ordinance shall be subject to the following conditions, and holders of permits issued under this ordinance shall be deemed to have accepted these conditions. The Director of Public Works, or the designee, may suspend or revoke a permit for violation of a permit condition, following written notification of the responsible party. An action by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, to suspend or revoke this permit may be appealed in accordance with Section 86.5.214.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 98
(a) Compliance with this permit does not relieve the responsible party of the responsibility to comply with other applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations.
(b) The responsible party shall design and install all structural and non-structural storm water management measures in accordance with the approved storm water management plan and this permit.
(c) The responsible party shall notify the Director of Public Works, or the designee, at least 15 business days before commencing any work in conjunction with the storm water management plan, and within 5 business days upon completion of the storm water management practices. If required as a special condition under sub. (5), the responsible party shall make additional notification according to a schedule set forth by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, so that practice installations can be inspected during construction.
(d) Practice installations required as part of this ordinance shall be certified "as built" by a licensed professional engineer. Completed storm water management practices must pass a final inspection by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, to determine if they are in accordance with the approved storm water management plan and ordinance. The Director of Public Works, or the designee, shall notify the responsible party in writing of any changes required in such practices to bring them into compliance with the conditions of this permit.
(e) The responsible party shall notify the Director of Public Works, or the designee, of any significant modifications it intends to make to an approved storm water management plan. The Director of Public Works, or the designee, may require that the proposed modifications be submitted to it for approval prior to incorporation into the storm water management plan and execution by the responsible party.
(f) The responsible party shall maintain all storm water management practices in accordance with the storm water management plan until the practices either become the responsibility of the Village of Weston, or are transferred to subsequent private owners as specified in the approved maintenance agreement.
(g) The responsible party authorizes the Director of Public Works, or the designee, to perform any work or operations necessary to bring storm water management measures into conformance with the approved storm water management plan, and consents to a special assessment or charge against the property as authorized under Wis. Stats. Chapter 66 Subchapter VII, or to charging such costs against the financial guarantee posted under Section 86.5.211.
(h) If so directed by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, the responsible party shall repair at the responsible party's own expense all damage to adjoining municipal facilities and drainage ways caused by runoff, where such damage is
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 99
caused by activities that are not in compliance with the approved storm water management plan.
(i) The responsible party shall permit property access to the Director of Public Works, or its designee, for the purpose of inspecting the property for compliance with the approved storm water management plan and this permit.
(j) Where site development or redevelopment involves changes in direction, increases in peak rate and/or total volume of runoff from a site, the Director of Public Works, or the designee, may require the responsible party to make appropriate legal arrangements with affected property owners concerning the prevention of endangerment to property or public safety.
(k) The responsible party is subject to the enforcement actions and penalties detailed in Section 86.5.213, if the responsible party fails to comply with the terms of this permit.
(5) Permit Conditions. Permits issued under this subsection may include conditions established by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, in addition to the requirements needed to meet the performance standards in Section 86.5.207 or a financial guarantee as provided for in Section 86.5.211.
(6) Permit Duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date the Director of Public Works, or the designee, notifies the responsible party that all storm water management practices have passed the final inspection required under sub. (4)(d).
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.209. Storm Water Management Plan (SWMP).
(1) Plan Requirements. The storm water management plan required under Section 86.5.208 (2) shall contain at a minimum the following information:
(a) Name, address, and telephone number for the following or their designees: landowner; developer; project engineer for practice design and certification; person(s) responsible for installation of storm water management practices; and person(s) responsible for maintenance of storm water management practices prior to the transfer, if any, of maintenance responsibility to another party.
(b) A proper legal description of the property proposed to be developed, referenced to the U.S. Public Land Survey system or to block and lot numbers within a recorded land subdivision plat.
(c) Pre-development site conditions, including:
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 100
1. One or more site maps at a scale of not less than 1 inch equals 20 feet. The site maps shall show the following: site location and legal property description; predominant soil types and hydrologic soil groups; existing cover type and condition; topographic contours of the site at a scale not to exceed 10 feet; topography and drainage network including enough of the contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site; watercourses that may affect or be affected by runoff from the site; flow path and direction for all storm water conveyance sections; watershed boundaries used in hydrology determinations to show compliance with performance standards; lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site; limits of the 100 year floodplain; location of wells and wellhead protection areas covering the project area and delineated pursuant to Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 811.16.
2. Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to show compliance with performance standards. All major assumptions used in developing input parameters shall be clearly stated. The geographic areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required map(s).
(d) Post-development site conditions, including:
1. Explanation of the provisions to preserve and use natural topography and land cover features to minimize changes in peak flow runoff rates and volumes to surface waters and wetlands.
2. Explanation of any restrictions on storm water management measures in the development area imposed by wellhead protection plans and ordinances.
3. One or more site maps at a scale of not less than 1 inch equals 20 feet showing the following: post-construction pervious areas including vegetative cover type and condition; impervious surfaces including all buildings, structures, and pavement; post-construction topographic contours of the site at a scale not to exceed 10 feet; post-construction drainage network including enough of the contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site; locations and dimensions of drainage easements; locations of maintenance easements specified in the maintenance agreement; flow path and direction for all storm water conveyance sections; location and type of all storm water management conveyance and treatment practices, including the on-site and off-site tributary drainage area; location and type of conveyance system that will carry runoff from the drainage and treatment practices to the nearest
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 101
adequate outlet such as a curbed street, storm drain, or natural drainage way; watershed boundaries used in hydrology and pollutant loading calculations and any changes to lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site.
4. Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to show compliance with performance standards. The computations shall be made for each discharge point in the development, and the geographic areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required map(s).
5. Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required for the placement and design of storm water management measures. Detailed drawings including cross-sections and profiles of all permanent storm water conveyance and treatment practices.
(e) A description and installation schedule for the storm water management practices needed to meet the performance standards in Section 86.5.207.
(f) A maintenance plan developed for the life of each storm water management practice including the required maintenance activities and maintenance activity schedule.
(g) Cost estimates for the construction, operation, and maintenance of each storm water management practice.
(h) Other information requested in writing by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, to determine compliance of the proposed storm water management measures with the provisions of this ordinance.
(i) All site investigations, plans, designs, computations, and drawings shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer to be prepared in accordance with accepted engineering practice and requirements of this ordinance.
(2) Alternate Requirements. The Director of Public Works, or the designee, may prescribe alternative submittal requirements for applicants seeking an exemption to on-site storm water management performance standards under Section 86.5.207 (5).
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.210. Maintenance Agreement.
(1) Maintenance Agreement Required. The maintenance agreement required under Section 86.5.208 (2) for storm water management practices shall be an agreement between the Village of Weston and the responsible party to provide for maintenance
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 102
of storm water practices beyond the duration period of this permit. The maintenance agreement shall be filed with the County Register of Deeds as a property deed restriction so that it is binding upon all subsequent owners of the land served by the storm water management practices.
(2) Agreement Provisions. The maintenance agreement shall contain the following information and provisions and be consistent with the maintenance plan required by Section 86.5.209(1)(f):
(a) Identification of the storm water facilities and designation of the drainage area served by the facilities.
(b) A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the storm water management system consistent with the storm water management plan required under Section 86.5.208 (2).
(c) Identification of the responsible party(s), organization or city, county, town or village responsible for long term maintenance of the storm water management practices identified in the storm water management plan required under Section 86.5.208 (2).
(d) Requirement that the responsible party(s), organization, or city, county, town or village shall maintain storm water management practices in accordance with the schedule included in par. (b).
(e) Authorization for the Director of Public Works, or the designee, to access the property to conduct inspections of storm water management practices as necessary to ascertain that the practices are being maintained and operated in accordance with the agreement.
(f) A requirement on the Director of Public Works, or the designee, to maintain public records of the results of the site inspections, to inform the responsible party responsible for maintenance of the inspection results, and to specifically indicate any corrective actions required to bring the storm water management practice into proper working condition.
(g) Agreement that the party designated under par. (c), as responsible for long term maintenance of the storm water management practices, shall be notified by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, of maintenance problems which require correction. The specified corrective actions shall be undertaken within a reasonable time frame as set by the Director of Public Works, or the designee.
(h) Authorization of the Director of Public Works, or the designee, to perform the corrected actions identified in the inspection report if the responsible party designated under par. (c) does not make the required corrections in the specified time period. The Director of Public Works, or the designee, shall enter the
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 103
amount due on the tax rolls and collect the money as a special charge against the
property pursuant to Wis. Stats. Chapter 66 Subchapter VII.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.211. Financial Guarantee.
(1) Establishment of the Guarantee. The Director of Public Works, or the designee, may
require the submittal of a financial guarantee, the form and type of which shall be
acceptable to the Director of Public Works, or the designee. The financial guarantee
shall be in an amount determined by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, to
be the estimated cost of construction and the estimated cost of maintenance of the
storm water management practices during the period which the designated party in
the maintenance agreement has maintenance responsibility. The financial guarantee
shall give the Director of Public Works, or the designee, the authorization to use the
funds to complete the storm water management practices if the responsible party
defaults or does not properly implement the approved storm water management plan,
upon written notice to the responsible party by the Director of Public Works, or the
designee, that the requirements of this ordinance have not been met.
(2) Conditions for Release. Conditions for the release of the financial guarantee are as
follows:
(a) The Director of Public Works, or the designee, shall release the portion of the
financial guarantee established under this section, less any costs incurred by the
Director of Public Works, or the designee, to complete installation of practices,
upon submission of “as built plans” by a licensed professional engineer. The
Director of Public Works, or the designee, may make provisions for a partial
pro-rata release of the financial guarantee based on the completion of various
development stages.
(b) The Director of Public Works, or the designee, shall release the portion of the
financial guarantee established under this section to assure maintenance of
storm water practices, less any costs incurred by the Director of Public Works,
or the designee, at such time that the responsibility for practice maintenance is
passed on to another entity via an approved maintenance agreement.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.212. Fee Schedule.
The fees referred to in other sections of this ordinance shall be established by the Director of
Public Works, or the designee, and may from time to time be modified by resolution. A schedule
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 104
of the fees established by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, shall be available for
review in the Clerk’s Office or at http://westonwi.gov/documentcenter/view/931.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.213. Enforcement.
(1) Any land disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff initiated after
the effective date of this ordinance by any person, firm, association, or corporation
subject to the ordinance provisions shall be deemed a violation unless conducted in
accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.
(2) The Director of Public Works, or the designee, shall notify the responsible party by
certified mail of any non-complying land disturbing construction activity or postconstruction
runoff. The notice shall describe the nature of the violation, remedial
actions needed, a schedule for remedial action, and additional enforcement action
which may be taken.
(3) Upon receipt of written notification from the Director of Public Works, or the
designee, under sub. (2), the responsible party shall correct work that does not comply
with the storm water management plan or other provisions of this permit. The
responsible party shall make corrections as necessary to meet the specifications and
schedule set forth by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, in the notice.
(4) If the violations to a permit issued pursuant to this ordinance are likely to result in
damage to properties, public facilities, or waters of the state, the Director of Public
Works, or the designee, may enter the land and take emergency actions necessary to
prevent such damage. The costs incurred by the Director of Public Works, or the
designee, plus interest and legal costs shall be billed to the responsible party.
(5) The Director of Public Works, or the designee, is authorized to post a stop work order
on all land disturbing construction activity that is in violation of this ordinance, or to
request the Village Attorney to obtain a cease and desist order in any court with
jurisdiction.
(6) The Director of Public Works, or the designee, may revoke a permit issued under this
ordinance for non-compliance with ordinance provisions.
(7) Any permit revocation, stop work order, or cease and desist order shall remain in
effect unless retracted by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, or by a court
with jurisdiction.
(8) The Director of Public Works, or the designee, is authorized to refer any violation of
this ordinance, or of a stop work order or cease and desist order issued pursuant to
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 105
this ordinance, to the Village Attorney for the commencement of further legal proceedings in any court with jurisdiction.
(9) Any person, firm, association, or corporation who does not comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than 10 dollars or more than 500 dollars per offense, together with the costs of prosecution. Each day that the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(10) Compliance with the provisions of this ordinance may also be enforced by injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting to injunctional proceedings.
(11) When the Director of Public Works, or the designee, determines that the holder of a permit issued pursuant to this ordinance has failed to follow practices set forth in the storm water management plan, or has failed to comply with schedules set forth in said storm water management plan, the Director of Public Works, or the designee, or a party designated by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, may enter upon the land and perform the work or other operations necessary to bring the condition of said lands into conformance with requirements of the approved plan. The Director of Public Works, or the designee, shall keep a detailed accounting of the costs and expenses of performing this work. These costs and expenses shall be deducted from any financial security posted pursuant to Section 86.311 of this ordinance. Where such a security has not been established, or where such a security is insufficient to cover these costs, the costs and expenses shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the property and collected with any other taxes levied thereon for the year in which the work is completed.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.214. Appeals.
(1) Board of Appeals. The board of appeals, created pursuant to the Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 94 ARTICLE XVI. Section 94.16.13: Appeals of Zoning Interpretation. Establishment and Purpose of the Village of Weston ordinances pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 61.354(4)(b) shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, in administering this ordinance. The board shall also use the rules, procedures, duties, and powers authorized by statute in hearing and deciding appeals. Upon appeal, the board may authorize variances from the provisions of this ordinance that are not contrary to the public interest, and where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 106
(2) Who May Appeal. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the Village of Weston affected by any decision of the Director of Public Works, or the designee.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.215. Severability.
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance is judged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the ordinance shall remain in force and not be affected by such judgment.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.216. Effective Date.
This ordinance shall be in force and effect from and after its adoption and publication.
(Ord. of 5-24-2005, Ord. of 02-06-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
DIVISION 3: CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION
Section 86.5.300 Creation.
The intent of this ordinance is to require use of best management practices to reduce the amount of sediment and other pollutants resulting from land disturbing construction activities. Use of this ordinance will foster consistent, statewide application of the construction site performance standards for new development and redevelopment contained in Wisconsin Administrative Code NR Chapter 151 Subchapters III and IV.
[Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.301. Authority.
(1) This ordinance is adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stat. § 61.354. This ordinance supersedes all provisions of an ordinance previously enacted under Wis. Stat. § 61.35 that relate to construction site erosion control. Except as otherwise specified in Wis. Stat. § 61.354, Wis. Stat. § 61.35 applies to this ordinance and to any amendments to this ordinance.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 107
(2) The provisions of this ordinance are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of the same governing body.
(3) The Village Board hereby designates the Director of Public Works, or the designee, to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
(4) The requirements of this ordinance do not pre-empt more stringent erosion and sediment control requirements that may be imposed by any of the following:
(a) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules, permits or approvals including those authorized under Wis. Stats. §§ 281.16 and 283.33.
(b) Targeted non-agricultural performance standards promulgated in rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources in Wisconsin Administrative Code NR 151.004.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.302. Findings of Fact.
The Village Board finds that runoff from land disturbing construction activity carries a significant amount of sediment and other pollutants to the waters of the state in the Village of Weston.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.303. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; prevent and control water pollution; prevent and control soil erosion; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth, by minimizing the amount of sediment and other pollutants carried by runoff or discharged from land disturbing construction activity to waters of the state in the Village of Weston.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.304. Applicability and Jurisdiction.
(1) Applicability.
(a) This ordinance applies to the following land disturbing construction activities except as provided under sub. (b):
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 108
1. Construction sites for which the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources received a notice of intent in accordance with Wisconsin Administrative Code NR 216 Subchapter III on or after January 20, 2014.
2. Construction sites for which a bid has been advertised or construction contract signed for which no bid was advertised, on or after January 20, 2014.
(b) This ordinance does not apply to the following:
1. A construction project that is exempted by federal statutes or regulations from the requirement to have a national pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued under Chapter 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 122, for land disturbing construction activity.
2. Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices.
3. Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities.
4. Routine maintenance for project sites under 5 acres of land disturbance if performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility.
(c) Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in paragraph (a), this ordinance applies to construction sites of any size that, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, or the designee, are likely to result in runoff that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water, that causes undue channel erosion, that increases water pollution by scouring or the transportation of particulate matter or that endangers property or public safety.
(2) Jurisdiction.
This ordinance applies to land disturbing construction activities on lands within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the Village of Weston, as well as all lands located within the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the Village of Weston, even if plat approval is not involved.
(3) Exclusions.
This ordinance is not applicable to activities conducted by a state agency, as defined under Wis. Stat.§ 227.01 (1), but also including the office of district attorney, which is subject to the state plan promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered into under Wis. Stat, § 281.33 (2).
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 109
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.305. Definitions.
(1) “Administering authority,” means a governmental employee, or a regional planning commission empowered under Wis. Stat. § 61.354, that is designated by the Village Board to administer this ordinance.
(2) “Agricultural facilities and practices,” has the meaning in Wis. Stats. §§ 281.16(1) (a) and (b).
(3) “Average annual rainfall,” means a typical calendar year of precipitation as determined by the department for users of models such as SLAMM, P8, or equivalent methodology. The average annual rainfall is chosen from a department publication for the location closest to the municipality.
(4) “Best management practice” or “BMP,” means structural or non-structural measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state.
(5) “Business day,” means a day the office of the Director of Public Works, or the designee, is routinely and customarily open for business.
(6) “Cease and desist order,” means a court-issued order to halt land disturbing construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit.
(7) “Construction site,” means an area upon which one or more land disturbing construction activities occur, including areas that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale where multiple separate and distinct land disturbing construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules but under one plan. A long-range planning document that describes separate construction projects, such as a 20-year transportation improvement plan, is not a common plan of development.
(8) “Division of land,” means the creation from one parcel of 5 or more parcels or building sites of 1 ½ or fewer acres each in area where such creation occurs at one time or through the successive partition within a 5-year period.
(9) “Erosion,” means the process by which the land’s surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
(10) “Erosion and sediment control plan,” means a comprehensive plan developed to address pollution caused by erosion and sedimentation of soil particles or rock fragments during construction.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 110
(11) “Extraterritorial,” means the unincorporated area within 3 miles of the corporate limits of a first, second, or third class city, or within 1.5 miles of a fourth class city or village.
(12) “Final stabilization,” means that all land disturbing construction activities at the construction site have been completed and that a uniform perennial vegetative cover has been established, with a density of at least 70 percent of the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or that employ equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
(13) “Governing body,” means town board of supervisors, county board of supervisors, city council, village board of trustees or village council.
(14) “Land disturbing construction activity,” means any man-made alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or existing vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of the state. Land disturbing construction activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading activities.
(15) “MEP” or “maximum extent practicable,” means a level of implementing best management practices in order to achieve a performance standard specified in this chapter which takes into account the best available technology, cost effectiveness, geographic features, and other competing interests such as protection of public safety and welfare, protection of endangered and threatened resources, and preservation of historic properties. MEP allows flexibility in the way to meet the performance standards and may vary based on the performance standard and site conditions.
(16) “Performance standard,” means a narrative or measurable number specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
(17) “Permit,” means a written authorization made by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, to the applicant to conduct land disturbing construction activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the state.
(18) “Pollutant,” has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. § 283.01 (13).
(19) “Pollution,” has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. § 281.01 (14).
(20) “Responsible party,” means any entity holding fee title to the property or performing services to meet the performance standards of this ordinance through a contract or other agreement.
(21) “Runoff,” means storm water or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 111
(22) “Sediment,” means settleable solid material that is transported by runoff, suspended within runoff or deposited by runoff away from its original location.
(23) “Separate storm sewer,” means a conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all of the following criteria:
(a) Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff.
(b) Is not part of a combined sewer system.
(c) Is not part of a publicly owned wastewater treatment works that provides secondary or more stringent treatment.
(d) Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
(24) “Site,” means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land disturbing construction activity is proposed in the permit application.
(25) “Stop work order,” means an order issued by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, which requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped.
(26) “Technical standard,” means a document that specifies design, predicted performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material, device or method.
(27) “Waters of the state,” has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. § 283.01 (20).
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.306. Technical Standards.
(1) Design Criteria, Standards and Specifications. All BMPs required to comply with this ordinance shall meet the design criteria, standards and specifications based on any of the following:
(a) Design guidance and technical standards identified or developed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources in Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 151 Subchapter V.
(b) For this ordinance, soil loss is calculated using the appropriate rainfall or runoff factor, also referred to as the R factor, or an equivalent design storm using a type II distribution, with consideration given to the geographic location of the site and the period of disturbance.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 112
(2) Other Standards. Other technical standards not identified or developed in sub. (1), may be used provided that the methods have been approved by the Director of Public Works, or the designee.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.307. Performance Standards for Construction Sites Under an Acre.
(1) Responsible Party. The landowner of the construction site or other person contracted or obligated by other agreement with the landowner to implement and maintain construction site BMPs is the responsible party and shall comply with this section.
(2) Erosion and Other Pollution Control Requirements.
(a) Erosion and Sediment Control Practices. Erosion and sediment control practices at each site where land disturbing construction activity is to occur shall be used to prevent or reduce all of the following:
1. The deposition of soil from being tracked onto streets by vehicles.
2. The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into on-site storm water inlets.
3. The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into adjacent waters of the state.
4. The discharge of sediment from drainage ways that flow off the site.
5. The discharge of sediment by dewatering activities.
6. The discharge of sediment eroding from soil stockpiles existing for more than 7 days.
7. The discharge of sediment from erosive flows at outlets and in downstream channels.
8. The transport by runoff into waters of the state of chemicals, cement, and other building compounds and materials on the construction site during the construction period. However, projects that require the placement of these materials in waters of the state, such as constructing bridge footings or BMP installations, are not prohibited by this subdivision.
(3) Location. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be located prior to runoff entering waters of the state.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 113
(4) Implementation. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be implemented as follows:
(a) Erosion and sediment control practices shall be constructed or installed before land disturbing construction activities begin.
(b) Erosion and sediment control practices shall be maintained until final stabilization.
(c) Final stabilization activity shall commence when land disturbing activities cease and final grade has been reached on any portion of the site.
(d) Temporary stabilization activity shall commence when land disturbing activities have temporarily ceased and will not resume for a period exceeding 14 calendar days.
(e) BMPs that are no longer necessary for erosion and sediment control shall be removed by the responsible party.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.308. Performance Standards for Construction Sites of One Acre or More.
(1) Responsible Party. The responsible party shall implement an erosion and sediment control plan, developed in accordance with Section 86.5.310 that incorporates the requirements of this section.
(2) Plan. A written plan shall be developed in accordance with Section 86.5.310 and implemented for each construction site.
(3) Erosion and Other Pollutant Control Requirements. The plan required under sub. (2) shall include the following:
(a) Erosion and Sediment Control Practices. Erosion and sediment control practices at each site where land disturbing construction activity is to occur shall be used to prevent or reduce all of the following:
1. The deposition of soil from being tracked onto streets by vehicles.
2. The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into on-site storm water inlets.
3. The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into adjacent waters of the state.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 114
4. The discharge of sediment from drainage ways that flow off the site.
5. The discharge of sediment by dewatering activities.
6. The discharge of sediment eroding from soil stockpiles existing for more than 7 days.
7. The discharge of sediment from erosive flows at outlets and in downstream channels.
8. The transport by runoff into waters of the state of chemicals, cement, and other building compounds and materials on the construction site during the construction period. However, projects that require the placement of these materials in waters of the state, such as constructing bridge footings or BMP installations, are not prohibited by this subdivision.
9. The transport by runoff into waters of the state of untreated wash water from vehicle and wheel washing.
(b) Sediment Performance Standards. In addition to the erosion and sediment control practices under par. (a), the following erosion and sediment control practices shall be employed:
1. BMPs that, by design, discharge no more than 5 tons per acre per year, or to the maximum extent practicable, of the sediment load carried in runoff from initial grading to final stabilization.
2. No person shall be required to employ more BMPs than are needed to meet a performance standard in order to comply with maximum extent practicable. Erosion and sediment control BMPs may be combined to meet the requirements of this paragraph. Credit may be given toward meeting the sediment performance standard of this paragraph for limiting the duration or area, or both, of land disturbing construction activity, or for other appropriate mechanisms.
3. Notwithstanding sub. 1., if BMPs cannot be designed and implemented to meet the sediment performance standard, the plan shall include a written, site-specific explanation of why the sediment performance standard cannot be met and how the sediment load will be reduced to the maximum extent practicable.
(c) Preventative Measures. The plan shall incorporate all of the following:
1. Maintenance of existing vegetation, especially adjacent to surface waters whenever possible.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 115
2. Minimization of soil compaction and preservation of topsoil.
3. Minimization of land disturbing construction activity on slopes of 20% or more.
4. Development of spill prevention and response procedures.
(4) Location. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be located prior to runoff entering waters of the state.
(5) Alternate Requirements. The Director of Public Works, or the designee, may establish storm water management requirements more stringent than those set forth in this section if the Director of Public Works, or the designee, determines that an added level of protection is needed for sensitive resources.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.309. Permitting Requirements, Procedures, and Fees.
(1) Permit Required. No responsible party may commence a land disturbing construction activity subject to this ordinance without receiving prior approval of an erosion and sediment control plan for the site and a permit from the Director of Public Works, or the designee.
(2) Permit Application and Fees. At least one responsible party desiring to undertake a land disturbing construction activity subject to this ordinance shall submit an application for a permit and an erosion and sediment control plan that meets the requirements of Section 86.5.309 and shall pay an application fee of which is part of the storm water review fee to the Village of Weston. By submitting an application, the applicant is authorizing the Director of Public Works, or the designee, to enter the site to obtain information required for the review of the erosion and sediment control plan.
(3) Review and Approval of Permit Application. The Director of Public Works, or the designee, shall review any permit application that is submitted with an erosion and sediment control plan, and the required fee. The following approval procedure shall be used:
(a) Within 30 business days of the receipt of a complete permit application, as required by sub. (2), the Director of Public Works, or the designee, shall inform the applicant whether the application and plan are approved or disapproved based on the requirements of this ordinance.
(b) If the permit application and plan are approved, the Director of Public Works, or the designee, shall issue the permit.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 116
(c) If the permit application or plan is disapproved, the Director of Public Works, or the designee, shall state in writing the reasons for disapproval.
(d) The Director of Public Works, or the designee, may request additional information from the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the Director of Public Works, or the designee, shall have 15 business days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the plan is either approved or disapproved.
(e) Failure by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, to inform the permit applicant of a decision within 15 business days of a required submittal shall be deemed to mean approval of the submittal and the applicant may proceed as if a permit had been issued.
(4) Surety Bond. As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit, the Director of Public Works, or the designee, may require the applicant to deposit a surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit to guarantee a good faith execution of the approved erosion control plan and any permit conditions.
(5) Permit Requirements. All permits shall require the responsible party to:
(a) Notify the Director of Public Works, or the designee, within 48 hours of commencing any land disturbing construction activity.
(b) Notify the Director of Public Works, or the designee, of completion of any BMPs within 14 days after their installation.
(c) Obtain permission in writing from the Director of Public Works, or the designee, prior to any modification pursuant to Section 86.5.310(3) of the erosion and sediment control plan.
(d) Install all BMPs as identified in the approved erosion and sediment control plan.
(e) Maintain all road drainage systems, storm water drainage systems, BMPs and other facilities identified in the erosion and sediment control plan.
(f) Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces and drainage ways resulting from land disturbing construction activities and document repairs in a site erosion control log.
(g) Inspect the BMPs within 24 hours after each rain of 0.5 inches or more which results in runoff during active construction periods, and at least once each week, make needed repairs and document the findings of the inspections in a site erosion control log with the date of inspection, the name of the person
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 117
conducting the inspection, and a description of the present phase of the construction at the site.
(h) Allow the Director of Public Works, or the designee, to enter the site for the purpose of inspecting compliance with the erosion and sediment control plan or for performing any work necessary to bring the site into compliance with the control plan. Keep a copy of the erosion and sediment control plan at the construction site.
(6) Permit Conditions. Permits issued under this section may include conditions established by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, in addition to the requirements set forth in sub. (5), where needed to assure compliance with the performance standards in Section 86.5.307 or Section 86.5.308.
(7) Permit Duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid for a period of 180 days, or the length of the building permit or other construction authorizations, whichever is longer, from the date of issuance. The Director of Public Works, or the designee, may extend the period one or more times for up to an additional 180 days. The Director of Public Works, or the designee, may require additional BMPs as a condition of the extension if they are necessary to meet the requirements of this ordinance.
(8) Maintenance. The responsible party throughout the duration of the construction activities shall maintain all BMPs necessary to meet the requirements of this ordinance until the site has undergone final stabilization.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.310. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, Statement, and Amendments.
(1) Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
(a) An erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared and submitted to the Director of Public Works, or the designee.
(b) The erosion and sediment control plan shall be designed to meet the performance standards in Section 86.5.307, Section 86.5.308 and other requirements of this ordinance.
(c) The erosion and sediment control plan shall address pollution caused by soil erosion and sedimentation during construction and up to final stabilization of the site. The erosion and sediment control plan shall include, at a minimum, the following items:
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 118
1. The name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant, together with the name of the applicant’s principal contact at such firm. The application shall also include start and end dates for construction.
2. Description of the site and the nature of the construction activity, including representation of the limits of land disturbance on a United States Geological Service 7.5-minute series topographic map.
3. A sequence of construction of the development site, including stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation.
4. Estimates of the total area of the site and the total area of the site that is expected to be disturbed by construction activities.
5. Calculations to show compliance with the required performance standards.
6. Existing data describing the surface soil as well as subsoils.
7. Depth to groundwater, as indicated by Natural Resources Conservation Service soil information where available.
8. Name of the immediate named receiving water from the United States Geological Service 7.5-minute series topographic maps.
(d) The erosion and sediment control plan shall include a site map. The site map shall include the following items and shall be at a scale not greater than 100 feet per inch and at a contour interval not to exceed five feet.
1. Existing topography, vegetative cover, natural and engineered drainage systems, roads and surface waters. Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site shall be shown. Any identified 100-year flood plains, flood fringes and floodways shall also be shown.
2. Boundaries of the construction site.
3. Drainage patterns and approximate slopes anticipated after major grading activities.
4. Areas of soil disturbance.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 119
5. Location of major structural and non-structural controls identified in the plan.
6. Location of areas where stabilization practices will be employed.
7. Areas which will be vegetated following construction.
8. Area and location of wetland acreage on the construction site and locations where storm water is discharged to a surface water or wetland within one-quarter mile downstream of the construction site.
9. An alphanumeric or equivalent grid overlying the entire construction site map.
(e) Each erosion and sediment control plan shall include a description of appropriate controls and measures that will be performed at the site to prevent pollutants from reaching waters of the state. The plan shall clearly describe the appropriate control measures for each major activity and the timing during the construction process that the measures will be implemented. The description of erosion controls shall include, when appropriate, the following minimum requirements:
1. Description of interim and permanent stabilization practices, including a practice implementation schedule. The erosion control plan shall ensure that existing vegetation is preserved where attainable and that disturbed portions of the site are stabilized.
2. Description of structural practices to divert flow away from exposed soils, store flows or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from the site. Unless otherwise specifically approved in writing by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, structural measures shall be installed on upland soils.
3. Management of overland flow at all sites, unless otherwise controlled by outfall controls.
4. Trapping of sediment in channelized flow.
5. Staging construction to limit bare areas subject to erosion.
6. Protection of downslope drainage inlets where they occur.
7. Minimization of tracking at all vehicle and equipment entry and exit locations of the construction site.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 120
8. Clean up of off-site sediment deposits.
9. Proper disposal of building and waste material.
10. Stabilization of drainage ways.
11. Control of soil erosion from dirt stockpiles.
12. Installation of permanent stabilization practices as soon as possible after final grading.
13. Minimization of dust to the maximum extent practicable.
(f) The erosion and sediment control plan shall require that velocity dissipation devices be placed at discharge locations and along the length of any outfall channel, as necessary, to provide a non-erosive flow from the structure to a water course so that the natural physical and biological characteristics and functions are maintained and protected.
(2) Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Statement. For each construction site identified under Section 86.5.304 (1)(c), an erosion and sediment control plan statement shall be prepared. This statement shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works, or the designee. The control plan statement shall briefly describe the site, including a site map. Further, it shall also include the best management practices that will be used to meet the requirements of the ordinance, including the site development schedule.
(3) Amendments. The applicant shall amend the plan if any of the following occur:
(a) There is a change in design, construction, operation or maintenance at the site which has the reasonable potential for the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state and which has not otherwise been addressed in the plan.
(b) The actions required by the plan fail to reduce the impacts of pollutants carried by construction site runoff.
(c) The Director of Public Works, or the designee, notifies the applicant of changes needed in the plan.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.311. Fee Schedule.
The fees referred to in other sections of this ordinance shall be established by the Village Board and may from time to time be modified by resolution. A schedule of the fees established by the
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 121
Director of Public Works, or the designee, shall be available for review in the Clerk’s office or at
http://westonwi.gov/documentcenter/view/931
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.312. Inspection.
If land disturbing construction activities are being carried out without a permit required by this
ordinance, the Director of Public Works, or the designee, may enter the land pursuant to the
provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0119(1), (2), and (3).
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.313. Enforcement.
(1) The Director of Public Works, or the designee, may post a stop-work order if any of
the following occurs:
(a) Any land disturbing construction activity regulated under this ordinance is being
undertaken without a permit.
(b) The erosion and sediment control plan is not being implemented in a good faith
manner.
(c) The conditions of the permit are not being met.
(2) If the responsible party does not cease activity as required in a stop-work order posted
under this section or fails to comply with the erosion and sediment control plan or
permit conditions, the Director of Public Works, or the designee, may revoke the
permit.
(3) If the responsible party, where no permit has been issued, does not cease the activity
after being notified by the Director of Public Works, or the designee, or if a
responsible party violates a stop-work order posted under sub. (1), the Director of
Public Works, or the designee, may request the Village Attorney to obtain a cease and
desist order in any court with jurisdiction.
(4) The Director of Public Works, or the designee, may retract the stop-work order issued
under sub. (1) or the permit revocation under sub. (2).
(5) After posting a stop-work order under sub. (1), the Director of Public Works, or the
designee, may issue a notice of intent to the responsible party of its intent to perform
work necessary to comply with this ordinance. The Director of Public Works, or the
designee, may go on the land and commence the work after issuing the notice of
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 122
intent. The costs of the work performed under this subsection by the Director of
Public Works, or the designee, plus interest at the rate authorized by Director of
Public Works, or the designee, shall be billed to the responsible party. In the event a
responsible party fails to pay the amount due, the clerk shall enter the amount due on
the tax rolls and collect as a special assessment against the property pursuant to Wis.
Stats. Chapter 66 Subchapter VII.
(6) Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than 10 dollars nor more than 500 dollars and the costs of
prosecution for each violation. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
(7) Compliance with the provisions of this ordinance may also be enforced by injunction
in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a
cease and desist order before resorting to injunctional proceedings.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.314. Appeals.
(1) Board of Appeals. The board of appeals created pursuant to the Village of Weston
Municipal Code Chapter 94 ARTICLE XVI Section 94.16.13: Appeals of Zoning
Interpretation. Establishment and Purpose of the Village of Weston ordinance
pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 61.354(4)(b):
(a) Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order,
decision or determination made by the Director of Public Works, or the
designee, in administering this ordinance except for cease and desist orders
obtained under Section 86.5.312 (3).
(b) Upon appeal, may authorize variances from the provisions of this ordinance
which are not contrary to the public interest and where owing to special
conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will result in
unnecessary hardship; and
(c) Shall use the rules, procedures, duties and powers authorized by statute in
hearing and deciding appeals and authorizing variances.
(2) Who May Appeal. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any aggrieved
person or by any office, department, board, or bureau of the Village of Weston
affected by any decision of the Director of Public Works, or the designee.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 123
Section 86.5.315. Severability.
If a court of competent jurisdiction judges any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of the ordinance shall remain in force and not be affected by such judgment.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.316. Effective Date.
This ordinance shall be in force and effect from and after its adoption and publication.
(Ord. of 5-24-2005, Ord. of 02-06-2014) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
DIVISION 4. ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION
Section 86.5.400. Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of The Village of Weston through the regulation of non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable, as required by federal and state law. This ordinance establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) permit process. The objectives of this ordinance are:
(a) To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user.
(b) To prohibit Illicit Connections and Discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
(c) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.401. Definitions.
(a) Administering Authority, means a governmental employee, or a regional planning commission empowered under Wis. Stat. § 61.354,, that is designated by the Village
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 124
of Weston Board to administer this ordinance.
(b) Best Management Practice or BMP, means structural or non-structural measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state.
(c) Clean Water Act, means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
(d) Construction activity, means activity subject to WPDES Construction Permits. Currently these include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of 1 acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
(e) Hazardous materials, means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
(f) Illegal Discharge, means any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the storm drain system, except as specifically exempted by this ordinance.
(g) Illicit Connection, means either of the following: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an Administering authority or, Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an Administering authority.
(h) Industrial Activity, means activity subject to WPDES Industrial Permits.
(i) Non-Stormwater Discharge, means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of storm water.
(j) Person, means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent.
(k) Pollutant, means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 125
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
(l) Premises, means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
(m) Storm Drainage System, means any publicly-owned facilities by which storm water is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
(n) Storm Water, means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
(o) Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan or SWPPP, means a document which describes the Best Management Practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to Stormwater, Stormwater Conveyance Systems, and/or Receiving Waters to the Maximum Extent Practicable.
(p) Wastewater, means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water, discharged from a facility.
(q) Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or WPDES, means a permit issued by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (WDNR) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.402. Applicability.
This ordinance shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an administering authority.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 126
Section 86.5.403. Responsibility for Administration.
The Director of Public Works shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the administering authority may be delegated in writing by the Director of Public Works to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.404. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this Ordinance.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.405. Ultimate Responsibility.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this ordinance are minimum standards; therefore, this ordinance does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.406. Discharge Prohibitions.
(a) Prohibition of Illegal Discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than storm water.
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this ordinance: flushing of water lines or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, non-
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 127
commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one PPM chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing Pollutants.
(2) Discharges specified in writing by the administering authority as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
(3) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the administering authority prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge permitted under a WPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the WDNR, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
(b) Prohibition of Illicit Connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this ordinance if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.407. Suspension of MS4 Access.
(a) Suspension due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations. The Director of Public Works may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or Waters of the State. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the administering authority may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or Waters of the State, or to minimize danger to persons.
(b) Suspension due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this ordinance may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The administering authority
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 128
will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may
petition the administering authority for reconsideration and hearing. A person
commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated
pursuant to this Section, without the prior approval of the administering authority.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.408. Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity WPDES storm water discharge
permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit
may be required in a form acceptable to the Director of Public Works prior to the allowing of
discharges to the MS4.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.409. Monitoring of Discharges.
(a) Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have storm water discharges
associated with industrial activity, including construction activity.
(b) Access to Facilities.
(1) The Director of Public Works shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities
subject to regulation under this ordinance as often as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this ordinance. If a discharger has security measures
in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the administering authority.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the Director of Public Works ready access to all
parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and
copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of a WPDES permit
to discharge storm water, and the performance of any additional duties as
defined by state and federal law.
(3) The Director of Public Works shall have the right to set up on any permitted
facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the administering
authority to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's storm water
discharge.
(4) The Director of Public Works has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 129
condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the Director of Public Works and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Director of Public Works access to a permitted facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this ordinance. A person who is the operator of a facility with a WPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the administering authority reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this ordinance.
(7) If the Director of Public Works has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the administering authority may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.410. Requirement to Prevent, Control and Reduce Stormwater Pollutants by the use of Best Management Practices.
The Director of Public Works will adopt requirements identifying Best Management Practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or Waters of the State. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid WPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliant with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the WPDES permit.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 130
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.411. Watercourse Protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.412. Notification of Spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or Waters of the State, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the administering authority in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the Director of Public Works within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.413. Enforcement.
(a) Notice of Violation.
(1) Whenever the Director of Public Works finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this Ordinance, the administering authority may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
a. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 131
b. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
c. That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
d. The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
e. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
f. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
(2) If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.414. Appeal of Notice of Violation.
Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the determination of the administering authority. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the Notice of Violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.415. Enforcement Measures after Appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 10 days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the administering authority, then representatives of the administering authority shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the governmental agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 132
Section 86.5.416. Cost of Abatement of the Violation.
Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within 10 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the village by reason of such violation. Interest at the rate of six (6) percent per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the 31st day following discovery of the violation.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.417. Injunctive Relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Ordinance. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this ordinance, the administering authority may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.418. Compensatory Action.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this Ordinance, the administering authority may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory action(s), such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.419. Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
[Amended via Ord. No. 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 133
Section 86.5.420. Prosecution.
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this ordinance shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $5,000.00 per violation; each day such violation exists shall be deemed a separate violation. The administering authority may recover all attorneys’ fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of these requirements, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.421. Remedies Not Exclusive.
The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the administering authority to seek cumulative remedies.
[Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.5.422. Effective Date.
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and publication as provided by law. All prior ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed.
(Ord. of 4-24-09) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
ARTICLE VI REFUSE AND RECYCLING UTILITY
Section 86.6.100. Declaration of Purpose.
There is hereby created a Refuse and Recycling utility for the purpose of providing funds for the management of refuse, recycling, and yard waste collection, processing, and storage under the jurisdiction of the Village of Weston. The Board of Trustees hereby finds, determines and declares the necessity of providing refuse and trash collection services, collection of recyclables, and collection and disposition of bio-mass and yard waste from both public and privately owned properties, and the need to educate the community about responsible and sustainable methods of waste disposal.
(Ord. of 10-23-12) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 134
Section 86.6.101. Definitions within Ordinance.
(a) Responsible Party. Responsible party shall mean the person or persons who by usage, occupancy or contractual arrangement are responsible to pay the utility account for an improved premise.
(b) Utility Account. Utility account shall mean any account created by the Village of Weston to collect sanitary sewer, water, or stormwater charges from owners or occupants of an improved premise.
(c) Improved Premises. Improved Premises shall mean structures, landscaping paved areas, and any area which has been altered such that run-off from the site is greater than that which would have historically been expected.
(Ord. of 10-23-12) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.6.102. Authority of Refuse Utility.
The Village, acting through the Refuse Utility, may acquire, construct, lease, own, operate, maintain, extend, expand, replace, clean, repair, conduct, manage and finance such facilities, operations and activities, as are deemed by the Village to be proper and reasonably necessary for the management of refuse, recycling, and yard waste.
(Ord. of 10-23-12) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.6.103. Establishment of Refuse Utility Fee.
(a) The Village Board hereby establishes a utility fee to be paid by the responsible party (whether owners or occupants). Such fee shall be established in such amounts which shall provide sufficient funds to properly operate, administer, and maintain refuse and recycling collection and disposal services in the Village. Residential occupants shall be charged a set fee assigned to each utility account within the Village.
(b) The charges, rates, and fees of the Utility will be listed in the Village of Weston Municipal Fee Schedule http://westonwi.gov/documentcenter/view/931.
(c) The Village Board may from time to time, by resolution, change the fees based upon revised estimates of the cost to operate, administer and maintain the local refuse services in the Village.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 135
(d) The Village Board may change the rate structure, charges, and fees of the utility during the annual budget approval process.
(e) The Refuse utility fee imposed by the Village is not a tax against real property. The obligation to pay the fee is a personal obligation of the responsible party.
(Ord. of 10-23-12) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.6.104. Dedication of Refuse Utility Fee.
All fees collected pursuant to this ordinance shall be paid into the Refuse Utility fund. Such revenue shall be used for the purposes of the operation, administration, and maintenance of the local refuse services in the Village. It shall not be necessary that the operation, administration, and maintenance expenditures from the Refuse Utility fund specifically relate to any particular property from which the fees for said purposes were collected. To the extent that the fees collected are insufficient to properly finance the provision of refuse and recycling collection and management services, the cost shall be paid from such other Village funds as may be determined by the Board of Trustees, but the Board of Trustees may order the reimbursement back from other funds to this utility fund if additional fees are thereafter collected.
(Ord. of 10-23-12) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.6.105. Collection of Refuse Utility Fee.
(a) The responsible party for any improved residential premises within the Village of Weston shall pay a utility fee according to the rate set forth in the Fee Schedule http://westonwi.gov/documentcenter/view/931 by Municipal Ordinance. Unless another responsible party has agreed, in writing, to pay and a copy of the writing is filed with the Village, the name of record on the utility account shall pay the utility fee. When the bill remains unpaid by the name of record on the utility account then the property owner becomes responsible for the utility fee. The obligation to pay the utility fee is personal to the responsible party.
(b) Refuse utility charges shall be billed to the owner of each improved parcel using refuse collection and disposal services. The parcel owner shall be responsible for payment of the refuse utility charge. Utility fees shall be billed as follows:
(1) Utility fees shall be collected via a special charge assessed annually, and placed on the annual property tax collection bill, or
(2) Quarterly by the Village and shall become due and payable in accordance with the rules and regulations pertaining to the collection of utility bills. Quarterly
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 136
utility fees for new development shall commence when charges for sanitary sewer, water and/or stormwater commence. Areas annexed to the Village of Weston or under contract to annex shall become subject to the utility fee, if there is a building on the property being annexed, on the date of annexation or the date of the annexation contract, whichever comes first.
(c) Fee Implementation shall be adopted by the Village Board through the budget process.
(d) Late Payment. Failure to pay the charges when due will be subject to a late payment charge of three (3) percent that will be added to bills not paid within 30 days of issuance, and an additional 3% for every 30 days late thereafter.
(e) Unpaid Charges. In addition to any other method of collection allowed by law, unpaid charges may be assessed as a lien against the property pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.0821.
(Ord. of 10-23-12) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.6.106. Enforcement of Utility Fee Collection.
Any charge due hereunder which is not paid when due may be recovered from the responsible party in an action at law by the Village. The Administrator is hereby empowered and directed to enforce this provision against such delinquent users. The employees of the Village shall, at all reasonable times, have access to any premises served by the Village for inspection and enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. of 10-23-12) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.6.107. Administrative Review and Appeals.
(a) The Administrator may, upon appropriate findings, recalculate the utility fee based on circumstance and written appeal from a utility customer.
(b) Any user or occupant who disputes the amount of the fee, or disputes any determination made by, or, on behalf of the Village, by the Administrator, pursuant to and by the authority of this chapter may petition the Village Board for a hearing on a revision or modification of such fee or determination. Such petitions may be filed only once in connection with any fee or determination, except upon a showing of changed circumstances sufficient to justify the filing of such additional petition.
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 137
(c) Such petition shall be in writing, filed with the Clerk, and the facts and figures shall be submitted in writing or orally at a hearing scheduled by the Board of Trustees. The Petitioner shall have the burden of proof.
(d) Within sixty (60) days of filing of the Petition, the Board of Trustees shall make findings of fact based on all relevant information, shall make a determination based upon such findings and, if appropriate, modify such fee or determination accordingly. Such determination by the Village Board shall be considered a final order.
(Ord. of 10-23-12) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.6.108. Notice of Decision for Review and Appeals of Utility Fees.
Every decision or determination of the Administrator, on behalf of the Village, or Board of Trustees shall be in writing; notice thereof shall be mailed to or served upon the Petitioner within a reasonable time from the date of such action. Service by certified mail, return receipt requested, shall be conclusive evidence of service for the purpose of this chapter.
(Ord. of 10-23-12) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.6.109. Disposition of Fees and Charges.
The fees paid and collected by virtue of this ordinance shall not be used for general or other governmental proprietary purposes of the Village, except to pay for an equitable share of the Village’s accounting, management and other governing costs, incident to operation of the utility fee program. Otherwise the fees and charges shall be used to pay for the cost of operation, administration, maintenance, repair, improvement, renewal; replacement and reconstruction of the Village facilities related to refuse service management.
(Ord. of 10-23-12) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.6.110. Exemptions from Utility Fees and Charges.
The Board of Trustees may, by resolution, exempt any class of user when they determine that the public interest deems it necessary or that the contribution to provision of services provided by the utility by said class is deemed to be insignificant.
(Ord. of 10-23-12) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Chapter 86 Utilities Page 138
Section 86.6.111. Severability.
If any provision of this Ordinance is invalid or unconstitutional, or if the application of this Ordinance to any person or circumstances is found invalid or unconstitutional by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the provisions or application of this Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provision or application.
(Ord. of 10-23-12) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Section 86.6.112. Obstruction.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay the enforcement of any order, rule, regulation or plan issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do any act forbidden by any order, rule regulation or plan issued pursuant to the authority contained in this section.
(b) Any person violating a provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to forfeiture as designated in Section 1.111 (General Penalty) of the Village of Weston Municipal Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. of 10-23-12) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015] [Renumbered via Ord. No 17-021, 6/21/2017]
Chapter 90 Vegetation Page 1
Chapter 90
VEGETATION*
Sec. 90.100. Penalties.
Sec. 90.101. Noxious Weeds.
Sec. 90.102. Protection of trees and shrubs.
* Cross References--Mobile Homes, Chapter 46; Planning Commission, Chapter 62; Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places, Chapter 70; Subdivision Regulations, Chapter 74; Zoning, Chapter 94.
State Law References--Nuisance weeds generally, Wis. Stats. § 23.235; noxious weeds generally, Wis. Stats. § 66.0407.
Chapter 90 Vegetation Page 2
VEGETATION
Sec. 90.100. Penalties.
Except where other penalties have been specifically provided under other sections of this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or failing to perform or obstructing the performance of any duties prescribed in this chapter shall be subject to Sec.
1.111.
(Code 1982, § 6.14) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015]
Sec. 90.101. Noxious Weeds.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Noxious weeds, includes Canada thistle, leafy spurge, field bind weed (creeping jenny) and any weed designated as a noxious weed by the department of natural resources by rule, and any other weed the governing body of the county board of any county by ordinance or resolution declares to be noxious within its respective boundaries.
Destroy means the complete killing of weeds or the killing of weed plants above the surface of the ground by the use of chemicals, cutting, tillage, cropping system, pasturing livestock or any or all of these in effective combination, at a time and in a manner as will effectually prevent the weed plants from maturing to the bloom or the flower stage.
(b) Destruction of noxious weeds. No person owning, occupying or controlling land within the Village shall permit noxious weeds to grow or pollinate upon said land. It shall be the responsibility of each person who owns, occupies or controls land within the Village to destroy all noxious weeds on said land.
(c) Exception. This section does not apply to Canada thistle or annual noxious weeds that are located on land that the department of natural resources owns, occupies or controls and that is maintained in whole or in part as habitat for wild birds by the department of natural resources.
(d) Notice. The Village President may annually on or before May 15, publish a class 2 notice, under Wisconsin Chapter 985, that every person is required by law to destroy all noxious weeds, as defined in this section, on lands in the Village which the person owns, occupies or controls.
Chapter 90 Vegetation Page 3
(e) Destruction by Village.
(1) Notice to Owner of Record by Certified Mail.
It shall be the duty of the Weed Commissioner to investigate the existence of noxious weeds. The Weed Commissioner and/or his/her designees are expressly authorized to enter upon private property to investigate the existence of noxious weeds. The Weed Commissioner shall send a notice of violation/abatement order by certified mail to the owner of record of any land which is in violation of this section. Said notice of violation/abatement order shall order the owner of record, occupier and/or person in control of the land to immediately destroy noxious weeds as required under this section or provide written notice to the Village Administrator of the reason for objecting to the notice of violation/abatement order by a specified date and time, not to exceed seven (7) days. If the noxious weeds are not destroyed and no timely objection is received by the Village Administrator, the Weed Commissioner shall destroy, or have destroyed the noxious weeds in the most economical manner. The Weed Commissioner and/or his/her designees are expressly authorized to enter upon the private property for such abatement purposes. All costs associated with destroying the noxious weeds shall be placed on the tax roll of said land as a special charge. In addition, any person who is in violation of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture as set forth in section 1.111.
(2) Posting Notice on Land in Violation. If the owner of record does not sign for the notice of violation/abatement order that is sent by certified mail, the Weed Commissioner or his/her designee shall post a notice of violation/abatement order upon the land in violation, in letters not less than one inch (1”) in height. Said notice of violation/abatement order shall provide the same information as the notice of violation/abatement order described in the previous subsection. If the nuisance is not abated and no timely objection is received by the Village Administrator, the Weed Commissioner shall destroy or have destroyed the noxious weeds in the most economical manner. The Weed Commissioner or his/her designees are expressly authorized to enter upon the private property for such abatement purposes. All costs associated with mowing shall be placed on the tax roll of said land as a special charge. In addition, any person who is in violation of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture as set forth in sec. 1.111.
(3) Due process hearing. If the owner, occupier and/or controller of the land subject to a notice of violation/abatement order contends that the land does not contain noxious weeds as defined in this section, he/she may object to the notice of violation/abatement order and request a hearing before the Plan Commission. The objection and request for hearing must be made in writing to the Village Administrator by the specified date and time identified in the notice of violation/abatement order. The objection and request for hearing shall include payment of a one hundred-dollar ($100) bond. If a decision is rendered in favor of the owner, occupier and/or controller of the land, the one hundred dollars ($100) will be returned. If the owner, occupier and/or controller of the land fails to appear for the hearing, or if the decision is rendered against him/her, the deposit shall be forfeited and applied to the cost to destroy the noxious weeds. When a hearing to challenge a notice of violation/abatement order, the hearing shall be held within
Chapter 90 Vegetation Page 4
fourteen (14) days from the date of the objection and request for hearing is received by the Village Administrator. At the hearing, the owner, occupier and/or controller of the land may appear in person or by his/her attorney, may present witnesses and may cross-examine witnesses as well as subpoena witnesses for his/her own case. At the close of the hearing, the Plan Commission shall make its determination in writing specifying its findings of fact, and conclusions. If the Plan Commission determines that noxious weeds exist on the land at issue, the Weed Commissioner and/or his/her designee shall destroy the noxious weeds unless the owner, occupier and/or controller of the land destroys the noxious weeds within forty-eight (48) hours of the Plan Commission’s decision.
(Code 1982, § 6.135; Ord. of 3-6-2000, § 1, Ord. of 3-6-2000 § 1) [Amended via Ord. No 15-
027, 11/18/2015; Ord. No. 19-014, 8/21/2019]
Chapter 90 Vegetation Page 5
Sec. 90.102. Protection of Trees and Shrubs.
(a) Intent and Purpose. It is the policy of the Village of Weston to regulate and establish policy for the control of planting, removal, maintenance and protection of trees and shrubs in the Village (See Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 94, Article 11):
(1) Eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions which may result in injury to persons using the streets, sidewalks, or other public areas of the Village;
(2) Promote and enhance the beauty and general welfare of the Village;
(3) Prohibit the undesirable and unsafe planting, removal, treatment and maintenance of trees and shrubs located in public areas;
(4) Guard all trees and shrubs, both public and private, within the Village against the spread of disease, insects, or pests; and
(5) To prevent damage to any public sewer or water main, street, sidewalk, or other public property.
(b) Applicability. This article shall apply to tree and shrubs growing or planted after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived in or upon public areas and also to all trees and shrubs growing or to be planted in or upon any private premises which shall threaten the life, safety, or welfare of the public, public areas, or trees within either public or private areas.
(c) Village Board. The Village Board or Village Arborist is empowered to require landowners to remove, prune, or treat specified trees, shrubs, or plants under certain conditions and to prohibit the planting of certain trees or tree species, shrubs, or plants on private lands within the Village (See Village of Weston Municipal Code Chapter 94, Article 11).
(d) Adoption of State Statutes. Wis. Stats. §§ 27.09 and 86.03 are adopted and incorporated in this article by reference.
(e) Definitions. Whenever the following words or terms are used in this article, they shall be construed to have the following meanings:
(1) Boulevard areas, mean the land between the normal location of the street curbing and sidewalk.
(2) Curb, means an enclosing frame, border or edging along a street.
(3) Dbh (diameter at breast height); represents the diameter in inches of a trunk cross section measured at 4 ½ above ground level; a basis for estimating or identifying
Chapter 90 Vegetation Page 6
tree volume, value, management needs and costs, utilization options, etc.
(4) Evergreen tree, means any woody plant normally having one trunk and bearing foliage in the form of limbs with needles, which may extend from the ground level throughout its entire height.
(5) Flush cut, means pruning a branch even with the trunk. This type of pruning is not suggested as the wound will not callus properly. A proper finish cut shall begin at the branch bark ridge and finish just outside of the branch collar.
(6) Hazard/Risk Tree, means any tree or part thereof which the Village Arborist upon examination deems as being a safety concern that may endanger the public using Village property or may cause damage to Village property whether growing upon public or private premises; this shall be declared a public nuisance.
(7) Median strip means the dividing area that is landscaped between opposing traffic lanes within a street.
(8) Public areas, include all public parks and right-of-ways owned, controlled or leased by the Village.
(9) Public nuisance, means any tree or shrub or part thereof which, by reason of its condition, interferes with the use of any public area; is infected with a plant disease; is infested with injurious insects or pests; is injurious to public improvements; or endangers the life, health, safety or welfare of persons, plants, or property.
(10) Public trees and shrubs, means all trees and shrubs located or to be planted in or upon public areas.
(11) Shrub, means any woody vegetation or woody plant having multiple stems and bearing foliage from the ground up.
(12) Topping, also known as rounding over is the practice of indiscriminately cutting limbs, creating stubs regardless of branch juncture. This practice creates a momentarily reduced crown that will respond significantly with more and longer weakly attached limbs, which will create a safety concern, this practice is never acceptable.
(13) Tree, means any woody plant, normally having one stem or trunk bearing its foliage or crown well above ground level reaching a mature height of 12 feet or more.
Chapter 90 Vegetation Page 7
(14) Village Arborist, means the person designated by the Village Board as authorized to carry out this article and assure that proper maintenance practices are completed to trees within the Village to create a safe and aesthetically pleasing community forest, this person shall be an International Society of Arboriculture Certified Arborist.
(15) Vision triangle or vision setback area is a clear sight triangle formed by a distance of 30 feet from the intersecting street rights of way and a third line connecting that distance to allow for clear views by persons traveling in vehicles or bicycles on the street.
(f) Designation of Village Arborist.
(1) The Village Board may designate a municipal employee to perform the duties of the Village Arborist under Wis. Stat. § 27.09 and may authorize such Arborist to perform the duties and exercise the powers imposed on the Village Board by this section.
(2) Annually the Village Arborist shall perform a risk assessment of all Village street trees and park trees in manicured areas and provide such report and recommendations to the Village Board.
(g) Abatement of nuisances. The Village Arborist shall order, direct, supervise and control the abatement of public nuisances as defined in this section by treatment, pruning, removal, or by other means which is determined to be necessary to prevent as fully as possible the spread of deleterious tree diseases or the insect pests or vectors known to carry such diseases, thus allowing for a structurally sound and safe community forest.
(1) Trees and shrubs on private premises.
a. The Village Arborist, after giving advance notice to the owner or tenant, shall have the authority to enter upon and inspect all premises, at reasonable times (7am to 5 pm), within the Village to determine whether any public nuisance exists thereon. If a request to inspect such trees or shrubs is denied by the person responsible for the property, an inspection warrant may be obtained pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.0119.
b. Notice to Owner of Record by Certified Mail. The Village Arborist shall send a notice of violation/abatement order by certified mail to the owner of record of any land which is in violation of this section. Said notice of violation/abatement order shall order the owner of record, occupier and/or person in control of the land to immediately abate the nuisance or provide
Chapter 90 Vegetation Page 8
written notice to the Village Administrator of the reasons for objecting to the notice of violation/abatement order by a specified date and time, not to exceed fourteen (14) days. If the nuisance is not abated and no timely objection is received by the Village Administrator, the Village Arborist shall abate the nuisance. The Village Arborist or his/her designees are expressly authorized to enter upon a private property for such abatement purposes. All costs associated abating the nuisance shall be placed on the tax roll of said land as a special charge. In addition, any person who is in violation of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture as set forth in sec. 1.111.
c. Posting Notice on Land in Violation. If the owner of record does not sign for the notice of violation/abatement order that is sent by certified mail, the Village Arborist or his/her designees shall post a notice of violation/abatement order upon the land in violation, in letters not less than one inch (1”) in height. Said notice of violation/abatement order shall provide the same information as the notice of violation/abatement order described in the previous subsection. If the nuisance is not abated and no timely objection is received by the Village Administrator, the Village Arborist shall abate the nuisance. The Village Arborist or his/her designees are expressly authorized to enter upon the private property for such abatement purposes. All costs associated with mowing shall be placed on the tax roll of said land as a special charge. In addition, any person who is in violation of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture as set forth in sec. 1.111.
d. Due Process Hearing. If the owner, occupier and/or controller of the land subject to a notice of violation/abatement order contends that his/her shrub(s) and/or tree(s) is/are not a nuisance, as defined in this section, he/she may object to the notice of violation/abatement order and request a hearing before the Public Works and Utility Committee . The objection and request for hearing must be made in writing to the Village Administrator by the specified date and time identified in the notice of violation/abatement order. The objection and request for hearing shall include payment of a one hundred dollar bond ($100). If a decision is rendered in favor of the owner, occupier and/or controller of the land, the one hundred dollars ($100) will be returned. If the owner, occupier and/or controller of the land fails to appear for the hearing, or if the decision is rendered against him/her, the deposit shall be forfeited and applied to the cost of abating the nuisance. When a hearing is requested to challenge a notice of violation/abatement order, the hearing shall be held within fourteen (14) days from the date of the objection and request for hearing is received by the Village
Chapter 90 Vegetation Page 9
Administrator. At the hearing, the owner, occupier and/or controller of the land may appear in person or by his/her attorney, may present witnesses and may cross-examine witnesses as well as subpoena witnesses for his/her own case. At the close of the hearing, the Public Works and Utility Committee shall make its determination in writing specifying its findings of fact and conclusions. If the Public Works and Utility Committee determines that a nuisance exists on the land at issue, the Public Works and Utility Committee shall order the Village Arborist and/or his/her designees to abate the nuisance in question unless the owner, occupier and/or controller of the land abates the nuisance within forty-eight (48) hours of the Public Works and Utility Committee’s decision.
(h) Interference with Arborist. No person shall interfere with the Village Arborist and their authorized representative while they are engaged in carrying out any work or activities authorized by this article.
(i) Treatment of trees. Shall be in accordance with the following:
(1) Whenever the Village Arborist determines that any tree or shrub or part thereof is infected with a deleterious or fatal tree disease or is in a weakened condition or harbors insects (elm bark beetles, gypsy moth caterpillars, emerald ash borer, etc.), the Village Arborist may cause all trees within the infected area to be treated as they see fit which, may mean injecting, spraying, severing interconnected roots, and or removing parts or whole trees along with other best practices to ensure that transfer of the insect or disease to other trees or plants does not occur.
(2) In order to facilitate the work and minimize the inconvenience to the public of any treatments conducted under this section, the Arborist shall give 2 weeks’ notice to landowners and or adjacent landowners and shall also post the appropriate warning notices in the areas along the streets where trees are to be treated. The Village shall not allow any claim for damages to any vehicle caused by spraying operations.
(3) When trees on private property are to be treated, the Arborist shall notify the owner of such property and proceed in accordance with the requirements of subsection (i) (2) of this section.
(4) No resident may prune, plant or remove trees on Village property.
(j) Assessment of costs of abatement.
(1) The entire costs to the Village plus a 25% administrative fee for abating any public
Chapter 90 Vegetation Page 10
nuisance or spraying trees shall be charged to and assessed against the parcel or lot
abutting on the street, alley, terrace, boulevard or parkway upon or in which such
tree is located on or the parcel or lot upon which such tree stands in accordance
with Wis. Stat. § 66.0627. The cost of abating any such nuisance or part thereof
which is located in or upon any park or right-of-way shall be borne by the village.
(2) The cost of abating a public nuisance, when done at the direction and under the
supervision of the Arborist, shall be assessed to the property to which such
nuisance, tree or wood is located as follows:
a. The Arborist shall keep a strict account of the costs of such work or
treatment and invoice the lot or parcel. Failure to pay within 60 days of the
date of the notice will result in the amount charged to be entered on the tax
roll as a tax against the property.
b.The Village declares that, in making assessments under this section, it is
acting under its police power, and no damages shall be awarded to any
owner for the destruction of any diseased or infested tree or wood part
thereof.
(k) Planting of trees and shrubs.
(1) Purpose. The Village Board states its determination that the planting, care and
protection of the trees within the Village are desirable for the purpose of beauty,
shade, comfort, noise and pollution reduction, storm water control, abatement, and
economic betterment and encourages all persons to assist in a program of tree
planting, care and protection.
(2) Tree planting program. The Public Works and Utility Committee shall
recommend to the Village Board, with approval from the Village Arborist, a
program for tree planting, care and protection for the public parks and street right
of way. Planting and care of trees within public right of way by adjacent property
owners, consistent with the program is encouraged. The Village Board shall also
encourage the planting, care and protection of trees and shrubs on private premises
within the Village.
a. General planting techniques.
1. Ball and burlap trees. When using this type of root stock the wire
basket should be removed to prevent girdling in the future width.
2. Hole width. Shall be a minimum of twice the tree’s root ball width.
Chapter 90 Vegetation Page 11
3. Hole depth. Trees shall be planted so the root collar is level with the soil line or slightly higher.
b. Right-of-way landscaping. Where a parcel abuts a dedicated public right- of-way, landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements as specified in Section 94.11.02(3)(a) of the Zoning Ordinance.
(3) Tree types.
a. The use of trees listed in Section 94.11.02(5) are prohibited and discouraged species in the public right-of-way.
(4) Unlawfully planted trees. Trees, plants or shrubs planted within any right-of- way or vision triangle without the authorization and approval of the Village Arborist may be removed without reimbursement. The Village Arborist shall notify the owner in writing, listing the unlawfully planted trees, plants or shrubs; ordering their removal and establishing a reasonable time within which such removal shall be accomplished. If removal is not accomplished within the 2 weeks specified in writing, the Village may remove such trees, plants or shrubs and assess the costs plus administrative fee thereof to the owner.
(l) Pruning.
(1) Trees and shrubs standing in or upon public area or upon any private premises adjacent to any public right-of-way or public area shall be kept pruned so that the lowest branches projecting over the public street or sidewalk provide a clearance of not less than 14 feet. The Village Arborist may waive this subsection for newly planted trees if it is determined that they do not interfere with public travel, obstruct the light of any streetlight or endanger public safety (See Sec. 50.100.).
(2) The necessity of the pruning may be determined by the Village Arborist.
(3) No cutting or pruning of oaks from April 1st through Oct. 1st is allowed, this is to prevent the initiation or spread of oak wilt prevention.
(m) Removal of trees and stumps.
(1) Hazardous, obstructive and infected trees. Any tree or part thereof, whether alive or dead, which the Village Arborist shall find to be infected, hazardous or a nuisance as to endanger the general public or other trees, plants or shrubs growing within the Village or to be injurious to sewers, sidewalks or other public
Chapter 90 Vegetation Page 12
improvements, growing upon private premises, shall be removed, pruned or treated by the owner of the property upon to which such tree or part thereof is located. If the tree is located within the public right-of-way, the property owner may remove, prune, or treat the hazardous tree as approved by the Village, otherwise the Village shall remove, prune or treat the hazardous tree. If a tree falls from private property into the public right-of-way, the Village will clear the obstruction from the right-of-way at no cost, but removal of the tree on private property is the responsibility of the adjacent property owner. When a private property owner is responsible for the cost of tree removal, the Village Arborist shall give written notice to such owner to remedy the situation which shall be served by certified letter. Such notice shall specifically state the period of time within which the action must be taken, which shall be within not less than 24 hours nor more than 2 weeks, as determined by the Village Arborist on the basis of seriousness of the condition of the tree or danger to the public. If the owner shall fail to remove, treat or prune such tree on private property within the time limits, the Village Arborist shall cause the tree to be removed, treated or pruned and shall report the full costs thereof to the Treasurer, who shall there upon enter such costs as a special charge against the property, plus a 25% administrative fee.
(2) Tree and stump removal standards. In cutting down trees located in public areas, the tree will be removed with the root stump ground out to a depth suitable for future planting of trees or turf. All wood and debris will be removed from the street prior to the end of each working day, and all holes shall be filled to normal grade level with topsoil and seed within 2 weeks.
(n) Prohibited acts.
(1) Damage to public trees. No person shall, without the consent of the Village, perform or cause to be performed by others any of the following acts:
a. Break, injure, mutilate, deface, kill or destroy any tree or shrub or permit any fire to burn where it will injure any tree or shrub.
b.Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, oil or other injurious substance to seep, drain or be emptied upon or about any tree or shrub or place cement or other solid substance around the base of the tree or shrub.
c. Remove any guard, stake or other device for the protection of a public tree or shrub; close or obstruct any open space about the base of a public tree or shrub designed to permit access of air, water and fertilizer.
d.Attach any sign, poster, notice or other object on any tree or fasten any guy
Chapter 90 Vegetation Page 13
wire, cable, rope, nails, screws or other device to any tree.
e. Cause or encourage any fire or burning near or around any tree.
f. Place or maintain upon the ground any stone, brick, cement or other impervious substance in such manner as may obstruct the free access of air or water to the roots of any tree, shrub or plant in or upon any public way or public place.
(Code 1999, § 6-4-1, Ord. 3-7-2009) [Amended via Ord. No 15-027, 11/18/2015; via Ord. No 17-012, 4/19/2017; Ord. No. 19-014, 8/21/2019]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR THE VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: MARCH 19, 2020

Zoning Ordinance Update and Amendment History
The following is a list and description of all ordinances approved by the Village Board since 2015 to update and amend this Chapter 94 of the Municipal Code. It does not generally include adopted amendatory ordinances that amended the Official Zoning Map (i.e., rezoning); see the Official Zoning Map here. To any extent there is conflict between the amendments contained in one of the following amendatory ordinance and the text of Chapter 94 that follows, the content of the amendatory ordinance will control.
2015
o Ordinance No. 15-001: An Ordinance Repealing Chapter 94 Zoning and Chapter 95 “Village of Weston Extraterritorial Zoning Code” and Recreating Chapter 94 “Zoning Ordinance for the Village of Weston” (Approved 3/16/15; Published 3/15/15)
o Ordinance No. 15-005: An Ordinance Repealing Section 94.6.02(3)(d) Entitled D-WC Weston Center Overlay and Renaming And Recreating Section 94.6.02(3)(d) Entitled D-WM Weston Marketplace Overlay (Approved 5/18/15; Published 5/22/15)
o Ordinance No. 15-006: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.17.04 Entitled Definitions of the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Weston (Approved 5/18/15; Published 5/22/15)
o Ordinance No. 15-009: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.15.02(2) Entitled Development Of Nonconforming Lots - Residential, RR and AR Zoning Districts (Approved 6/15/15; Published 6/17/15)
o Ordinance No. 15-021: Amending Section 94.4.10(2) Entitled Garage, Yard, Estate, And In-Home Sale; Section 94.13.02 (8) Entitled Signs Allowed Without Permit; Section 94.13.03 (1) Entitled Sign Purposes; Section 94.13.04 (1) Entitled Sign Prohibitions And Limitations; Section 94.13.04 (2) Entitled Community Information Signs; Section 94.13.05 (4) Related To Temporary Sign Regulations For Residential And Rr Zoning Districts; Section 94.13.07 (5) Related To Temporary Sign Regulations For Non-Residential, Agricultural, PR And N Zoning Districts; Section 94.13.08 Entitled Temporary Signs; and Section 94.13.09(3) Related To Structural Requirements For Temporary Signs Of The Zoning Ordinance (Approved 10/19/15; Published 10/21/15)
o Ordinance No. 15-022: An Ordinance Amending Figure 5.01 (1) Of The Village Zoning Ordinance Entitled Rural, Open Space And Residential District Lot Dimension And Intensity Standards (Approved 10/19/15; Published 10/21/15)
o Ordinance No. 15-023: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.16.11(7) Entitled Criteria for Grant of a Variance (Approved 10/19/15; Published 10/21/15)
2016
o Ordinance No. 16-003: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.3.02 of the Zoning Ordinance Entitled Treatment of Allowable Uses by Zoning District. (Approved 4/19/16; Published 4/20/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-004: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.4.02(4)7. of the Zoning Ordinance Entitled Residential Land Use Types – Manufactured Home Community – Performance Standards (Approved 4/19/16; Published 4/20/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-005: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.6.03(4), Figure 6.03 of the Zoning Ordinance Entitled Conditional (C), Prohibited (R), And Permitted (P) Uses in WHP Overlay Districts. (Approved 4/19/16; Published 4/20/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-006: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.13.08 of the Zoning Ordinance Entitled One-Time Event Signs. (Approved 4/19/16; Published 4/20/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-007: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.16.02(4) of the Zoning Ordinance Entitled Zoning Administrator Review and Recommendation, Section 94.16.02(5) of the Zoning Ordinance Entitled Notice of Public Hearing, Section 94.16.03 (4) of the Zoning Ordinance Entitled Zoning Administrator Review and Recommendation, Section 94.16.03(5) of the Zoning Ordinance
Entitled Notice of Public Hearing, and Section 94.16.03(7) of the Zoning Ordinance Entitled Review Criteria for Amendments to the Official Zoning Map (Approved 4/19/16; Published 4/20/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-008: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.16.06(2), (3) and (4) of the Zoning Ordinance Relating to the Conditional Use Permit Approval Process (Approved 4/19/16; Published 4/20/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-009: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.16.11(4) and (5) of the Zoning Ordinance Relating to Variance Procedures (Approved 4/19/16; Published 4/20/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-010: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.16.13(4) of the Zoning Ordinance Relating to Concurring Vote and Decision of an Appeal of a Zoning Interpretation (Approved 4/19/16; Published 4/20/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-011: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.16.15(2) of the Zoning Ordinance Relating to Zoning Administrator Duties (Approved 4/19/16; Published 4/20/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-012: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.3.03(13) of the Zoning Ordinance Entitled Utility Connections to Principal Building for Human Habitation (Approved 4/19/16; Published 4/20/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-013: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.16.19(1) of the Zoning Ordinance Entitled Violations, and Section 94.16.19(3) of the Zoning Ordinance Entitled Penalties (Approved 4/19/16; Published 4/20/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-014: An Ordinance Amending Figure 5.01 (1) of the Village Zoning Ordinance Entitled Rural, Open Space and Residential District Lot Dimension and Intensity Standards (Approved 4/19/16; Published 4/20/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-015: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.5.08(1)(b) and (d) of the Zoning Ordinance Relating to Calculating Maximum Permitted Density in the AR District (Approved 4/19/16; Published 4/20/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-016: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.16.09(4) of the Zoning Ordinance Relating to Site Plan Procedures Application Contents (Approved 4/19/16; Published 4/20/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-021: An Ordinance Creating Section 94.4.10(13) of the Zoning Ordinance Entitled Temporary Sales by Mobile Food Vendors and Adding This New Temporary Land Use to the Temporary Land Use Category Within the Charts Displayed in Figures 3.04 And 3.05 of the Village Zoning Ordinance and Amending Section 94.17.04 Definitions of the Zoning Code to Create Definitions Related to This New Use (Approved 4/19/16; Published 4/20/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-025: An Ordinance Amending Chapter 94 Zoning, Section 94.3.04, Figure 3.04 Allowable Uses in Rural, Open Space and Residential Zoning Districts, Section 94.3.05, Figure 3.05 Allowable Uses in Non-Residential and Mixed Use Zoning Districts and Section 94.4.08(1) Light Industrial (Approved 5/16/16; Published 5/18/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-026: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.16.11(2) of the Zoning Ordinance Entitled Eligible Provisions for which Variances May Be Granted (Approved 5/16/16; Published 5/18/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-027: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.13.07(7)(b)1. and (c)1. of the Zoning Ordinance Relating to On-Building Sign (Wall, Awning, Marquee, or Projecting Sign) in the INT Institutional and B-1 Neighborhood Business Districts; and B-2 Highway Business, B-3 General Business, BP Business Park, and I Industrial Districts; and Amending the Same in Figure 13.07: Summary of Maximum Dimensions and Number of On-Premise Business Signs (for Non-Residential, Agricultural, and PR Districts—See Section 94.13.05 for Residential and RR District Standards) (Approved 5/16/16; Published 5/18/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-028: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.12.08(10) of the Zoning Ordinance Entitled Provisions for Sidewalk and Creating Section 94.12.09(15) of the Zoning Ordinance Entitled Pedestrian Facilities (Approved 5/16/16; Published 5/18/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-032: An Ordinance Creating Section 94.4.10(14) of the Zoning Ordinance Entitled Temporary Asphalt, Batch or Concrete, Stone Crushing and/or Processing Operations and
adding the new temporary land use category within the Charts Displayed in Figures 3.04 and 3.05 of the Village Zoning Ordinance (Approved 8/15/16; Published 8/18/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-034: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.4.09(2) of the Zoning Ordinance Entitled Detached Accessory Structure (For Residential Use) (Approved 8/15/16; Published 8/18/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-035: An Ordinance Amending Figure 5.01(1) of the Village Zoning Ordinance Entitled Rural, Open Space and Residential District Lot Dimension and Intensity Standard. (Approved 8/15/16; Published 8/18/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-036: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.3.05: Figure 3.05 of the Village Zoning Ordinance Entitled Allowable Uses in Non-Residential and Mixed Use Zoning Districts (Approved 8/15/16; Published 8/18/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-037: An Ordinance Creating Section 94.16.18(5) of the Zoning Ordinance Entitled Parkland Fees (Approved 8/15/16; Published 8/18/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-043: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.5.04 Intrusions into Required Yards (Approved 10/18/16; Published 10/20/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-044: An Ordinance Amending Section 94.4.07(3) Freight Terminal and reflecting a change in name of a land use category from Freight Terminal to Freight Terminal/ Transportation Depot in Figures 3.04 and 3.05 and Sections 94.4.07(5) Livestock or Farm Commodity Trucking and 94.17.04 Definitions (Approved 10/18/16; Published 10/20/16)
o Ordinance No. 16-046: An Ordinance Incorporating a “Rural Mix” Zoning District into the Village Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 94) (Approved 12/19/16; Published 00/21/16)
2017
o Ordinance No. 17-006: An Ordinance to Amend Section 94.11.02: Landscape Requirements to Update a Maximum Percentage of Tree Species Planted and A Municipal Code Reference (Approved 4/17/17; Published 4/19/17)
o Ordinance No. 17-007: An Ordinance to Amend Section 94.12.06: Exterior Storage Standards for Multi-Family Dwellings and Non-Residential Facilities and Properties to Discontinue the Prohibition of Privacy Slats Within Chain-link Fences (Approved 4/17/17; Published 4/19/17)
o Ordinance No. 17-008: An Ordinance to Amend Section 94.12.08 Access and Driveway Standards to Explicitly Refer the Requirements for Widths of Driveways Connected to A Public Right-Of-Way to Chapter 71 (Approved 4/17/17; Published 4/19/17)
o Ordinance No. 17-009: An Ordinance to Amend Section 94.12.09: Off Street Parking and Traffic Circulation Standards to Provide a Definition of Reconstruction and Maintenance and Their Associated Requirements (Approved 4/17/17; Published 4/19/17)
o Ordinance No. 17-010: An Ordinance to Amend Section 94.4.05(12) Commercial Animal Establishment Land Use Definition to Prohibit Outdoor and Overnight Activities Within The B-1 And B-2 Zoning Districts And To Amend Figure 3.05 To Allow Commercial Animal Establishments Within B-2 Zoning District As A Permitted Use By Right And Within The B-1 And Li Zoning Districts As A Conditional Use (Approved 4/17/17; Published 4/19/17)
o Ordinance No. 17-014: An amendment to Section 94.4.02(3): to allow the construction of a Townhome, create performance standards and allow the use within the 2F zoning District as a Conditional Use and establishing a prohibition on the construction of new carports for multi-family residence land uses (Approved 7/24/17; Published 7/26/17)
o Ordinance No. 17-015: An Ordinance to Amend Sections 94.4.09(1) and (2) to Limit Front Yard Placement of Accessory Structures and Setting Additional Standards for Said Circumstance, Referencing the Definitions of Detached Garage, Utility Shed, Gazebo and Carport, Establishing Roof Load Standards, Driveway Requirements and a Code Reference (Approved 6/19/17; Published 6/21/17)
o Ordinance No. 17-016: An amendment to Section 94.4.02(2): to establish a prohibition of construction of new carports for two-family residence land uses (Approved 7/24/17; Published 7/26/17)
o Ordinance No. 17-017: An Ordinance to Amend Sections 94.12.06(3) and (4) to Establish and Clarify Standards for Parking Operable and Inoperable Motorized Vehicles in all Zoning Districts (Approved 6/19/17; Published 6/21/17)
o Ordinance No. 17-018: An Ordinance to Amend Section 94.16.12 to Establish Criteria for the Expiration of a Variance. (Approved 6/19/17; Published 6/21/17)
o Ordinance No. 17-019: An Ordinance to Amend Section 94.17.04 to Establish Definitions for Detached Garage, Utility Shed, Gazebo and Carport (Approved 6/19/17; Published 6/21/17)
o Ordinance No. 17-020: An ordinance to amend Figure 3.05 in Section 94.3.05 Allowable uses in Non-Residential and Mixed Use Zoning Districts, to change the land use of Outdoor Display from a conditional use to a permitted use-by-right within the B-2 zoning district (Approved 6/19/17; Published 6/21/17)
o Ordinance No. 17-025: An amendment to Section 94.4.05(2): to prohibit the use of a “Payday Lender” or “Payday Loan Business” as defined by Wis. Stat. §§138.14 in pursuant to Wis. Stat. §§62.23(hi) (Approved 7/24/17; Published 7/26/17)
o Ordinance No. 17-026: An Ordinance to Amend Figures 5.01(2) and 5.02(2) to Remove “Principal” from “Minimum Principal Building Separation (Ft),” and Modify the “Minimum Building Separation (Ft)” in the FP, AR and MF Zoning Districts to 30 Feet And in the RR-2, SF-L and 2F Zoning Districts To 10 Feet; and to Amend Figure 5.02(1) to Modify The “Minimum Lot Area” in the INT Zoning District from 30,000 Square Feet to 20,000 Square Feet (Approved 8/21/17; Published 8/23/17)
o Ordinance No. 17-029: An Ordinance to amend figure 4.09(2) Detached Accessory Structure (for Residential Use) Allowances to add the FP zoning district and decrease the “Minimum Distance from Other Buildings” from 30 feet to 10 feet for the RM, FP, AR and RR-5 zoning districts (Approved 8/21/17; Published 8/23/17)
o Ordinance No. 17-032: An Ordinance to amend Section 94.4.07(4) Distribution Centers to accommodate a conditional use when adjacent to residential land uses and amend Figure 3.05 Allowable Uses in Non-Residential and Mixed-Use Zoning Districts to allow said use as a permitted use-by-right and a conditional use within the LI Limited Industrial zoning district. Ordinance No 17-029: An Ordinance to amend figure 4.09(2) Detached Accessory Structure (for Residential Use) Allowances to add the FP zoning district and decrease the “Minimum Distance from Other Buildings” from 30 feet to 10 feet for the RM, FP, AR and RR-5 zoning districts (Approved 9/18/17; Published 9/21/17)
o Ordinance No. 17-034: An ordinance to rename Section 94.4.09(10) Keeping of Farm Animals on Residential Lots to Keeping of Farm Animals on Residential Lots and School Sites, amend Chapter 94 Zoning to replace the words “Section 94.4.09(10) Keeping of Farm Animals on Residential Lots” with “Section 94.4.09(10) Keeping of Farm Animals on Residential Lots and School Sites” wherever it appears in Chapter 94 and amend Figure 3.05 Allowable Uses in Non-Residential and Mixed Use Zoning Districts to allow said use as a conditional use within the INT Institutional zoning district (Approved 11/20/17; Published 11/24/17)
o Ordinance No. 17-035: An ordinance amending Section 94.4.02(1) Single-Family Detached Residence and (2) Two-Family Residence to include structures which have been altered beyond 50% of the equalized assessed value of the structure and alterations to the elements listed in the performance standards of the respective codes (Approved 12/18/17; Published 12/20/17)
o Ordinance No. 17-036: An ordinance to amend Section 94.4.09(2) Detached Accessory Structure (for Residential Use) to exclude parcels exceeding 5 acres in area from performance standard 10. (Approved 11/20/17; Published 11/24/17)
o Ordinance No. 17-037: An ordinance to amend Section 94.10.02(1) General Design Requirements (for single-family and two-family housing) to state, “All new single-family detached residence shall meet the design requirements of Section 94.4.02(1). Expansion or exterior remodel (exceeding 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure at the time of the proposed project) of existing single-family detached residence shall meet the design requirements of Section 94.4.02(1) to the extent determined practical by the applicable site plan approval authority. All new two-family residence shall meet the design requirements of Section 94.4.02(2). Expansion or exterior remodel (exceeding 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure at the time of the proposed project) of existing two-family residence shall meet the design requirements of Section 94.4.02(2) to the extent determined practical by the applicable site plan approval authority” (Approved 12/18/17; Published 12/20/17)
o Ordinance No. 17-038: An ordinance to amend Figure 5.01(1) Rural, Open Space, and Residential District Lot Dimensions and Intensity Standards correcting footnote (a) to state, “Maximum Accessory Structure Floor Area may be increased by conditional use permit, subject to the procedures in Section 94.16.06, and per the standards in Section 94.4.09(2),” as stated in and consistent with Section 94.4.09(2)11 (Approved 12/18/17; Published 12/20/17)
2018
o Ordinance No. 18-007: An Ordinance To Amend Sec. 94.4.09(16) Outdoor Alcohol Area (Approved 2/19/18; Published 2/23/18)
o Ordinance No. 18-011: An Ordinance To Amend Section 94.13.04(4) Variable Message Signs (VMS) (Approved 4/16/18; Published 4/18/18)
o Ordinance No. 18-012: An Ordinance To Amend Section 94.17.04 Definitions (Approved 4/16/18; Published 4/18/18)
o Ordinance No. 18-021: An Ordinance Repealing Chapter 94 Zoning, Article 7 Floodplain Overlay Zoning and Amending and Recreating the Same (Approved 8/20/18, Published 8/23/18)
2019
o Ordinance No. 19-001: An Ordinance to Amend Various Provisions within Chapter 94 (Zoning Ordinance) to Address Recent Changes in State Law, Respond to Village Land Development Review Services Audit, and Make Other Miscellaneous Zoning Ordinance Changes (Approved 1/21/19; Published 1/23/19)
o Ordinance No. 19-012: An Ordinance to amend Section 94.16.16(1) Village Plan Commission. (Approved 8/19/19, Published 8/21/19)
o Ordinance No. 19-015: An Ordinance to amend Sections 94.4.02(1) Single-Family Detached Residence And 94.4.09(2) Detached Accessory Structure (For Residential Use). (Approved 9/17/19, Published 9/19/19)
2020
o Ordinance No. 20-005: An Ordinance to Amend Chapter 94 Zoning, Figure 5.01(1) Rural, Open Space, and Residential District Lot Dimensions and Intensity Standards In Regards to Decreasing the Minimum Lot Area Required Per Dwelling Unit in a MF Multiple Family Residential Zoning District and Figure 5.01(2) Rural, Open Space and Residential District Setback and Height Standards in Regards to Increasing the Maximum Building Height in a MF Multiple Family Residential Zoning District.

ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Table of Contents i
Table of Contents
Table of Contents .......................................................................................................................i
Article 1: INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................... 1
Section 94.1.01:
Section 94.1.01: TitleTitle .................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 11
Section 94.1.02: Authority
Section 94.1.02: Authority .................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 11
Section 94.1.03: Purpose
Section 94.1.03: Purpose ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 11
Section 94.1.04: Severability and Non
Section 94.1.04: Severability and Non--LiabilityLiability .................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 11
Section 94.1.05: Abrogation
Section 94.1.05: Abrogation .............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 11
Section 94.1
Section 94.1.06: Rules of Interpretation.06: Rules of Interpretation .......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 11
Section 94.1.07: Jurisdiction
Section 94.1.07: Jurisdiction ................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 22
Section 94.1.08: Effective Date
Section 94.1.08: Effective Date ...................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 22
Section 94.1.09: Relationship to Restrictive Covenants
Section 94.1.09: Relationship to Restrictive Covenants ................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 22
Article 2: ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARD ZONING DISTRICTS .............................. 1
Section 94.2.01: Purpose
Section 94.2.01: Purpose ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 22
Section 94.2.0
Section 94.2.02: Listing and Purposes of Standard Zoning Districts2: Listing and Purposes of Standard Zoning Districts .................................................................................................................................................................... 22
Section 94.2.03: Map of Standard Zoning Districts
Section 94.2.03: Map of Standard Zoning Districts ...................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 55
Section 94.2.04: Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries on Official Zoning Map
Section 94.2.04: Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries on Official Zoning Map ............................................................................................................ 55
Article 3: LAND USES ALLOWED IN ZONING DISTRICTS ............................................. 1
Section 94.3.01: Purpose
Section 94.3.01: Purpose ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 22
Section 94.3.02: Treatment of Allowable Uses by Zoning District
Section 94.3.02: Treatment of Allowable Uses by Zoning District ............................................................................................................................................................................ 22
Section 94.3.03: Standards Generally App
Section 94.3.03: Standards Generally Applicable to Land Useslicable to Land Uses .................................................................................................................................................................................. 22
Section 94.3.04: Allowable Uses in Rural, Open Space and Residential Zoning Districts
Section 94.3.04: Allowable Uses in Rural, Open Space and Residential Zoning Districts ...................................................................................................... 44
Section 94.3.05: Allowable Uses in Non
Section 94.3.05: Allowable Uses in Non--Residential and Mixed Use Zoning DistrictsResidential and Mixed Use Zoning Districts .............................................................................................................. 88
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS ................................................ 1
Section 94.4.01: Purpose
Section 94.4.01: Purpose ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 22
Section 94.4.0
Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types2: Residential Land Use Types .......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 22
Section 94.4.03: Agricultural Land Use Types
Section 94.4.03: Agricultural Land Use Types .................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 1313
Section 94.4.04: Institutional & Recreational Land Use Types
Section 94.4.04: Institutional & Recreational Land Use Types ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1616
Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types
Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types .................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 2020
Section 94.4.06: Storage or Disposal Land Use Types
Section 94.4.06: Storage or Disposal Land Use Types ............................................................................................................................................................................................................ 3030
Section 94.4.07: Transportation Land Use Types
Section 94.4.07: Transportation Land Use Types .......................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 3535
Section 94.4.08: Industrial Land Use Types
Section 94.4.08: Industrial Land Use Types .......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 3737
Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use Types
Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use Types .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4444
Section 94.4.10: Temporary Land Use Types
Section 94.4.10: Temporary Land Use Types ...................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 6060
Article 5: DENSITY, INTENSITY AND BULK REGULATIONS ........................................ 1
Section 94.5.01: Purpose
Section 94.5.01: Purpose ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 22
Section 94.5.02: Location of Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations
Section 94.5.02: Location of Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations .............................................................................................................................................................. 22
Section 94.5.03: Yard Setback Adjustments
Section 94.5.03: Yard Setback Adjustments .............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 22
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Table of Contents ii
Section 94.5.04: Intrusions into Required Yards
Section 94.5.04: Intrusions into Required Yards .................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 22
Section 94.5.05: Exceptions to Maximum Height Regulations;
Section 94.5.05: Exceptions to Maximum Height Regulations; Collaborative OpportunitiesCollaborative Opportunities .............................................................................................. 33
Section 94.5.06: Building Area and Coverage Inclusions and Exclusions
Section 94.5.06: Building Area and Coverage Inclusions and Exclusions ........................................................................................................................................................ 44
Section 94.5.07: Landscape Surface Ratio Inclusions and Exclusions
Section 94.5.07: Landscape Surface Ratio Inclusions and Exclusions .................................................................................................................................................................... 44
Section 94.5.08: Calculating Maximum Permitted Density in AR District
Section 94.5.08: Calculating Maximum Permitted Density in AR District ............................................................................................................................................ 1212
Article 6: OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS ........................................................................... 1
Section 94.6.01: Purpose and Application of Overlay Districts
Section 94.6.01: Purpose and Application of Overlay Districts .................................................................................................................................................................................... 22
Section 94.6.02: D Design Overlay District
Section 94.6.02: D Design Overlay District ................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 22
Section 94.6.03: WHP Wellhead Protection Area Overlay District
Section 94.6.03: WHP Wellhead Protection Area Overlay District ........................................................................................................................................................................ 55
Section 94.6.04: AH Airport Height Limitation Overlay District
Section 94.6.04: AH Airport Height Limitation Overlay District ...................................................................................................................................................................... 1010
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS ................................................ 1
Section 94.7.01: Title
Section 94.7.01: Title .................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 22
Section 94.7.02: Statutory authorization
Section 94.7.02: Statutory authorization .......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 22
Section 94.7.03: Finding of fact
Section 94.7.03: Finding of fact.................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 22
Section 94.7.04: Statement of purpose
Section 94.7.04: Statement of purpose ................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 22
Section 94.7.05: General Provisions
Section 94.7.05: General Provisions ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 22
Section 94.7.06: General standards a
Section 94.7.06: General standards applicable to all floodplain districtspplicable to all floodplain districts .............................................................................................................................................................. 44
Section 94.7.07: Floodway district (FW)
Section 94.7.07: Floodway district (FW) .......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 66
Section 94.7.08: Floodfringe district (FF)
Section 94.7.08: Floodfringe district (FF) ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 88
Section 94.7.09: General floodplain district (GFP)
Section 94.7.09: General floodplain district (GFP) .......................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 99
Section 94.7.10: Nonconforming uses
Section 94.7.10: Nonconforming uses ................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 1010
Section 94.7
Section 94.7.11: Administration.11: Administration .............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 1313
Section 94.7.12: Amendments
Section 94.7.12: Amendments...................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 2020
Section 94.7.13: Enforcement and penalties
Section 94.7.13: Enforcement and penalties .............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 2121
Section 94.7.14: Definitions
Section 94.7.14: Definitions ............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 2121
Article 8: SHORELAND OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT ................................................... 1
Section 94.8.01: Statutory Authorization
Section 94.8.01: Statutory Authorization ...................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 22
Section 94.8.02: Finding of Fact and Purpose
Section 94.8.02: Finding of Fact and Purpose ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 22
Section 94.8.03: Jurisdiction
Section 94.8.03: Jurisdiction ................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 22
Section 94.8.04: Compliance
Section 94.8.04: Compliance .............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 22
Section 94.8.0
Section 94.8.05: Municipalities and State Agencies Regulated5: Municipalities and State Agencies Regulated .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 22
Section 94.8.06: Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
Section 94.8.06: Abrogation and Greater Restrictions .................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 22
Section 94.8.07: Terms of Article
Section 94.8.07: Terms of Article ............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 22
Section 94.8.08: Interpretation
Section 94.8.08: Interpretation ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 22
Section
Section 94.8.09: Severability94.8.09: Severability .............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 33
Section 94.8.10: Applicability of Shoreland District Regulations
Section 94.8.10: Applicability of Shoreland District Regulations ................................................................................................................................................................................ 33
Section 94.8.11: Administration and Enforcement of Code
Section 94.8.11: Administration and Enforcement of Code ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 33
Se
Section 94.8.12: Building Permit Requiredction 94.8.12: Building Permit Required .................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 44
Section 94.8.13: Occupancy Permit Required
Section 94.8.13: Occupancy Permit Required ............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 55
Section 94.8.14: Conditional Use Permit Required
Section 94.8.14: Conditional Use Permit Required .......................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 55
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Table of Contents iii
Section 94.8.15: Sign Permit Required
Section 94.8.15: Sign Permit Required .............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 55
Se
Section 94.8.16: Other Permitsction 94.8.16: Other Permits ...................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 55
Section 94.8.17: Site Restrictions
Section 94.8.17: Site Restrictions ................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 55
Section 94.8.18: Use Restrictions
Section 94.8.18: Use Restrictions ................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 66
Section 94.8.19: Shoreland
Section 94.8.19: Shoreland RegulationsRegulations .............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 77
Section 94.8.20: Restriction or Joint Use
Section 94.8.20: Restriction or Joint Use .......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 88
Article 9: SHORELAND-WETLAND OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT ............................. 1
Section 94.9.01: Statutory authorizati
Section 94.9.01: Statutory authorizationon .......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 22
Section 94.9.02: Finding of fact and purpose
Section 94.9.02: Finding of fact and purpose ............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 22
Section 94.9.03: General shoreland
Section 94.9.03: General shoreland--wetland provisionswetland provisions ................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 22
Section 94.9.04: Shoreland
Section 94.9.04: Shoreland--wetland zoning districtwetland zoning district ............................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 33
Article 10: BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS .................................................. 1
Section 94.10.01: Purpose
Section 94.10.01: Purpose .................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 22
Section 94.10.02: Single
Section 94.10.02: Single--Family and TwoFamily and Two--Family Housing StandardsFamily Housing Standards .................................................................................................................................................................. 22
Section 94.10.03
Section 94.10.03: : Design Standards fDesign Standards for Multior Multi--Family and NonFamily and Non--Residential BuildingsResidential Buildings ................................................................................................................ 22
Section 94.10.04
Section 94.10.04: : Large Retail and Commercial Service Development StandardsLarge Retail and Commercial Service Development Standards ................................................................................................................................ 88
Article 11: LANDSCAPING AND PRESERVATION STANDARDS ..................................... 1
Section 94
Section 94.11.01 Purpose.11.01 Purpose ...................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 22
Section 94
Section 94.11.02: Landscaping Requirements.11.02: Landscaping Requirements .......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 22
Section 94.11.03 Lawn Care, Alternative Groundcover, and the Preservation of Topography
Section 94.11.03 Lawn Care, Alternative Groundcover, and the Preservation of Topography ...................................................................................... 1111
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS ....................................................... 1
Section 94.12.01: Purpose and Applicability
Section 94.12.01: Purpose and Applicability ............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 22
Section 94.12.02: Stormwater Management, Earth Filling, and Excavating
Section 94.12.02: Stormwater Management, Earth Filling, and Excavating.............................................................................................................................................. 22
Section 94.12.03: Fences, Landscape Walls, and Hedges
Section 94.12.03: Fences, Landscape Walls, and Hedges .......................................................................................................................................................................................................... 22
Section 94.12.04: Swimming Pools
Section 94.12.04: Swimming Pools .......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 44
Section 94
Section 94.12.05: Firewood Storage.12.05: Firewood Storage ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 55
Section 94.12.06: Exterior Storage Standards
Section 94.12.06: Exterior Storage Standards ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 66
Section 94.12.07: Outdoor Recreational Vehicle Storage
Section 94.12.07: Outdoor Recreational Vehicle Storage .......................................................................................................................................................................................................... 88
Section 94.12.08 Access and Driveway Standards
Section 94.12.08 Access and Driveway Standards ............................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 99
Section 94.12.09: Off
Section 94.12.09: Off--Street Parking and Traffic Circulation StandardsStreet Parking and Traffic Circulation Standards ...................................................................................................................................................... 1212
Section 94.12.10: Off
Section 94.12.10: Off--Street Loading StandardsStreet Loading Standards .............................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 1515
Section 94.12.11: Exterior L
Section 94.12.11: Exterior Lighting Standardsighting Standards ................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 1717
Section 94.12.12: Vibration Standards
Section 94.12.12: Vibration Standards ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 1919
Section 94.12.13: Noise Standards
Section 94.12.13: Noise Standards ...................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 2020
Sect
Section 94.12.14: Air Pollution Standardsion 94.12.14: Air Pollution Standards .............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 2121
Section 94.12.15: Odor Standards
Section 94.12.15: Odor Standards ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 2222
Section 94.12.16: Glare and Heat Standards
Section 94.12.16: Glare and Heat Standards ...................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 2222
Section 94.12.17: Fire and E
Section 94.12.17: Fire and Explosion Standardsxplosion Standards .......................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 2222
Section 94.12.18: Toxic or Noxious Material Standards
Section 94.12.18: Toxic or Noxious Material Standards .................................................................................................................................................................................................... 2222
Section 94.12.19: Waste Material Standards
Section 94.12.19: Waste Material Standards ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 2323
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Table of Contents iv
Section 94.12.20: Hazardous Materials Standards
Section 94.12.20: Hazardous Materials Standards ...................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 2323
Section 94.12.21: Electromagnetic Emission Standards
Section 94.12.21: Electromagnetic Emission Standards ........................................................................................................................................................................................................ 2323
Article 13: SIGNS ....................................................................................................................... 1
Section
Section 94.13.01: Purpose94.13.01: Purpose .................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 22
Section 94.13.02: Sign Permitting and Approval Procedures
Section 94.13.02: Sign Permitting and Approval Procedures .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 22
Section 94.13.03: General Signage Standards
Section 94.13.03: General Signage Standards .......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 66
Section 94.13.04: General
Section 94.13.04: General Signage Regulations Applicable to All Zoning DistrictsSignage Regulations Applicable to All Zoning Districts ...................................................................................................................... 1010
Section 94.13.05: Regulations for Residential and RR Zoning Districts
Section 94.13.05: Regulations for Residential and RR Zoning Districts ........................................................................................................................................................ 1313
Section 94.13.06:
Section 94.13.06: Signage for Residential Uses in NonSignage for Residential Uses in Non--Residential DistrictsResidential Districts .......................................................................................................................................... 1515
Section 94.13.07: Regulations for Non
Section 94.13.07: Regulations for Non--Residential, Agricultural, PR, and N Zoning DistrictsResidential, Agricultural, PR, and N Zoning Districts ................................................................................ 1515
Section 94.13.08: One
Section 94.13.08: One--time Event Signstime Event Signs ...................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 1919
Section 94.13.09: Structural Requirements
Section 94.13.09: Structural Requirements .............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 2020
Section 94.13.10: Maintenance Requirements
Section 94.13.10: Maintenance Requirements ...................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 2121
Section 94.13.11: Nonconforming Signs
Section 94.13.11: Nonconforming Signs ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 2222
Article 14: N NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT ........................................................................ 1
Section 94.14.01: Purpose
Section 94.14.01: Purpose .................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 22
Section 94.14.02: Minimum N District Size
Section 94.14.02: Minimum N District Size ............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 22
Section 94.1
Section 94.14.03: Allowable and Required Uses in a N District4.03: Allowable and Required Uses in a N District ................................................................................................................................................................................ 22
Section 94.14.04:
Section 94.14.04: N District N District Density, Intensity, and Bulk RequirementsDensity, Intensity, and Bulk Requirements ........................................................................................................................................................ 33
Section 94.14.05:
Section 94.14.05: N District N District Circulation and Parking RequirementsCirculation and Parking Requirements .................................................................................................................................................................... 44
Section 94
Section 94.14.06: Architectural Requirements..14.06: Architectural Requirements. ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 88
Section 94.14.07: Additional
Section 94.14.07: Additional N N District RequirementsDistrict Requirements ........................................................................................................................................................................................................ 1212
Section 94.14.08: Procedural Requirements for the N Neighborhood District
Section 94.14.08: Procedural Requirements for the N Neighborhood District ........................................................................................................................................ 1313
Section 94.14.09 Criteria for General Development Plan (GDP) Approval
Section 94.14.09 Criteria for General Development Plan (GDP) Approval .......................................................................................................................................... 1414
Section 94.14.10 Specific Implementation Plan (SIP) Approval
Section 94.14.10 Specific Implementation Plan (SIP) Approval ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1616
Section 94.14.11 Amendment of General Development Plan or Specific Implementation Plan
Section 94.14.11 Amendment of General Development Plan or Specific Implementation Plan .................................................................................... 1717
Section 94.14.12 Buildin
Section 94.14.12 Building Permitg Permit .......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 1717
Section 94.14.13 Delayed Effective Dates, Construction Required
Section 94.14.13 Delayed Effective Dates, Construction Required.......................................................................................................................................................................... 1717
Section 94.14.14 Incorporation of New N Districts
Section 94.14.14 Incorporation of New N Districts .................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 1818
Article 15: NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES, STRUCTURES AND SITES ..................... 1
Section 94.15.01: Purpose
Section 94.15.01: Purpose .................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 22
Section 94.15.02: Nonconforming and Substandard Lots
Section 94.15.02: Nonconforming and Substandard Lots ........................................................................................................................................................................................................ 22
Section 94.15.03: Nonconforming Uses
Section 94.15.03: Nonconforming Uses .............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 22
Section 94.15.04: Nonconforming Structures
Section 94.15.04: Nonconforming Structures .............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 33
Section 94.15.05: Nonconforming Sites
Section 94.15.05: Nonconforming Sites .............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 44
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION ......................................................... 1
Section 94.16.01: Purpose
Section 94.16.01: Purpose .................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 22
Section 94.16.02: Amendments to Zoning Regulations (Text Amendments)
Section 94.16.02: Amendments to Zoning Regulations (Text Amendments) ................................................................................................................................................ 22
Section 94.16.03: Amendments to the Official Zoning Map (Rezonings)
Section 94.16.03: Amendments to the Official Zoning Map (Rezonings) .......................................................................................................................................................... 44
Section 94.16.04: Zoning Permits
Section 94.16.04: Zoning Permits .............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 66
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Table of Contents v
Section 94.16.05
Section 94.16.05:: Building PermitBuilding Permit ............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 77
Section 94.16.06:
Section 94.16.06: Conditional Use PermitsConditional Use Permits .................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 77
Section 94.16.07: Temporary Use Reviews
Section 94.16.07: Temporary Use Reviews ................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 1111
Section 94.16.08: Sign Permits
Section 94.16.08: Sign Permits .................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 1212
Section 94.16.09: Site Plan Procedures
Section 94.16.09: Site Plan Procedures .......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 1212
Section 94.16.10
Section 94.16.10: : Certificate of Occupancy ProceduresCertificate of Occupancy Procedures ............................................................................................................................................................................................................ 1212
Section 94.16.11
Section 94.16.11: : Variance ProceduresVariance Procedures .......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 1212
Section 94.16.12: Interpretations
Section 94.16.12: Interpretations ............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 2020
Section 94.16.13: Appeals of Zoning Interpretations
Section 94.16.13: Appeals of Zoning Interpretations .............................................................................................................................................................................................................. 2222
Section 94.16.14: Comprehensive Plan Amendments
Section 94.16.14: Comprehensive Plan Amendments ................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 2323
Section 94.16.15: Zoning Administrator
Section 94.16.15: Zoning Administrator .................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 2525
Section 94.16.16: Village Plan Commission and Extraterritorial Zoning Committee
Section 94.16.16: Village Plan Commission and Extraterritorial Zoning Committee .............................................................................................................. 2626
Section 94.16.17: Zoning Board of Appeals
Section 94.16.17: Zoning Board of Appeals ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 2727
Section 94.16.18: Fees
Section 94.16.18: Fees ............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 2727
Section 94.16.19: Violations and Penalties
Section 94.16.19: Violations and Penalties .............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 2929
Article 17: DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................................ 1
Section 94.17.01: Introduction to Word Usage, Abbreviations and Definitions
Section 94.17.01: Introduction to Word Usage, Abbreviations and Definitions ...................................................................................................................................... 22
Section 94.17.02: Word Usage
Section 94.17.02: Word Usage ...................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 22
Section 94.17.03: Abbreviations
Section 94.17.03: Abbreviations .................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 22
Section 94.17.04: Definitions
Section 94.17.04: Definitions ............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 33
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Table of Contents vi
Page intentionally left blank
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
Article 1: INTRODUCTION 1-1
Article 1: INTRODUCTION
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.1.01: Title through Section 94.1.06: Rules of Interpretation
Article 1: INTRODUCTION 1-1
Section 94.1.01: Title
This Chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as the VILLAGE OF WESTON ZONING ORDINANCE except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as “this Chapter”.
Section 94.1.02: Authority
This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the State of Wisconsin Statutes. Specific statutory references are provided within the body of this Chapter solely as a means of assisting the reader. Such references are not to be considered as all inclusive, may not always be up to date, and shall in no manner be construed so as to limit the application or interpretation of this Chapter.
Section 94.1.03: Purpose
This Chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
(1) Protecting the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare;
(2) Implementing the Comprehensive Plan to the extent possible under zoning;
(3) Controlling and lessening congestion in the streets;
(4) Securing safety from fire, panic, and other dangers;
(5) Promoting adequate light and air;
(6) Encouraging the protection of natural resources;
(7) Preventing the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of population;
(8) Preserving and enhancing property values;
(9) Facilitating adequate transportation, water, sewage disposal, parks, and other public facilities;
(10) Promoting high quality and sustainable community design;
(11) Managing growth and the impacts of land development; and
(12) Preserving and enhancing community appearance and quality of life.
Section 94.1.04: Severability and Non-Liability
The provisions of this Chapter are separable in accordance with the following:
(1) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this Chapter not specifically included in said judgment.
(2) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any portion of this Chapter to a particular property, water, building, or structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, water, building, or structure not specifically included in said judgment.
(3) If any requirement or limitation attached to an authorization given under this Chapter is found invalid, it shall be presumed that the authorization would not have been granted without the requirement or limitation and, therefore, said authorization shall also be invalid.
Section 94.1.05: Abrogation
It is not intended that this Chapter abrogate or interfere with any constitutionally protected vested right or abrogate, repeal, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law.
Section 94.1.06: Rules of Interpretation
(1) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, and welfare, shall be liberally
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.1.07: Jurisdiction through Section 94.1.09: Relationship to Restrictive Covenants
Article 1: INTRODUCTION 1-2
construed in favor of the Village, and shall not be construed to be a limitation or repeal of any other power now possessed by the Village.
(2) Where property is affected by the regulations imposed under this Chapter and by other governmental regulations, the regulations that are more restrictive or that impose higher or greater requirements shall prevail. Where there are conflicts between regulations in this Chapter, the regulations that are more restrictive or that impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail.
(3) Nothing herein contained shall require any changes in plans, construction, size, or designated use of any building or part thereof, for which a building permit has been issued before March 18, 2015 and the construction of which shall have been started within one year from the date of such permit.
(4) All plans approved under the predecessor zoning ordinance shall be valid and may be used to obtain a building permit for a period of not more than one year after the Village approval authority has provided approval, except where otherwise subject to developer's agreement provisions or approval conditions covering such matter. Where such period has elapsed without the issuance of a building permit, the previously approved plans are no longer valid and must be resubmitted for approval under this Chapter.
(5) Except as provided under provisions for substandard lots, nonconforming uses, nonconforming structures, and nonconforming sites in Article 15, no building, structure, development, or premises shall be hereinafter used or occupied, and no permit granted that does not conform to this Chapter.
(6) In cases of mixed-occupancy or mixed-use structures or land uses, the regulations for each land use shall apply to the portion of the structure or land so occupied or so used.
(7) No yard or other open space shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building or structure on any other lot, except for outlots specifically designated and legally restricted for that purpose.
Section 94.1.07: Jurisdiction
This Chapter is applicable to all territory located within the corporate limits of the Village of Weston, and within the Extraterritorial Zoning Jurisdiction of the Village. Certain provisions are, where specifically indicated, not applicable within the Extraterritorial Zoning Jurisdiction or to certain land uses or development forms that are common in the Extraterritorial Zoning Jurisdiction. Articles 7 through 9 are not applicable within the Extraterritorial Zoning Jurisdiction, but similar rules administered by Marathon County are applicable there.
Section 94.1.08: Effective Date
This Chapter became effective upon passage and posting according to law, on the date of repeal and re-enactment of this Chapter. The re-enactment of this Chapter shall not adversely affect the Village's right to prosecute any violation of the predecessor zoning ordinance, provided that the violation occurred while that predecessor ordinance was in effect.
Section 94.1.09: Relationship to Restrictive Covenants
Property owners may record deed restrictions, covenants, easements, declarations, and other similar restrictions on their property. The Village will not enforce any such recorded restriction, except it may enforce such restriction if at least one of the following conditions is present:
(1) The restriction reflects a requirement in this Chapter, using the enforcement procedures in this Chapter.
(2) The restriction specifically provides the Village with an enforcement role, and the Village Board had approved that role.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.1.09: Relationship to Restrictive Covenants through Section 94.1.09: Relationship to Restrictive Covenants
Article 1: INTRODUCTION 1-3
Page intentionally left blank
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Article 2: ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARD ZONING DISTRICTS 2-1
Article 2: ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARD ZONING DISTRICTS
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.2.01: Purpose through Section 94.2.02: Listing and Purposes of Standard Zoning
Districts
Article 2: ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARD ZONING DISTRICTS 2-2
Section 94.2.01: Purpose
The jurisdiction of this Chapter is hereby divided into zoning districts of such number and location as necessary to achieve compatibility of land uses within each district and achieve the purposes of this Chapter. Article 2 addresses standard zoning districts. Overlay zoning districts are addressed in Articles 6 through 9.
Section 94.2.02: Listing and Purposes of Standard Zoning Districts
Aside from public rights-of-way, each part of the Village is mapped within one of the following standard zoning districts. The purpose of each district is stated below. Also listed (within parentheses) are parallel or similar zoning districts from the predecessor zoning ordinance, for reference purposes only.
(1) Rural and Open Space Districts.
(a) FP Farmland Preservation. The FP district is intended to promote continued agricultural and forestry uses on lands suited for such uses: protect and encourage long-term investments in food, fiber, building material, bioenergy, and other resource-related production; enable property owner eligibility in the State’s farmland preservation tax credit program following State certification of the FP district; preserve rural character and manage non-agricultural and non-forestry development; provide opportunities for farm residences, agriculturally- and forestry-related businesses, and home occupations. The FP district is intended for areas planned for long-term farmland preservation in the Comprehensive Plan. (Predecessor district: None)
(b) AR Agriculture and Residential. The AR district is primarily intended to preserve agricultural, forested, and other open lands until ripe for non-agricultural development, including residential, commercial, and industrial development, and to allow for very low density residential development. The AR district is also intended for areas planned for denser development in the Comprehensive Plan, but not yet suited for such denser development due to lack of public utilities or services in the area, inadequate roads, a sufficient supply of lands zoned for development elsewhere, and other factors. (Predecessor districts: AG, RR-10)
(c) RR-2 Rural Residential 2 Acres. The RR-2 district is intended for mainly single family detached residential development on minimum two acre sized rural lots, along with compatible home occupations, small-scale institutional and recreational uses, and low-intensity agricultural uses. Development within this district may be served by private on-site wastewater treatment systems (POWTS), and roadways within a rural cross section. The RR-2 district is intended for areas planned for rural residential development within the Comprehensive Plan. (Predecessor districts: RR Rural Residential; SR Suburban Residential)
(d) RR-5 Rural Residential 5 Acres. The RR-5 district is intended for mainly single family detached residential development on minimum five acre sized rural lots, along with compatible home occupations, small-scale institutional and recreational uses, and low-intensity agricultural uses. Development within this district may be served by private on-site wastewater treatment systems (POWTS), and roadways within a rural cross section. The RR-5 district is intended for areas planned for rural residential development within the Comprehensive Plan. (Predecessor districts: RR Rural Residential; SR Suburban Residential)
(e) PR Parks and Recreation. The PR district is intended to accommodate parks, public recreational areas, public open spaces, and private lands and buildings available for public recreation and/or conservation. (Predecessor districts: PUL Public and Utility Lands, OC-1 Conservancy Overlay)
(2) Residential Districts.
(a) SF-L Single Family Residential-Large Lot. The SF-L district is intended for mainly single family detached residential development, along with compatible home occupations and small-scale institutional and
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.2.02: Listing and Purposes of Standard Zoning
Districts
through Section 94.2.02: Listing and Purposes of Standard Zoning
Districts
Article 2: ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARD ZONING DISTRICTS 2-3
recreational uses. New development within this district shall be served by public sanitary sewer and water services but may have roadways with a rural cross section (e.g., roadside swales). The SF-L district generally requires a minimum lot size between those required in the RR and SF-S districts. The SF-L district is intended for areas planned for single family residential development, or for portions of areas planned for neighborhood development, within the Comprehensive Plan. (Predecessor district: S-R Suburban Residence and R-E Residential Estate)
(b) SF-S Single Family Residential-Small Lot. The SF-S district is intended for mainly single family detached residential development, along with compatible home occupations and small-scale institutional and recreational uses. Development within this district is served by public sanitary sewer and water services, and roadways with an urban cross section (e.g., curbs, storm sewer). The SF-S district enables smaller lot sizes than other single family residential districts. The SF-S district is intended for areas planned for single family residential development, or portions of those areas planned for neighborhood development, within the Comprehensive Plan. (Predecessor districts: R-1 Residential-Single Family and R-2 Residential-Single Family)
(c) 2F Two Family Residential. The 2F district accommodates two family residences such as duplexes and two-flats; single family residences; and compatible home occupations and small-scale institutional and recreational uses. Development within this district is served by public sanitary sewer and water services, and roadways with an urban cross section (e.g., curbs, storm sewer). The 2F district is intended for areas planned for two family residential development, or portions of areas planned for neighborhood development at the Village’s discretion, within the Comprehensive Plan. (Predecessor district: RTF Residential Two Family)
(d) MF Multiple Family Residential. The MF district accommodates a range of housing types, including multiple family residences (e.g., townhouses, apartment buildings, multiplexes), two family residences, and single-family residences, along with compatible institutional and recreational uses. Development within this district is served by public sanitary sewer and water services, and roadways with an urban cross section (e.g., curbs, storm sewer). The MF district is intended for areas planned for multiple family residential development, or portions of areas planned for neighborhood development at the Village’s discretion, within the Comprehensive Plan. (Predecessor district: R-3 Multiple Family, Garden Apartments and R-4 Multiple Family, Apartments)
(e) MH Manufactured Home. The MH district provides a safe, attractive, and functional environment for “parks” and subdivisions specifically intended for mobile and/or manufactured homes. Development within this district is served by public sanitary sewer and water services, and public roadways with an urban cross section (e.g., curbs, storm sewer). The roadway, sewer, and water networks within each manufactured home community are to be privately owned, except where otherwise approved by the Village. The MH district is intended for portions of areas planned for multiple family residential development or neighborhood development, within the Comprehensive Plan, at the Village’s discretion. (Predecessor district: R-5 Residential Manufactured/Mobile Home Park)
(3) Non-Residential and Mixed-Use Districts.
(a) INT Institutional. The INT district enables a range of public, semi-public, educational, religious, and other “gathering” type uses generally intended for non-commercial purposes, subject to performance standards to ensure compatibility between institutional uses and surrounding uses, zoning districts, and infrastructure. Development within this district is generally served by public sanitary sewer and water services, and roadways with an urban cross section (e.g., curbs, storm sewer). The INT district is intended for areas planned for public/quasi-public uses within the Comprehensive Plan, and for other non-residential, non-agricultural use. (Predecessor district: PUL Public and Utility Lands; OIP Institutional and Public Service overlay)
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.2.02: Listing and Purposes of Standard Zoning
Districts
through Section 94.2.02: Listing and Purposes of Standard Zoning
Districts
Article 2: ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARD ZONING DISTRICTS 2-4
(b) B-1 Neighborhood Business. The B-1 district accommodates small-scale office, retail, and service uses compatible with adjacent residential neighborhoods. Development within this district is served by public sanitary sewer and water services. The B-1 district is intended for areas planned for commercial uses, and for small portions of areas planned for neighborhood development, within the Comprehensive Plan. (Predecessor district: B-1 Neighborhood Convenience Retail and Service)
(c) B-2 Highway Business. The B-2 district accommodates a range of large- and small-scale office, retail, commercial service, restaurant, and lodging uses. Development within this district is served by public sanitary sewer and water services. This district is intended for mapping (i) along major highway corridors; (ii) outside of the Village’s neighborhood areas; and (iii) in areas planned for commercial uses within the Comprehensive Plan. (Predecessor district: B-2 Community Retail and Service)
(d) B-3 General Business. The B-3 district accommodates a wide range of commercial uses, along with compatible wholesale, light industrial, and outdoor storage and display uses. Development within this district is served by public sanitary sewer and water services. This district is intended for mapping (i) along major highway corridors; (ii) outside of the Village’s neighborhood areas; and (iii) in areas planned for commercial uses, and occasionally in areas planned for industrial uses, within the Comprehensive Plan. (Predecessor district B-3 General Commercial)
(e) BP Business Park. The BP district accommodates office, light industrial, and other compatible businesses and support uses in a controlled business or office park setting. Allowable uses and activities include those associated with low levels of noise, odor, vibrations, and particulate emissions. Development within this district is served by public sanitary sewer and water services. This district is intended for mapping in areas planned for commercial uses, and occasionally in areas planned for industrial uses, within the Comprehensive Plan. (Predecessor district: B-P Business Park and B-4 Office)
(f) LI Limited Industrial. The LI district accommodates primarily light industrial, storage, office, and other compatible businesses and support uses. Allowable uses are geared toward activities which are not associated with high levels of noise, odor, particulate emissions, outdoor activities, and other potential nuisances. Development within this district is served by public sanitary sewer and water services. This district is intended for mapping in areas planned for industrial uses within the Comprehensive Plan. (Predecessor district: LMD Light Manufacturing Distribution)
(g) GI General Industrial. The GI district accommodates a range of manufacturing, assembling, fabrication and processing, bulk handling, storage, warehousing, trucking, and utility uses. The uses associated with this district may have significant off-site impacts such as heavy truck traffic, noise, and odors. Development within this district is served by public sanitary sewer and water services. This district is intended for mapping in limited areas planned for industrial uses within the Comprehensive Plan, at the Village’s discretion. (Predecessor district: M1 Manufacturing and warehousing)
(h) RM Rural Mix. The RM district is intended to allow for a range of low density residential, general agricultural and forestry, and related on-site processing, storage, and rural business uses that are appropriate for certain larger rural parcels. The RM district is generally shown over areas planned for residential and/or agricultural uses in the Comprehensive Plan. The RM zoning district is available for mapping within the Village limits only; it may not be mapped within the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction because the associated Extraterritorial Zoning Committee has not recommended its use there. (Predecessor districts: AG, RR-10)
[Amended via Ord. 16-046, 12/21/2016]
(4) Other Districts.
(a) N Neighborhood. The N district is intended to facilitate cohesive planned neighborhood developments that include desirable and innovative variations in the mix and relationship of uses, structures, and
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.2.03: Map of Standard Zoning Districts through Section 94.2.04: Interpretation of Zoning District
Boundaries on Official Zoning Map
Article 2: ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARD ZONING DISTRICTS 2-5
open spaces, consistent with proven principles of high-quality neighborhood design including traditional neighborhood design and conservation neighborhood design. Development within this district is served by public sanitary sewer and water services. See Article 14 for specifications. (Predecessor district: TND Traditional Neighborhood Development)
Section 94.2.03: Map of Standard Zoning Districts
Standard
Standard zzoning oning ddistricts established by this Chapter are shown on the Official Zoning Mapistricts established by this Chapter are shown on the Official Zoning Map and Official and Official Extraterritorial Zoning MapExtraterritorial Zoning Map, which, which together with all etogether with all explanatory materials thereon, arexplanatory materials thereon, are hereby made part of this hereby made part of this Chapter.Chapter. For the remainder of this Chapter, the term Official Zoning Map is inclusive of the term Official For the remainder of this Chapter, the term Official Zoning Map is inclusive of the term Official Extraterritorial Zoning MapExtraterritorial Zoning Map.. The Zoning Administrator shall keep and maintain The Zoning Administrator shall keep and maintain the Official Zoning Mapthe Official Zoning Map; all ; all other versions oother versions of such mapf such map((ss)) may not be complete or up to date.may not be complete or up to date.
Section 94.2.04: Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries on Official Zoning Map
(1) Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately following the limits of any municipal boundary shall be construed as following such limits.
(2) Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately following streets or railroad lines shall be construed as following the nearest right-of-way line of such streets or railroad lines.
(3) Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately following platted lot lines or other property lines as shown on parcel maps shall be construed to follow such lines. After March 18, 2015, no lot or parcel shall be divided into more than one standard zoning district.
(4) Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, or other continuously flowing watercourses shall be construed as following the then-current channel centerlines of such watercourses.
(5) Zoning district boundaries shown as separated from any of the features listed in paragraphs (1) through (4) above shall be construed to be at such distances there from as are shown on the Official Zoning Map.
(6) Where any uncertainty exists as to the exact location of a zoning district boundary line, as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the location of the line shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.2.04: Interpretation of Zoning District
Boundaries on Official Zoning Map
through Section 94.2.04: Interpretation of Zoning District
Boundaries on Official Zoning Map
Article 2: ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARD ZONING DISTRICTS 2-6
Page intentionally left blank
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Article 3: LAND USES ALLOWED IN ZONING DISTRICTS 3-1
Article 3: LAND USES ALLOWED IN ZONING DISTRICTS
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.3.01: Purpose through Section 94.3.03: Standards Generally Applicable to Land
Uses
Article 3: LAND USES ALLOWED IN ZONING DISTRICTS 3-2
Section 94.3.01: Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to indicate which types of land uses may locate in each standard zoning district.
Section 94.3.02: Treatment of Allowable Uses by Zoning District
The allowable land uses for each standard zoning district established in Article 2 are listed in Figures 3.04 and 3.05. Article 4 contains detailed descriptions and performance standards for the land uses listed in these figures. No land use is permitted or permissible on a property unless it can be located or implemented on that property in full compliance with all applicable provisions of this Chapter, unless a variance has been granted pursuant to Section 94.16.11.
(1) Land Uses Permitted by Right. Land uses listed as permitted uses (designated by the letter “P” in Figures 3.04 and 3.05) are permitted by right, subject to all applicable requirements of this Chapter and other regulations.
(2) Land Uses Listed as Conditional Uses. Land uses listed as conditional uses (designated by the letter “C” in Figures 3.04 and 3.05) are allowed only by conditional use permit, subject to the procedures in Section 94.16.06, other applicable requirements of this Chapter, and other applicable regulations.
(3) Temporary Land Uses. Temporary land uses (designated by the letter “T” in Figures 3.04 and 3.05) are allowed on a temporary basis subject to temporary use approval requirements in Section 94.16.07.
(4) Multiple Land Uses in Single Building or on Single Lot. Where, in the determination of the Zoning Administrator, multiple land uses are proposed or in existence within a single building and/or on a single lot, he or she shall first make a determination whether each such use is a principal use or an accessory use. All principal uses sharing a single building, and/or a single lot must be listed as either a permitted land use or a conditional land use in the associated zoning district, except in the case of legally established nonconforming uses under Article 15. If any such uses are listed as a conditional use, they shall be subject to the associated procedure requirements in Section 94.16.06.
[Amended via Ord. 16-003, 4/20/2016]
Section 94.3.03: Standards Generally Applicable to Land Uses
(1) Allowable Land Uses (per Article 3). Allowable land uses are stated in Figures 3.04 and 3.05. Allowable uses shall be subject to the use regulations applicable to all land uses in Section 3.03 and those applicable to the individual uses established in Article 4.
(2) Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations (per Article 5). Structures and site development shall comply with the density, intensity, and bulk regulations in Figures 5.01(1) and (2) and 5.02(1) and (2) and shall be subject to the general density, intensity, and bulk regulations of Article 5.
(3) Overlay District Requirements (per Articles 6 through 9). All lots, uses, structures, and site features within one or more overlay zoning districts shall be subject to applicable overlay zoning district requirements in Articles 6 through 9 in addition to those of the underlying standard zoning district.
(4) Building and Site Design Standards (per Article 10). Land use and development shall conform to applicable building and site design requirements of Article 10. Agricultural uses and structures associated with them are exempt from these requirements.
(5) Landscaping and Preservation Standards (per Article 11). Land use and development shall conform to applicable landscaping and preservation requirements of Article 11. Except for requirements specifically required for particular land uses under Article 4, agricultural uses and structures associated with them are exempt from these requirements.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.3.03: Standards Generally Applicable to Land
Uses
through Section 94.3.03: Standards Generally Applicable to Land
Uses
Article 3: LAND USES ALLOWED IN ZONING DISTRICTS 3-3
(6) General Performance Standards (per Article 12). Land use and development shall comply with applicable performance standards of Article 12. Except where the application of performance standards in Article 14 is specifically made applicable to agricultural and/or single- and two-family residential uses in this Chapter, such as via the listing of such use in Article 4, agricultural and single- and two-family residential uses and structures associated with them are exempt from these requirements.
(7) Signs (per Article 13). All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of Article 13.
(8) Nonconforming and Substandard Lots, Uses, Structures, and Sites (per Article 15). Any non-conforming or substandard situation shall comply with the requirements of Article 15.
(9) Procedural Regulations and Requirements (per Article 16). All All new new and expanded and expanded uses and uses and development of land shall comply with all development of land shall comply with all applicable applicable requirements of requirements of ArticleArticle 1616, pertaining to the , pertaining to the procedures to secure approval of procedures to secure approval of the the land use and/or development. land use and/or development.
(10) Site Plan Review Required. All All development activities or uses of landevelopment activities or uses of land that result in construction, d that result in construction, reconstruction, exterior remodeling, or expansion of structures, parking lots, loading areas, or outdoor reconstruction, exterior remodeling, or expansion of structures, parking lots, loading areas, or outdoor storage areas storage areas are subject to site plan are subject to site plan approval under approval under Section 94Section 94.16.16.09.09, except for the following, except for the following activities, activities, uses, and suses, and structurestructures::
(a) “Single-Family Detached Residence” and “Two-Family Residence” structures. Before a “Community Living Arrangement” land use may be established in any residence, site plan approval shall be required.
(b) Uses for which a Specific Implementation Plan in an N Neighborhood district has been approved in accordance with the procedures of Article 14, provided that the Specific Implementation Plan provides a similar level of detail and range of plans as a typical site plan submittal required under this Chapter.
(c) Agricultural uses and structures associated with them, such as barns and silos.
(d) Accessory structures or improvements which, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, do not warrant site plan approval due to their insignificance on the landscape and to surrounding properties.
(11) Number of Principal Buildings per Lot. More than one principal building is allowed on any one lot,More than one principal building is allowed on any one lot, but only by conditional use permit in but only by conditional use permit in any any RR RR oror SFSF districtdistrict..
(12) Principal Use to Precede Accessory Use or Structure. No accessory structure or use shall be constructed on any lot prior to establishment of a principal use on that same lot, unless otherwise allowed in this Chapter.
(13) Utility Connections to Principal Buildings for Human Habitation. All principal buildings used for human habitation shall be provided at all times with functional connections to water, sanitary sewer, and electrical utilities. Where public water utility service is not available to an area in the determination of the Village Public Works Director, connection to a functioning private well in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code NR § 812 shall suffice. Where sanitary sewer service is not available to an area in the determination of the Village Public Works Director, connection to a functioning private onsite wastewater treatment system approved by Marathon County shall suffice. The installation of holding tanks in the Village shall not be permitted, except in one of the following circumstances:
(a) As a replacement on a property where there was a legal holding tank as of March 18, 2015.
(b) As a replacement system for a private on-site wastewater treatment system only if the Marathon County Conservation, Planning & Zoning Department determines that the property is unsuitable for any other type of private on-site wastewater treatment system, including any conventional or mound system.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.3.04: Allowable Uses in Rural, Open Space and
Residential Zoning Districts
through Section 94.3.04: Allowable Uses in Rural, Open Space and
Residential Zoning Districts
Article 3: LAND USES ALLOWED IN ZONING DISTRICTS 3-4
(c) In other circumstances if a conditional use permit is applied for and granted under Section 94.16.06.
[Amended via Ord. 16-012, 4/20/2016]
Section 94.3.04: Allowable Uses in Rural, Open Space and Residential Zoning Districts
Figure 3.04: Allowable Uses in Rural, Open Space and Residential Zoning Districts P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use T = Temporary Use P/C = Use allowance varies-see Sec. 94.4.0# Empty Cell = Prohibited Use Land Use Category (#) Land Use Type Zoning District (see key at end of figure) FP AR RR-2; RR-5 PR SF-L SF-S 2F MF MH
Residential Land Uses (see Section 94.4.02 for descriptions and standards for each land use)
(1) Single-Family Detached Residence
C
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(2) Two-Family Residence
P
P
(3) Multi-Family Residence (3-8 units)
C
P
(3) Multi-Family Residence (9-32 units)
P
(3) Multi-Family Residence
(33+ units)
P
(4) Manufactured Home Community
P
(5) Mixed Use Dwelling Unit
C
Agricultural Land Uses (see Section 94.4.03 for descriptions and standards for each land use)
(1) Agricultural Use
P
P
P/C
C
(2) Agricultural-Related Use
P
C
C
(3) Community Garden
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(4) On-site Agricultural Retail
P
P
C
Institutional and Recreational Land Uses (see Section 94.4.04 for descriptions/standards for each use)
(1) Passive Outdoor Public Recreation
C
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(2) Active Outdoor Public Recreation
C
C
C
P
C
C
C
C
C
(3) Indoor Institutional—General
C
C
P
C
C
C
P
(4) Indoor Institutional—Intensive
C
C
(5) Outdoor Institutional
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
(6) Public Service or Utility
C
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(7) Institutional Residential
C
C
C
C
(8) Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents)
P
P
P
P
P
P
(9) Community Living Arrangement (9-15 residents)
C
C
C
C
P
P
(10) Community Living Arrangement (16+ residents)
C
P
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.3.04: Allowable Uses in Rural, Open Space and
Residential Zoning Districts
through Section 94.3.04: Allowable Uses in Rural, Open Space and
Residential Zoning Districts
Article 3: LAND USES ALLOWED IN ZONING DISTRICTS 3-5
P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use T = Temporary Use P/C = Use allowance varies-see Sec. 94.4.0# Empty Cell = Prohibited Use Land Use Category (#) Land Use Type Zoning District (see key at end of figure) FP AR RR-2; RR-5 PR SF-L SF-S 2F MF MH
Commercial Land Uses (see Section 94.4.05 for descriptions and standards for each land use)
(1) Office
(2) Personal or Professional Service
C
(3) Artisan Studio
C
(4) Group Day Care Center
C
C
C
C
(5) Indoor Sales or Service
(6) Outdoor Display
(7) Indoor Repair and Maintenance
(8) Outdoor and Vehicle Repair and Maintenance
(9) Drive-In or Drive-Through Sales or Service
(10) Indoor Commercial Entertainment
(11) Outdoor Commercial Entertainment
C
(12) Commercial Animal Establishment
C
C
C
(13) Bed and Breakfast
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
(14) Boarding House
C
C
(15) Campground
C
P
(16) Commercial Indoor Lodging
(17) Tourist Rooming House
C
C
C
C
(18) Adult Entertainment or Adult-Oriented Establishment
(19) Large Retail and Commercial Service Development
(20) Micro-beverage Production Facility
Storage or Disposal Land Uses (see Section 94.4.06 for descriptions and standards for each land use)
(1) Indoor Storage or Wholesaling
(2) Outdoor Storage or Wholesaling
(3) Personal Storage Facility
C
C
(4) Junkyard or Salvage Yard
C
(5) Solid Waste Disposal, Composting, and/or Recycling Facility
C
(6) Auction Yard
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.3.04: Allowable Uses in Rural, Open Space and
Residential Zoning Districts
through Section 94.3.04: Allowable Uses in Rural, Open Space and
Residential Zoning Districts
Article 3: LAND USES ALLOWED IN ZONING DISTRICTS 3-6
P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use T = Temporary Use P/C = Use allowance varies-see Sec. 94.4.0# Empty Cell = Prohibited Use Land Use Category (#) Land Use Type Zoning District (see key at end of figure) FP AR RR-2; RR-5 PR SF-L SF-S 2F MF MH
Transportation Land Uses (see Section 94.4.07 for descriptions and standards for each land use)
(1) Off-Site Parking
C
C
C
(2) Airport or Heliport
C
(3) Freight Terminal and Mass Transportation Depot
(4) Distribution Center
(5) Livestock or Farm Commodity Trucking
C
C
Industrial Land Uses (see Section 94.4.08 for descriptions and standards for each land use)
(1) Light Industrial
C
(2) Heavy Industrial
(3) Communications Tower
C
P
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
(4) Non-Metallic Mineral Extraction
C
C
Accessory and Miscellaneous Land Uses (see Section 94.4.09 for descriptions/standards for each use)
(1) Detached Accessory Structure (For Non-Residential Use)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(2) Detached Accessory Structure (For Residential Use)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(3) Family Day Care Home (4-8 children)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(4) Intermediate Day Care Home (9-15 children)
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
(5) Home Occupation
P
P
P
P
P
P
C
C
(6) Residential Business
C
C
C
C
C
C
(7) In-Home Suite
P
P
C
C
P
P
(8) Accessory Dwelling Unit
C
C
C
C
C
C
(9) Animal Fancier
P
P
P
C
C
(10) Keeping of Farm Animals on Residential Lots and School Sites
P
P
P
(11) Company Cafeteria
(12) Company Provided On-Site Amenities
(13) Indoor Sales Incidental to Storage or Light Industrial Land Use
C
(14) Light Industrial Activities Incidental to Indoor Sales or Services
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.3.04: Allowable Uses in Rural, Open Space and
Residential Zoning Districts
through Section 94.3.04: Allowable Uses in Rural, Open Space and
Residential Zoning Districts
Article 3: LAND USES ALLOWED IN ZONING DISTRICTS 3-7
P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use T = Temporary Use P/C = Use allowance varies-see Sec. 94.4.0# Empty Cell = Prohibited Use Land Use Category (#) Land Use Type Zoning District (see key at end of figure) FP AR RR-2; RR-5 PR SF-L SF-S 2F MF MH
(15) Outdoor Display Incidental to Indoor Sales or Service
(16) Outdoor Alcohol Area
P/C
(17) Small Exterior Communication Device
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(18) Large Exterior Communication Device
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
(19) Geothermal Energy System (GES)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(20) Small Wind Energy System
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(21) Small Solar Energy System
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(22) Outdoor Solid Fuel Furnace
P
P
C
(23) Private Lake (Pond)
P
P
P
C
C
C
C
C
C
(24) Vehicle Course or Track
P
P
C
C
(25) Donation Drop-Off Box or Vending Machine
P
C
C
Temporary Land Uses (see Section 94.4.10 for descriptions and standards for each land use)
(1) Temporary Outdoor Sales
T
(2) Garage, Yard, Estate, and In-Home Sales
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
(3) Outdoor Assembly or Special Event
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
(4) Contractor’s Project Office
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
(5) Contractor’s On-Site Equipment Storage Facility
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
(6) Relocatable Building
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
(7) On-Site Real Estate Sales Office
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
(8) Seasonal Outdoor Sales of Farm Products
T
T
T
(9) Temporary Portable Storage Container
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
(10) Temporary Shelter
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
(11) Temporary Agricultural Structure
T
T
(12) Temporary Unscreened Storage
(13) Temporary Sales by Mobile Food Vendors
T
(14) Temporary Asphalt, Batch or Concrete, Stone Crushing and/or Processing Operations
T/C
T/C
T/C
T/C
T/C
T/C
T/C
T/C
T/C
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.3.05: Allowable Uses in Non-Residential and
Mixed Use Zoning Districts
through Section 94.3.05: Allowable Uses in Non-Residential and
Mixed Use Zoning Districts
Article 3: LAND USES ALLOWED IN ZONING DISTRICTS 3-8
P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use T = Temporary Use P/C = Use allowance varies-see Sec. 94.4.0# Empty Cell = Prohibited Use Land Use Category (#) Land Use Type Zoning District (see key at end of figure) FP AR RR-2; RR-5 PR SF-L SF-S 2F MF MH Key to Zoning Districts: FP = Farmland Preservation AR = Agriculture and Residential RR-2 = Rural Residential (2-acre minimum) RR-5 = Rural Residential (5-acre minimum) PR = Parks and Recreation SF-L = Single Family Residential-Large Lot SF-S = Single Family Residential-Small Lot 2F = Two Family Residential MF = Multiple Family Residential MH = Manufactured Home
[Amended via Ord. 16-021, 4/20/2016; Ord. 16-025, 5/18/2016; Ord. 16-032, 8/18/2016; Ord. 16-044, 10/20/2016; Ord. 17-014, 7/26/2017; Ord. 17-034, 11/24/2017; Ord. 19-001, 1/23/2019]
Section 94.3.05: Allowable Uses in Non-Residential and Mixed Use Zoning Districts
Figure 3.05: Allowable Uses in Non-Residential and Mixed Use Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use T = Temporary Use P/C = Use allowance varies-see Sec. 94.4.0# Empty Cell = Prohibited Use Land Use Category (#) Land Use Type Zoning District (see key at end of figure) INT B-1 B-2 B-3 BP LI GI RM
Residential Land Uses (see Section 94.4.02 for descriptions and standards for each land use)
(1) Single-Family Detached Residence
P
(2) Two-Family Residence
C
(3) Multi-Family Residence
C
C
(4) Manufactured Home Community
(5) Mixed Use Dwelling Unit
P
P
C
Agricultural Land Uses (see Section 94.4.03 for descriptions and standards for each land use)
(1) Agricultural Use
P/C
(2) Agricultural-Related Use
C
P
C
P
P
P/C
(3) Community Garden
P
P
P
P
C
C
C
P
(4) On-site Agricultural Retail
P
Institutional and Recreational Land Uses (see Section 94.4.04 for descriptions/standards for each use)
(1) Passive Outdoor Public Recreation
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(2) Active Outdoor Public Recreation
P
C
P
P
P
P
P
P
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.3.05: Allowable Uses in Non-Residential and
Mixed Use Zoning Districts
through Section 94.3.05: Allowable Uses in Non-Residential and
Mixed Use Zoning Districts
Article 3: LAND USES ALLOWED IN ZONING DISTRICTS 3-9
P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use T = Temporary Use P/C = Use allowance varies-see Sec. 94.4.0# Empty Cell = Prohibited Use Land Use Category (#) Land Use Type Zoning District (see key at end of figure) INT B-1 B-2 B-3 BP LI GI RM
(3) Indoor Institutional—General
P
P
P
P
C
C
C
(4) Indoor Institutional—Intensive
P
C
C
P
(5) Outdoor Institutional
P
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
(6) Public Service or Utility
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(7) Institutional Residential
P
C
C
C
C
C
C
(8) Community Living Arrangement (1-8)
C
P
(9) Community Living Arrangement (9-15)
C
C
C
C
C
(10) Community Living Arrangement (16+)
P
C
C
C
Commercial Land Uses (see Section 94.4.05 for descriptions and standards for each land use)
(1) Office
C
P
P
P
P
P
P
C
(2) Personal or Professional Service
P
P
P
P
P
P
(3) Artisan Studio
P
P
P
C
C
C
(4) Group Day Care Center
P
P
P
P
C
C
C
(5) Indoor Sales or Service
P
P
P
C
C
(6) Outdoor Display
C
P
P
C
C
(7) Indoor Repair and Maintenance
P
P
P
P
C
(8) Outdoor and Vehicle Repair and Maintenance
C
P
P
P
C
(9) Drive-In or Drive-Through Sales or Service
C
P
P
C
C
C
(10) Indoor Commercial Entertainment
C
P
P
P
C
C
(11) Outdoor Commercial Entertainment
C
C
C
C
(12) Commercial Animal Establishment
C
P
P
C
C
(13) Bed and Breakfast
C
C
C
(14) Boarding House
C
C
(15) Campground
C
C
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.3.05: Allowable Uses in Non-Residential and
Mixed Use Zoning Districts
through Section 94.3.05: Allowable Uses in Non-Residential and
Mixed Use Zoning Districts
Article 3: LAND USES ALLOWED IN ZONING DISTRICTS 3-10
P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use T = Temporary Use P/C = Use allowance varies-see Sec. 94.4.0# Empty Cell = Prohibited Use Land Use Category (#) Land Use Type Zoning District (see key at end of figure) INT B-1 B-2 B-3 BP LI GI RM
(16) Commercial Indoor Lodging
C
P
P
P
(17) Tourist Rooming House
C
C
(18) Adult Entertainment or Adult-Oriented Establishment
C
(19) Large Retail and Commercial Service Development
C
C
(20) Micro-beverage Production Facility
C
P
P
C
P
P
C
Storage or Disposal Land Uses (see Section 94.4.06 for descriptions and standards for each land use)
(1) Indoor Storage or Wholesaling
P
C
P
P
C
(2) Outdoor Storage or Wholesaling
C
C
P/C
P
C
(3) Personal Storage Facility
C
C
C
(4) Junkyard or Salvage Yard
C
(5) Solid Waste Disposal, Composting, and/or Recycling Facility
C
C
C
(6) Auction Yard
C
C
C
C
Transportation Land Uses (see Section 94.4.07 for descriptions and standards for each land use)
(1) Off-Site Parking
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
(2) Airport or Heliport
C
C
C
C
(3) Freight Terminal and Mass Transportation Depot
C
P
(4) Distribution Center
P/C
P
(5) Livestock or Farm Commodity Trucking
C
P
C
Industrial Land Uses (see Section 94.4.08 for descriptions and standards for each land use)
(1) Light Industrial
C
C
P
P
C
(2) Heavy Industrial
C
P
(3) Communications Tower
C
C
C
P
C
P
P
P
(4) Non-Metallic Mineral Extraction
C
C
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.3.05: Allowable Uses in Non-Residential and
Mixed Use Zoning Districts
through Section 94.3.05: Allowable Uses in Non-Residential and
Mixed Use Zoning Districts
Article 3: LAND USES ALLOWED IN ZONING DISTRICTS 3-11
P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use T = Temporary Use P/C = Use allowance varies-see Sec. 94.4.0# Empty Cell = Prohibited Use Land Use Category (#) Land Use Type Zoning District (see key at end of figure) INT B-1 B-2 B-3 BP LI GI RM
Accessory and Miscellaneous Land Uses (see Section 94.4.09 for descriptions/standards for each use)
(1) Detached Accessory Structure (For Non-Residential Use)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(2) Detached Accessory Structure (For Residential Use)
P
P
(3) Family Day Care Home (4-8 children)
P
P
P
(4) Intermediate Day Care Home (9-15 children)
C
(5) Home Occupation
C
P
(6) Residential Business
C
C
(7) In-Home Suite
P
(8) Accessory Dwelling Unit
C
C
C
C
(9) Animal Fancier
C
C
P
(10) Keeping of Farm Animals on Residential Lots and School Sites
C
P
(11) Company Cafeteria
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(12) Company Provided On-site Amenities
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(13) Indoor Sales Incidental to Storage or Light Industrial Land Use
P
P
P
P
C
(14) Light Industrial Activities Incidental to Indoor Sales or Services
P
C
C
(15) Outdoor Display Incidental to Indoor Sales or Services
P
P
C
C
(16) Outdoor Alcohol Area
P/C
P/C
P/C
P/C
P/C
P/C
(17) Small Exterior Communication Device
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(18) Large Exterior Communication Device
C
C
P
P
P
P
P
C
(19) Geothermal Energy System (GES)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.3.05: Allowable Uses in Non-Residential and
Mixed Use Zoning Districts
through Section 94.3.05: Allowable Uses in Non-Residential and
Mixed Use Zoning Districts
Article 3: LAND USES ALLOWED IN ZONING DISTRICTS 3-12
P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use T = Temporary Use P/C = Use allowance varies-see Sec. 94.4.0# Empty Cell = Prohibited Use Land Use Category (#) Land Use Type Zoning District (see key at end of figure) INT B-1 B-2 B-3 BP LI GI RM
(20) Small Wind Energy System
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(21) Small Solar Energy System
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(22) Outdoor Solid Fuel Furnace
C
P
P
P
(23) Private Lake (Pond)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(24) Vehicle Course or Track
C
C
C
C
P
(25) Donation DropDonation Drop--Off Box Off Box or Vending Machineor Vending Machine
P
P
P
P
C
P
P
Temporary Land Uses (see Section 94.4.10 for descriptions and standards for each land use)
(1) Temporary Outdoor Sales
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
(2) Garage, Yard, Estate, and In-Home Sales
T
(3) Outdoor Assembly or Special Event
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
(4) Contractor’s Project Office
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
(5) Contractor’s On-Site Equipment Storage Facility
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
(6) Relocatable Building
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
(7) On-Site Real Estate Sales Office
T
T
T
T
T
T
(8) Seasonal Outdoor Sales of Farm Products
T
T
T
T
(9) Temporary Portable Storage Container
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
(10) Temporary Shelter
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
(11) Temporary Agricultural Structure
T
(12) Temporary Unscreened Outdoor Storage Accessory to Industrial Use
T
T
T
(13) Temporary Sales by Mobile Food Vendors
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.3.05: Allowable Uses in Non-Residential and
Mixed Use Zoning Districts
through Section 94.3.05: Allowable Uses in Non-Residential and
Mixed Use Zoning Districts
Article 3: LAND USES ALLOWED IN ZONING DISTRICTS 3-13
P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use T = Temporary Use P/C = Use allowance varies-see Sec. 94.4.0# Empty Cell = Prohibited Use Land Use Category (#) Land Use Type Zoning District (see key at end of figure) INT B-1 B-2 B-3 BP LI GI RM
(14) Temporary Asphalt, Batch or Concrete, Stone Crushing and/or Processing Operations
T/C
T/C
T/C
T/C
T/C
T/C
T/C
T/C Key to Zoning Districts: INT = Institutional B-1 = Neighborhood Business B-2 = Highway Business B-3 = General Business BP = Business Park LI = Limited Industrial GI = General Industrial RM = Rural Mix
[Amended via Ord. 16-021, 4/20/2016; Ord. 16-025, 5/18/2016; Ord. 16-032 and 16-036, 8/18/2016; Ord. 16-044, 10/20/2016; Ord. 16-046, 12/21/16; Ord. 17-010, 4/19/17; Ord. 17-020, 6/21/2017; Ord. 17-032, 9/21/2017; Ord. 17-034, 11/24/17; Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.3.05: Allowable Uses in Non-Residential and
Mixed Use Zoning Districts
through Section 94.3.05: Allowable Uses in Non-Residential and
Mixed Use Zoning Districts
Article 3: LAND USES ALLOWED IN ZONING DISTRICTS 3-14
Page intentionally left blank
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-1
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.01: Purpose through Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-2
Section 94.4.01: Purpose
(1) Article 4 includes descriptions and performance standards for the land use types listed in Figures 3.04 and 3.05 as permitted, conditional, or temporary uses in at least one standard zoning district. Where provided, performance standards shall be met as part of the establishment, expansion, and operation of land uses within the corresponding land use type.
(2) While the number of parking spaces for each land use type is provided in this Article, other specifications for parking lots and spaces are provided in Section 94.12.09.
Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types
(1) Single-Family Detached Residence.
A dwelling unit designed for and occupied by not more than one family and having no roof, wall, or floor in common with any other dwelling unit, and located on an individual lot. The dwelling unit must be a site-built structure built in compliance with the State of Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code (UDC), or by federal law may be a manufactured dwelling (modular home) as permitted by the UDC or a manufactured home that has received a Federal Manufactured Housing Certificate label. Mobile homes that have not received a Federal Manufactured Housing Certificate label are not included within the Single-Family Detached Residence land use type.
Performance Standards: The following performance standards shall apply to each Single-Family Detached Residence constructed or expanded as defined by Section 94.10.02 after March 18, 2015, except that any of the standards 1 through 8 may be waived or modified by conditional use permit, upon a finding that the architectural style of the proposed residence provides compensating design features and that the proposed residence will be compatible and harmonious with other residences in the vicinity. If alterations are made to any of the individual standards listed below, then said standard shall be met.
1. Shall have minimum gross floor area of 1,000 square feet, not including an attached garage, carport, deck, porch, or unfinished basement.
2. Shall be served by a garage on the same lot of at least 400 square feet of gross floor area for each dwelling unit and meeting associated requirements in Section 94.4.09(2).
3. Shall have a roof with a pitch of at least 3 inches in height for each foot of width and an eave which extends at least 6 inches from the wall which supports the roof.
4. Each residence and attached building shall have a roof surfaced with any of the following: wood shakes; asphalt, composition, or wood shingles; clay, concrete or metal tiles; slate; built-up gravel materials; screw down metal roofing; rubber membrane (for flat roofs or roofs with no greater than a 1:12 pitch); or similar material approved by the Zoning Administrator.
5. Each residence and attached building shall be covered with siding made of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, Masonite, vinyl, metal lap, or similar material approved by the Zoning Administrator. Exterior siding shall extend down to the top of the foundation. If the top of the foundation is below grade, the siding shall extend to the ground.
6. Shall be placed on a finished, permanent foundation, such as a poured concrete slab or basement meeting UDC requirements. Such foundation shall not extend more than 24 inches above the exterior finished grade of the lot, except that where the grade of the lot slopes, only that portion of the foundation which is on the highest point of the lot must meet this requirement.
7. The side of any residence facing the front yard shall not be less than 24 feet in width, not including attached garages, carports, and open decks. The ratio of each residence’s length to its
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types through Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-3
width shall be no greater than 5 to 2. Therefore, a minimum 24-foot long residence must be at least 9 feet 7 inches wide.
8. The width of attached garages with front yard facing garage doors shall be limited to a maximum of 60 percent of the overall width of the residence as it faces the front yard.
9. May not be split into two or more dwelling units, except for “In-Home Suites” meeting the requirements of this Article.
10. If in a subdivision platted after March 18, 2015, shall meet the single-family and two-family housing variety standards in Section 94.10.02.
11. No carport may be attached to a Single-Family Detached Residence after March 18, 2015.
12. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: 2 outdoor spaces, such as in a driveway, plus garage space(s). All motor vehicles shall be parked on a hard surface as defined in Section 94.17.04, or on a graveled surface if such surface was permitted before January 1, 2014 and completed within one year of issuance.
[Amended via Ord. 17-035, 12/20/2017; Ord. 19-015, 9/19/19]
(2) Two-Family Residence.
A single structure containing two separate dwelling units, each unit having a private individual exterior access, and with no shared internal access within the building. Two-Family Residences can be constructed as attached side-by-side units each with a ground floor and roof (duplex), or as a two-story structure with one unit above the other (flats). Where side-by-side, both dwelling units may either share the same lot or be on separate lots as a “zero lot line” structure, such as that depicted in the top panel of Figure 4.02. If alterations are made to any of the individual standards listed below, then said standard shall be met.
Performance Standards:
1. Each Two-Family Residence constructed or expanded as defined by Section 94.10.02 after March 18, 2015 shall meet performance standards 1 through 8 in subsection (1) above, except where otherwise allowed by conditional use permit.
2. The structure must be in compliance with the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code (UDC).
3. Where side by side, a building code-required, fire rated wall must separate the two dwelling units from the lowest level to flush against the underside of the roof.
4. Individual sanitary sewer and public water laterals and utility meters are required for each dwelling unit.
5. The minimum gross floor area of each dwelling unit shall be 700 square feet, exclusive of attached garages, carports, and open decks/porches.
6. If in a subdivision platted after March 18, 2015, shall meet the single-family and two-family housing variety standards in Section 94.10.02.
7. Each unit within each new Two-Family Residence shall be served by a separate driveway, or minimum driveway width for any shared driveway shall be not less than 30 feet at the front lot line.
8. No carport may be attached to a Two-Family Residence after July 26, 2017.
9. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: 2 outdoor spaces per dwelling unit, such as in a driveway, plus spaces in garage(s). All motor vehicles shall be parked on a hard surface, or on a graveled surface if such surface was permitted before January 1, 2014 and completed within one year of issuance.
10. Zero Lot Line Structures (see Figure 4.02(1)). For buildings containing two separate dwelling units constructed side-by-side, with each unit located on a separate lot, having a private
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types through Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-4
individual exterior access, and no shared internal access within the building, the following additional standards shall apply:
a. The duplex shall meet the front, side, and rear setbacks required for the applicable zoning district, except that the shared wall shall have no minimum setback requirement.
b. The builder shall provide, with the zoning permit or building permit application, an agreement or covenant specifying maintenance standards for the common wall, maintenance and replacement standards for exterior surfaces of the building to maintain a neat and harmonious appearance over time, maintenance standards for any common sewer lateral and any other common features, and restrictions against construction of detached single family residences on any of the affected lots in the event either or all sides of the zero lot line construction dwelling are destroyed. Such agreement or covenant shall also provide that it may not be terminated, amended or otherwise altered without the approval of the Village Board. Such agreement shall be subject to Zoning Administrator approval, and then recorded by the builder against all affected properties prior to occupancy of the dwelling as a zero-lot line structure.
[Amended via Ord. 17-016, 7/26/2017; Ord. 17-035, 12/20/2017; Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types through Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-5
Figure 4.02(1): Examples of Zero Lot Line Structures
[Amended via Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19]
(3) Multi-Family Residence.
A single structure with three or more individual attached dwelling units, including “rental apartments,” condominium buildings with 3+ units each, townhouses, and row houses. Each dwelling unit may take access from a shared entrance or hallway or from a private, individual exterior doorway. “Institutional Residential Uses,” as defined in this Chapter, are regulated separately.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types through Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-6
Performance Standards: The performance standards in Figure 4.02(2) apply to each new development containing a Multi-family Residence established after January 1, 2019 and to any approved expansion or conversion to such a development after such date to the extent determined practical by the site plan approval authority. The site plan approval application shall, in addition to providing all materials required under Section 94.16.09(4), shall be accompanied by all materials necessary to assure compliance with the performance standards.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types through Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-7
Figure 4.02(2): Performance Standards for Multi-Family Residences and Associated Developments R = Required Blank Cell = Allowed NA = Not Allowed Performance Standard (to right, R = Required) Number of Dwelling Units in Development (regardless of number of units per building or number of buildings in development) 3-8 units 9-32 units 31+ units
1. Dwellings meet design standards for Multi-Family Residences in Section 94.10.03.
R
R
R
2. Detached Accessory Structures meet standards in Section 94.4.09(2).
R
R
R
3. Public sewer and water service.
R
R
R
4. Zero-lot line structures meet applicable standards in Section 94.4.02(2).
R
R
R
5. Minimum of 1 unit for every 33 units designed for handicapped accessibility.
R
6. Minimum of 500 square feet of Gross Floor Area per efficiency and 1-bedroom unit and 700 square feet per 2+ bedroom unit, not including garages or open decks, porches, patios, etc.
R
R
R
7. Within the 2F zoning district, each Multi-Family Residence of within a townhouse or row house building has an attached garage. (Townhouse/row house defined in Section 94.17.04.)
R
R
R
8. Off-street motor vehicle parking:
• Minimum 1 parking space per efficiency/1-bedroom unit; 1 parking space per bedroom for each 2+ bedroom unit, and one visitor parking space for every 4 units.
• On a hard surface as defined in Section 94.17.04.
• No attached carport.
• Minimum of 1 enclosed (e.g., underbuilding, garage) parking space per dwelling unit.
R
R
R
9. Safe and convenient pedestrian facilities, such as hard-surfaced walkways, linking residential building entrances with parking and recreational facilities and with existing and planned bike and pedestrian facilities along adjacent roadways and parcels.
R
R
10. Designated off-street bicycle parking space in bike rack or similar, near building entrance.
R
R
11. Serviced by manager with an office or residence <30 miles away.
R
R
R
12. Manager or maintenance person residing on-site.
R
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types through Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-8
R = Required Blank Cell = Allowed NA = Not Allowed Performance Standard (to right, R = Required) Number of Dwelling Units in Development (regardless of number of units per building or number of buildings in development) 3-8 units 9-32 units 31+ units
13. Bufferyard per Section 94.11.02(3)(d) along all property lines abutting single family residentially zoned property.
R
R
R
14. Storage and removal of waste and recyclable materials per Sections 66.112, 66.114, 66.115, and 94.12.06(2) as applicable.
R
R
R
15. All building entrances secured, either by key or keyless entry provided to residents.
R
R
R
16. Security cameras in parking lots (including underbuilding) and at common entryways.
R
R
17. Secured indoor storage areas to at least 50% of dwelling units.
R
R
18. Clothes washing machines and dryers in at least 50% of dwelling units.
R
R
19. Heating and air conditioning within all units and indoor common areas, except for enclosed parking areas, allowing for occupant control and not allowing window units.
R
R
R
20. Sound mitigation in all shared walls and floors between separate units to reduce sound transmission between units, with a minimum standard Sound Transmission Class (STC) meeting the requirements of Section 1207 of the International Building Code.
R
R
R
21. Dedicated, on-site location for centralized mail delivery (e.g., cluster mailbox), coordinating type and location with Village and U.S. Postal Service.
R
R
22. Deliberately designed and improved common recreational facility for use of tenants and their guests only, such as a community room, exercise room, clubhouse, pool, playground, play courts, gazebo, fire pit, fenced pet exercise area, or common garden with water, shed, fencing, and equipment. Selected facility should be geared to the expected demographics and interests of tenants.
R
23. Usable outdoor open space in the quantity provided in Figure 4.02(3). Usable outdoor open space is common outdoor area available, designed, and sufficiently square or round for the intended outdoor recreational activities (including those in line 22) and located outside of the floodplain, wetlands, surface waters, stormwater basins and conveyance routes, slopes of 12% or greater, and other areas with severe limitations for recreational use in the determination of the site plan approval authority.
R
R
R
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types through Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-9
[Amended via Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types through Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-10
Figure 4.02(3): Usable Outdoor Open Space Worksheet for Developments Containing Multi-Family Dwellings A B C D Directions # dwelling units Sq. ft./unit Total sq. ft.
1
Calculate usable outdoor open space required 1
x
300 required
=
2
Calculate outdoor private open space provided for individual dwelling units, such patios, porches, balcony, and decks, counting only those areas of 48 sq. ft. or greater not including steps
x
=
3
Subtract Column D of Line 2 from Line 1
Remaining usable outdoor open space required
4
Calculate square footage of deliberately designed and improved common recreational facilities for tenants and their guests, such as community room, exercise room, clubhouse, pool; playground, play courts, gazebo, fire pit; fenced pet exercise area; common garden with water, shed, fencing, and equipment. Amenity (list and describe) Sq. ft.
5 Add square footages from Line 5, Column C Total common recreational facility square footage provided 6 Multiply Line 5, Column C by 2 Common recreational facility “bonus” counting towards requirement x 2 = 7 Subtract Line 6 from Line 3, Column D Remaining usable outdoor open space required for development 1 =
Note: 1 See Figure 4.02(3), line 23, for definition of “usable outdoor open space”.
[Amended via Ord. 17-014, 7/26/2017; Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types through Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-11
(4) Manufactured Home Community.
This land use is a form of residential development that is exclusively reserved for individually sold or rented pads or sites containing mobile homes and/or manufactured homes. The placement or replacement of mobile homes, as defined in Article 17, is not permitted anywhere within the jurisdiction of this Chapter.
Performance Standards: The following performance standards apply to each new Manufactured Home Community established after March 18, 2015, any approved expansion or conversion to a Manufactured Home Community after such date, and each existing Manufactured Home Community to the extent determined practical by the Zoning Administrator.
1. No mobile or manufactured home may be split into two or more residences.
2. A concrete slab shall be provided for each mobile home space.
3. Prior to occupancy, the owner shall remove the axle, install a fire and weather resistant pre-finished material surrounding the entire perimeter of the home and completely enclosing a space between the exterior wall of such home and the ground. Such foundation siding shall be properly vented, harmonious, and compatible with the home.
4. Attachments to a mobile home unit, such as a sun porch or windbreak, shall not be wider than eight feet or longer than 24 feet.
5. Each mobile home shall be used primarily as a residence for one family. No mobile home shall be used primarily as a storage unit. Storage under mobile homes is prohibited.
6. No mobile or manufactured home site shall be rented for a period of less than 30 days.
7. Wrecked, damaged, dilapidated, or abandoned mobile or manufactured homes shall not be kept or stored upon any premise. The Building Inspector shall determine if a mobile home is abandoned, wrecked, damaged, or dilapidated to a point that makes it unfit for human occupancy without an investment in the mobile or manufactured home that is greater than 50 percent of its assessed value. Whenever the Building Inspector so determines and declared a public nuisance under Chapter 50 of the Code, he or she shall notify the licensee or landowner and owner of the mobile home in writing, giving the findings upon which, his determination is based and shall order such home removed or repaired to a safe and sanitary condition of occupancy.
8. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided and continuously maintained along all property borders abutting single family residentially zoned property.
9. No mobile/manufactured home units, attachments thereto, or associated parking areas shall be located closer than 40 feet to an abutting public right-of-way external to the Manufactured Home Community. Landscape plantings providing screening shall be provided between any external public right-of-way and a mobile/manufactured home or parking area.
10. No mobile/manufactured home unit or attachment thereto (including but not limited to decks and carports) shall be located closer than 20 feet from any other mobile/manufactured home unit or attachment thereto.
11. Vehicular entrances to a Manufactured Home Community shall only be provided on external collector streets or arterial streets.
12. Vehicular entrances to each mobile home shall be from a shared private street or dedicated public street internal to the Manufactured Home Community.
13. A minimum of 25 percent of the total lots or spaces approved within a Manufactured Home Community shall be completed and ready for occupancy before first occupancy is permitted. This standard shall not apply to an expansion of an existing Manufactured Home Community, provided such expansion is in full compliance with all applicable requirements of this Chapter.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types through Section 94.4.02: Residential Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-12
14. No less than 10 percent of the total area of any Manufactured Home Community shall be devoted to common recreational areas and facilities, including but not limited to playgrounds, community swimming pools, community buildings, and off-street recreation trails. Areas included in the calculation of common recreational facilities shall not include streets or parking areas.
15. Access for pedestrians and cyclists entering or leaving the community shall be by safe and convenient routes. Pedestrian and bicycle crossings shall be safely located, marked, and controlled.
16. There shall be safe, efficient, convenient, and harmonious groupings of structures, uses, and facilities, and for appropriate relation of space inside and outside buildings to intended uses and structural features. Streets shall be arranged so as to discourage outside traffic from traversing the community.
17. Pedestrian walkways shall form a logical, safe, and convenient system for pedestrian access to all dwellings, project facilities, and principal off-street pedestrian destinations. Maximum walking distance in the open between dwelling units and related parking spaces, delivery areas and trash and garbage storage areas intended for use of occupants shall not exceed 100 feet.
18. The Zoning Administrator, Fire Chief, or their lawful agents or employees are authorized and directed to inspect each Manufactured Home Community not less than once in every 12-month period to determine the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants of the park and inhabitants as affected thereby and the compliance of structures and activities therein with this Chapter and all other applicable laws.
19. Before any mobile or manufactured home may be located within a Manufactured Home Community, its placement shall be approved per Chapters 14 and 46 of the Code.
20. Except for those mobile homes in place as of March 18, 2015, there shall be no mobile homes placed, replaced, installed, stored, or otherwise kept in any Manufactured Home Community, as the term “mobile home” is defined in Article 17.
21. Except for those manufactured homes in place as of March 18, 2015, there shall be no manufactured homes placed, replaced, installed, stored, or otherwise kept in any Manufactured Home Community, as the term “manufactured home” is defined in Article 17, except for those manufactured homes that meet the criteria in Section 94.4.02(1).
22. Each vacant mobile home space or site shall be properly secured, maintained in a neat condition free from debris and properly mowed, and have all ground openings safely and securely covered or sealed.
23. No mobile or manufactured home or other building shall be installed, stored, or kept within any power, pipeline, or utility easement. Any preexisting mobile home so located shall be immediately removed from the Manufactured Home Community; any preexisting manufactured home may be removed or relocated to a non-easement location.
24. Each new and expanded Manufactured Home Community shall be subject to site plan approval under Section 94.16.09, and as part of the site plan submittal shall include a plan that includes clearly delineated lots that are at least 5,000 square feet and 50 feet in width each.
25. Each new and expanded Manufactured Home Community, with expansion meaning the addition of one or more improved mobile home sites, shall make available or install one or more storm shelters for use by residents during severe weather, meeting all applicable FEMA design standards.
26. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: 2 spaces per mobile home plus parking necessary for other on-site uses, including but not limited to rental offices, community centers, or recreation facilities. All motor vehicles shall be parked on a hard surface, or on a graveled surface if such surface was permitted before January 1, 2014 and completed within one year of issuance.
[Amended via Ord. 16-004, 4/20/2016]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.03: Agricultural Land Use Types through Section 94.4.03: Agricultural Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-13
(5) Mixed Use Dwelling Unit.
A Mixed Use Dwelling Unit is a residential dwelling unit located within the same building as another land use type, generally above the ground floor of a building used for an office, business, or institutional land use, except where otherwise allowed per the following performance standards.
Performance Standards:
1. With each building permit application, the applicant must provide evidence of covenants specifying the obligations for each dwelling unit with respect to any common structures, such as the shared wall, roof, and other inseparable improvements.
2. A Mixed se Dwelling Unit located on the ground floor of a building used for an office, business, or institutional land use may not be located within the first 24 feet of the ground floor as measured from the front of the building.
3. Additional entrances shall not be added to the front elevation of an existing building, but may be added to interior side, rear, or street side elevations.
4. Mixed Use Dwelling Unit entryways located off of a rear or interior side yard shall be connected to a street frontage by a hard-surfaced walkway or driveway.
5. Such uses shall, to the extent determined practical by the Village approval authority, meet the performance standards for “Multi-Family Residences” established in Figure 4.02(2).
6. Minimum Required Parking: Per Figure 4.02(2). Each non-residential use in the same building as a Mixed Use Dwelling Unit shall meet associated parking requirements in Section 94.4.05.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19]
Section 94.4.03: Agricultural Land Use Types
(1) Agricultural Use.
Any of the following activities conducted for the purpose of producing an income, livelihood, or for purposes related to any type of hobby farm: crop or forage production; keeping farm animals; beekeeping; nursery, sod, or Christmas tree production; maple syrup production; floriculture; aquaculture; forest management; enrolling land in a federal agricultural commodity payment program or a federal or state agricultural land and conservation payment program. Also includes an activity that is an integral part of, or incidental to, an Agricultural Use. Excludes any other separately listed land use in this Section, including but not limited to the Keeping of Farm Animals on a Residential Lot and School Sites, a Commercial Animal Establishment, and an Animal Fancier.
Performance Standards:
1. Shall meet the requirements of the Village’s Animal ordinance and the County’s Animal Waste Management Ordinance, where applicable.
2. No farm animals shall be permitted as part of a principal Agricultural Use on a lot or parcel that is less than five acres in area, exclusive of existing public rights-of-way and road easements.
3. The keeping of hogs and pigs intended for slaughter or market, goats, roosters, or fur-bearing animals (other than rabbits and ferrets) shall not be permitted, except within the FP, AR, and RM districts or on a farm operation of at least 20 acres established before March 18, 2015.
4. Within any RR and RM district, hobby farms meeting the definition in Section 94.17.04, including not more than 25 animal units, and on a lot or parcel at least 10 acres in area, shall be allowed as permitted uses. All other Agricultural Uses shall be regulated as conditional uses in any RR or RM district.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.03: Agricultural Land Use Types through Section 94.4.03: Agricultural Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-14
5. Beekeeping is permitted subject to the standards in Section 94.4.09(10), except that that the number of beehives shall be limited to one for each 2,500 square feet of lot area.
6. The raising or keeping of farm animals shall be permitted at a density not to exceed one animal unit per every acre owned, not considering fractional amounts of acreage. The definition of an animal unit is in Section 94.17.04. The Zoning Administrator may approve modifications and exceptions to this animal unit density standard if, each year the normal density standard is to be exceeded, the land owner provides conservation compliance documentation from Marathon County signifying that the keeping of a higher density of animal units is in compliance with all NR 151 Agricultural Runoff Performance Standards and Prohibitions.
7. Any area where farm animals are allowed to pasture or run shall be adequately fenced to keep them confined to such area.
8. Except for a farm in existence before March 18, 2015, barns, poultry houses, or similar animal enclosures may be no closer than 50 feet from any lot line, except that poultry houses for not more than eight chickens or ducks need only meet the minimum setback requirement for accessory structures.
9. This subsection does not establish regulations for household pets such as rabbits, ferrets, fish, song birds, potbelly pigs, cats, or dogs which are kept indoors. Household pets such as dogs or cats are regulated separately from this chapter through Chapter 10 of the Code. This subsection also does not establish regulations for the accessory use listed as “Keeping of Farm Animals on a Residential Lot and School Sites” in Section 94.4.09(10).
[Amended via Ord. 16-046, 12/21/2016; Ord. 17-034, 11/24/2017]
(2) Agricultural-Related Use.
A facility, whether or not located on a farm, that has at least one of the following as a primary and not merely incidental purpose: providing agricultural supplies, agricultural equipment, agricultural inputs, or agricultural services directly to farms; storing, processing, or handling raw agricultural commodities obtained directly from farms; slaughtering livestock; marketing livestock to or from farms; processing agricultural by-products or wastes received directly from farms. Examples of such uses include, but are not limited to, agricultural implement sales, storage, and/or repair operations; feed and seed stores; agricultural chemical dealers and/or storage facilities; animal feed storage facilities (except those accessory to an “Agricultural Use”); commercial dairies; food processing facilities; licensed farm auction operations; canning and other food packaging facilities; greenhouses and garden centers; orchard stores; agricultural waste and by-product disposal facilities (except those accessory to an “Agricultural Use”); farms regularly open for tours, demonstrations, hayrides, corn mazes, farm breakfasts, and other similar events; sawmills; de-barking operations; and chipping facilities. Not included within this land use category are plants intended to convert agricultural products to energy on a large-scale basis, Sales of Farm and Forestry Products, landscape contractors, and or any other separately listed land use in this Section.
Performance Standards:
1. Within any RM district, agricultural and forestry storage facilities, sawmills, de-barking operations, chipping facilities, and other Agricultural-Related Uses of similar or lesser impact as determined by the Zoning Administrator shall be allowed as permitted uses. All other Agricultural-Related Uses shall be regulated as conditional uses in any RM district.
2. For agricultural implement sales, storage, and/or repair operations:
a. The display of items shall not be permitted in required landscaped areas, required bufferyards, or required setback areas for the principal structure.
b. Display areas shall be separated from any circulation area by a minimum of 10 feet, which shall be clearly delimited.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.03: Agricultural Land Use Types through Section 94.4.03: Agricultural Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-15
c. Items being displayed shall not interfere with motor vehicle, pedestrian, and bicycle traffic visibility.
d. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
[Amended via Ord. 16-046, 12/21/2016]
(3) Community Garden.
An area for cultivation and related activities divided into one or more plots to be cultivated by more than two operators or members, as a principal land use of a property. The Community Garden may be the sole principal use of the property or may be a second principal use on a property. Does not include gardens for cultivation of crops for home consumption.
Performance Standards: For any new or expanded Community Garden after March 18, 2015:
1. Issuance of a zoning permit is required. With the application for a zoning permit, the applicant shall demonstrate through the submittal of plans, written statements, or both that the Community Garden will meet all applicable performance standards.
2. All activity areas and structures shall comply with the required setbacks and height regulations for principal structures within the associated zoning district. Fences shall comply with Section 94.12.03.
3. The application shall include the name(s) of the property owner, any established sponsoring organization, and the garden manager.
4. The application shall include a plan that demonstrates consideration for and indicates locations of structures, materials storage, equipment storage, access for deliveries and pickups, water availability, and availability of parking.
5. The following structures are permitted: tool sheds, shade pavilions, restroom facilities, planting preparation houses, benches, bike racks, raised/accessible planting beds, compost bins, picnic tables, fences, garden art, rain barrel systems, children's play areas, and barns with approval of the Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee.
6. There shall be no exterior lighting associated with the Community Garden use, except for standard residential yard lighting.
(4) On-Site Agricultural Retail.
The sale of non-animal agricultural products grown exclusively on the site or on an adjacent property in common ownership, on a year-round basis or requiring the construction and maintenance of permanent structures, except that packaging and equipment used to store, display, package, or carry products for the convenience of the operation or its customers (such as egg cartons, baskets, containers, and bags) may be produced off-site. Includes permanent or seasonal dining establishments in which products are grown and served on the same farm.
Performance Standards:
1. The sale of products that are grown or otherwise produced on non-adjacent property under the same ownership, or on property under different ownership, shall be prohibited.
2. The maximum total Gross Floor Area of a structure or a combination of structures dedicated primarily to the On-Site Agricultural Retail use shall be 1,000 square feet in area.
3. Structures shall all be set back at least 100 feet from any lot in a residential zoned district.
4. Roadside stands, less than 200 square feet in area, shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from any lot line.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.04: Institutional & Recreational Land Use
Types
through Section 94.4.04: Institutional & Recreational Land Use
Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-16
5. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: four off-street parking spaces shall be provided or one space per 200 square feet of indoor and outdoor sales areas plus one space per employee on the largest work shift, depending on which calculation provides for the greater amount of off-street parking spaces.
Section 94.4.04: Institutional & Recreational Land Use Types
(1) Passive Outdoor Public Recreation.
Includes all recreational land uses located on public property or a public easement that involves passive recreational activities. Such land uses include arboretums, natural areas, wildlife areas, hiking trails, bike trails, cross country ski trails, horse trails, open grassed areas not associated with any particular “Active Outdoor Public Recreation” land use, picnic areas, picnic shelters, gardens, fishing areas (not including commercial fishing ponds), and similar land uses. Also includes private conservancy lands restricted against further development.
Performance Standards:
1. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: One space per four expected patrons at maximum capacity for any use requiring over five spaces by this standard.
2. In the FP zoning district, the following additional standards shall also be met:
a. The use and its location in the farmland preservation zoning district are consistent with the purposes of the farmland preservation zoning district.
b. The use and its location in the farmland preservation zoning district are reasonable and appropriate, considering alternative locations, or are specifically approved under state or federal law.
c. The use is reasonably designed to minimize the conversion of land, at and around the site of the use, from agricultural use or open space use.
d. The use does not substantially impair or limit the current or future agricultural use of surrounding parcels of land that are zoned for or legally restricted to agricultural use.
e. Construction damage to land remaining in agricultural use is minimized and repaired to the extent feasible.
(2) Active Outdoor Public Recreation.
Includes all outdoor land uses located on public property or public easement that accommodates active recreational activities. Such land uses include play courts (such as tennis courts and basketball courts), playfields (such as ball diamonds, football fields, and soccer fields), tot lots, outdoor swimming pools, swimming beach areas, fitness courses, golf courses open to the public, and similar land uses.
Performance Standards:
1. Concession stands, shelters, pavilions, gazebos, restrooms, and other buildings commonly associated with an Active Outdoor Public Recreation use shall be permitted but shall meet size limitations associated with Accessory Buildings (for Non-Residential Use).
2. Air domes may be allowed to house part of use by conditional use permit.
3. Any Active Outdoor Public Recreation Use that involves balls or other projectiles shall provide netting, sufficient distance, or another method approved by the Zoning Administrator to prevent the balls or projectiles from leaving the property.
4. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: One space per four expected patrons at maximum capacity for any use requiring over five spaces by this standard.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.04: Institutional & Recreational Land Use
Types
through Section 94.4.04: Institutional & Recreational Land Use
Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-17
(3) Indoor Institutional—General.
Indoor facilities that include 20,000 square feet of indoor Gross Floor Area or less, including gyms, public or commercial swimming pools, libraries, museums, community centers, schools, churches, funeral homes, nonprofit clubs, nonprofit fraternal organizations, convention centers, and similar land uses generally serving a community purpose and meeting this size requirement. Crematoriums are lawful accessory use to a funeral home, where serving only customers of the funeral home and where meeting all performance standards in Article 12. Indoor Institutional uses do not include any arena, convention center, hospital, jail, prison, or similar use of a size and character that typically serve the needs of the whole community and region (regardless of whether over or under 20,000 square feet).
Performance Standards:
1. Shall provide a deliberately designed area exclusively for drop-offs and pick-ups of persons that is outside of the public right-of-way.
2. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: Per Figure 4.04(1).
(4) Indoor Institutional—Intensive.
Indoor facilities that generally serve the community and (a) include over 20,000 square feet of indoor Gross Floor Area, including gyms, public or commercial swimming pools, libraries, museums, community centers, schools, churches, funeral homes, non-profit clubs, non-profit fraternal organizations that exceed this size threshold, and (b) all arenas, convention centers, hospitals, jails, prisons, and similar uses of a size and character that typically serve the needs of the whole community and region.
Performance Standards:
1. Shall provide a deliberately designed area exclusively for drop-offs and pick-ups of persons that is outside of the public right-of-way.
2. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
3. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: Per Figure 4.04(1). Figure 4.04(1): Indoor Institutional Parking Requirements
Church
One space per four seats at maximum capacity
Community/Recreation Center
One space per 300 SF of GFA or one space per four patrons at maximum capacity, whichever is greater, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift.
Funeral Home
One space per three patron seats, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift
Hospital
One space per two hospital beds, plus one space per staff doctor, and one space per two staff on the largest work shift
Library, Museum
One space per 300 SF of GFA, or one space per four seats at maximum capacity, whichever is greater, plus one parking space per employee
Elementary or Middle School
One space per employee on the largest work shift
High School
One space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one space per three students at maximum school capacity
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.04: Institutional & Recreational Land Use
Types
through Section 94.4.04: Institutional & Recreational Land Use
Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-18
Figure 4.04(1): Indoor Institutional Parking Requirements
University, College, or Trade School
One space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one space per three students at maximum school capacity
Other Uses
One space per three expected persons at maximum capacity
(5) Outdoor Institutional.
Includes cemeteries, country clubs, and similar land uses.
Performance Standards:
1. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: Per Figure 4.04(2): Figure 4.04(2): Outdoor Institutional Parking Requirements
Cemetery
One space per shift employee
Other Uses
One space per three expected persons at maximum capacity
(6) Public Service or Utility.
Includes all municipal, county, State and Federal facilities (except those separately addressed in this Section); emergency service facilities such as fire departments and rescue operations; wastewater treatment plants; public and/or private utility substations; water towers and reservoirs; wells and well houses; utility and public service related distribution facilities; and similar land uses. Power production facilities (power plants) shall instead be regulated as “Heavy Industrial” uses.
Performance Standards:
1. Outdoor storage areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property.
2. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
3. The exterior of all buildings shall meet the standards for non-residential structures in Section 94.10.03.
4. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one space per company vehicle normally stored or parked on the premises, plus one space per 500 square feet of gross square feet of office area.
5. In the FP zoning district, the following additional standards shall also be met:
a. The use and its location in the farmland preservation zoning district are consistent with the purposes of the farmland preservation zoning district.
b. The use and its location in the farmland preservation zoning district are reasonable and appropriate, considering alternative locations, or are specifically approved under state or federal law.
c. The use is reasonably designed to minimize conversion of land at and around the site of the use, from agricultural use or open space use.
d. The use does not substantially impair or limit the current or future agricultural use of surrounding parcels of land that are zoned for or legally restricted to agricultural use.
e. Construction damage to land remaining in agricultural use is minimized and repaired, to the extent feasible.
(7) Institutional Residential.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.04: Institutional & Recreational Land Use
Types
through Section 94.4.04: Institutional & Recreational Land Use
Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-19
Includes senior housing, retirement homes, assisted living facilities, nursing homes, hospices, group homes, convents, monasteries, dormitories, convalescent homes, limited care facilities, rehabilitation centers, and similar land uses not considered to be Community Living Arrangements under Wis. Stat. §62.23.
Performance Standards:
1. There shall be a minimum of 800 square feet of Gross Site Area for each occupant of the development.
2. A minimum of 30 percent of the development's Gross Site Area shall be held as permanently protected green space.
3. An off-street passenger loading area shall be provided at a minimum of one location within the development.
4. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: Per Figure 4.04(3). Figure 4.04(3): Institutional Residential Parking Requirements
Senior Housing, Retirement Housing
one space per dwelling unit
Assisted Living or Limited Care Facility
one space per two dwelling units
Nursing Home or Hospice
one space per four patient beds, plus one space per two employees on the largest work shift, plus one space per doctor
Monastery, Convent, Dormitory
one space per six residents, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift
(8) Community Living Arrangement.
Includes community living arrangements for adults, as defined in Wis. Stat. § 46.03(22); community living arrangements for children, as defined in Wis. Stat. § 48.743(1); foster homes, as defined in Wis. Stat. § 48.02(6); or adult family homes, as defined in Wis. Stat. § 50.01 (1) (a) or (b). Community Living Arrangements do not include “Group Day Care Centers” (see separate listing); nursing homes (an “Institutional Residential” land use); or hospitals, prisons, or jails (all “Indoor Institutional” land uses). Community Living Arrangement facilities are regulated depending upon their capacity, as provided for in Wis. Stats. § 61.35 and 62.23(7)(i), provided any such regulations and the performance standards below do not violate preemptive federal or state housing or anti-discrimination laws.
Performance Standards:
1. Except as provided in subsections 3. and 4. below, no Community Living Arrangement shall be established within 2,500 feet of any other such facility regardless of its capacity unless the Plan Commission and Village Board agree to a reduction in spacing. Two community living arrangements may be adjacent if the Village authorizes that arrangement and if both facilities comprise essential components of a single program.
2. Except as provided in subsection 3 below, the total combined capacity of all Community Living Arrangements (of all capacities) in the Village shall not exceed one percent of the combined population of the Village (unless specifically authorized by the Village Board following a public hearing). The applicant shall be responsible for providing information on the total, combined capacity of all Community Living Arrangements within the Village and its Extraterritorial Zoning Area.
3. A foster home that is the primary domicile of a foster parent and that is licensed under Wis. Stat. § 48.62, or an adult family home certified under Wis. Stat. § 50.032 (1m)(b) shall be a permitted
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types through Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-20
use in all residentially zoned areas and are not subject to subsections 1. and 2. above except that foster homes operated by corporations, child welfare agencies, churches, associations, or public agencies shall be subject to subsections 1 and 2.
4. No adult family home described in Wis. Stat. §50.01(1)(b) may be established within 2,500 feet, or any lesser distance established by an ordinance of the Village, of any other adult family home described in Wis. Stat. §50.01(1)(b), or any Community Living Arrangement. An agent of an adult family home described in Wis. Stat. §50.01(1)(b) may apply for an exception to this requirement, and the exception may be granted at the discretion of the Village.
5. There shall be no maximum to the number of Community Living Arrangement facilities, except as other performance standards may indirectly establish a limit.
6. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: three spaces, plus one space for every three residents over eight residents (except for those residents under 16 years of age and otherwise without the ability to drive).
Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types
(1) Office.
Includes all exclusively indoor land uses whose primary functions are the handling of information, administrative services, or both, generally with little direct service to customers on-site. Office uses that are accessory to a principal residential use of a property are not considered “Office” uses but are instead regulated as “Home Occupations” or “Residential Businesses” under this chapter.
Performance Standards:
1. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per 300 square feet of Gross Floor Area.
(2) Personal or Professional Service.
Exclusively indoor land uses whose primary function is the provision of services directly to an individual on a walk-in or on-appointment basis. Examples include professional services, banks, insurance or financial services, realty offices, medical offices and clinics, veterinary clinics, barber shops, and beauty shops. Payday loan uses, as defined in Wis. Stat. § 138.14, are not considered “Personal or Professional Service” uses under this chapter and are not permitted within the Village. Service uses that are accessory to a principal residential use of a property are not considered “Personal or Professional Service” uses but are instead regulated as “Home Occupations” or “Residential Businesses” under this chapter.
Performance Standards:
1. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per 300 square feet of Gross Floor Area.
[Amended via Ord. 17-025, 7/26/2017]
(3) Artisan Studio.
A building or portion thereof used for the preparation, display, and sale of individually crafted artwork, photography, jewelry, furniture, sculpture, pottery, leathercraft, hand-woven sections, and related items, and occupied by no more than five artists or artisans. Uses occupied by more than five artists or artisans shall be considered a “Light Industrial” use under Section 94.4.08(1). Studios that are accessory to a principal residential use of a property are not considered “Artisan Studio” uses but are instead regulated as home occupations under this chapter.
Performance Standards:
1. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per 300 square feet of Gross Floor Area.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types through Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-21
(4) Group Day Care Center.
A land use in which licensed persons and facilities provide child care services for nine or more children, such as day care centers, pre-schools, and nursery schools. Such land uses may be operated as a stand-alone use, or in conjunction with another principal land use on the same site such as a church, primary school, business, or civic organization. Any child care facility located on the same site as a principal land use, and that is reserved solely for the use of company employees and their guests on the same site, are instead regulated as a “Company Provided On-Site Amenities” accessory use.
Performance Standards:
1. No Group Day Care Center shall be located within a building that is also occupied as a residence.
2. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per five students, plus one space for each employee on the largest work shift.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19]
(5) Indoor Sales or Service.
Includes all land uses, except as otherwise separately listed in this Section, that conduct or display sales or rental merchandise or equipment, or that conduct non-personal or non-professional services, entirely within an enclosed building. This includes a wide variety of retail stores and commercial service uses not otherwise listed in this Chapter, along with self-service facilities such as coin-operated laundromats. Includes uses like retail bakeries and delis where the consumption of products typically occurs off-site, but does not include restaurants, which are instead classified as “Indoor Commercial Entertainment” uses. Display of products outside of an enclosed building shall be considered an “Outdoor Display Incidental to Indoor Sales” accessory use, or, if outdoor sales exceed 15 percent of the total sales area of the building(s) on the property, an “Outdoor Display” principal land use. Sales or service uses that are accessory to a principal residential use of a property are not considered “Indoor Sales or Service” uses but are instead regulated as “Home Occupations” or “Residential Businesses” under this chapter. Does not include any “Commercial Animal Establishment” use.
Performance Standards:
1. Use may also be subject to conditional use permit requirements and adherence to performance, building design, and site design standards in Section 94.10.06 if classified as a “Large Retail and Commercial Service Development” under Section 94.10.04. However, following initial conditional use permit approval, individual “Indoor Sales or Service” uses may occupy the constructed spaces without the need for a further conditional use permit.
2. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per 300 square feet of Gross Floor Area.
(6) Outdoor Display.
Includes all land uses, except as otherwise separately listed in this Article, that conduct sales or display sales or rental merchandise or equipment outside of an enclosed building. Examples include outdoor vehicle sales, outdoor vehicle rental, manufactured home sales, and monument sales. Such land uses do not include the storage or display of inoperative vehicles or equipment, or other materials typically associated with a “Junkyard or Salvage Yard” use. If an area less than 15 percent of the total sales area of the building(s) on the property is used for display of products outside of an enclosed building, such use shall instead be considered an “Outdoor Display Incidental to Indoor Sales” accessory use.
Performance Standards:
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types through Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-22
1. The display of items shall not be permitted in required landscaped areas, required bufferyards, or required setback areas for the principal structure.
2. Display areas shall be separated from any circulation area by a minimum of 10 feet, which shall be clearly delimited.
3. Items being displayed shall not interfere with motor vehicle, pedestrian, and bicycle traffic visibility.
4. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
5. The display of items outdoors shall be permitted during the entire calendar year; however, if items are removed from the display area, all support fixtures used to display the items shall be removed.
6. There must be a principal building on the same lot as the Outdoor Display land use, which serving as an essential component of that use, such as a sales office, indoor showroom, and/or storage facility. Such building shall be attached to a permanent foundation, and if erected or expanded after March 18, 2015, shall meet building design standards in Section 94.10.03.
7. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per 300 square feet of Gross Floor Area. In no event shall the display of items reduce or inhibit the use or number of parking stalls provided on the property below what is required in this Section. If the number of provided parking stalls on the property is already less than the requirement, such display area shall not further reduce the number of parking stalls already present.
(7) Indoor Repair and Maintenance.
Includes all land uses, except as separately listed, that perform repair and maintenance services for consumer products and contain all operations (except loading) entirely within an enclosed building, including electronics, mechanical, and small engine repair service businesses. Because of outdoor vehicle storage requirements, all vehicle repair and maintenance uses shall instead be regulated as “Outdoor and Vehicle Repair and Maintenance” uses.
Performance Standards:
1. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per 300 square feet of Gross Floor Area.
(8) Outdoor and Vehicle Repair and Maintenance.
Includes all land uses, except those that are separately listed in this Section, that perform maintenance services (including repair) and have all, or any portion (beyond simply loading) of their operations located outside of an enclosed building. Also includes all businesses that repair or maintain motor vehicles designed for road use and brought in from off-site.
Performance Standards:
1. All outdoor activity areas shall be completely enclosed by an opaque fence, wall, or building section for each Outdoor and Vehicle Repair and Maintenance use no later than January 1, 2017. Such enclosure shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property.
2. Outdoor storage of vehicle parts and abandoned, unlicensed, and inoperable vehicles is prohibited, except that each inoperable vehicle being serviced may be kept outdoors for a period not exceeding 30 days.
3. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
4. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per 300 square feet of Gross Floor Area, or one space per each employee on the largest shift, whichever is less.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types through Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-23
(9) Drive-Through and Drive-In Sales or Service.
Includes all land uses that perform sales and/or services to persons in vehicles, or to vehicles that may or may not be occupied at the time of such activity (except “Outdoor and Vehicle Repair and Maintenance” land uses, which are separately listed and regulated). Such uses often have traffic volumes that exhibit their highest levels concurrent with peak traffic flows on adjacent roads. Examples include drive-in, drive-up, and drive-through facilities in conjunction with another principal use (like a bank or restaurant), vehicular fuel stations, and car washes.
Performance Standards:
1. There shall be stacking space for at least five vehicles behind each drive-through order station, at least two vehicles between each order station and the first pass-through window, and at least two spaces beyond the last pass-through window for post-order pick-up.
2. The drive-through facility shall be designed so as to not impede or impair loading, vehicular movement, and pedestrian movement, or exacerbate the potential for conflicts with such activities.
3. Clearly marked pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided for each walk-in customer access to the facility adjacent to drive-through lane(s).
4. All vehicular areas shall have a hard surface that is designed to meet the requirements of a minimum four-ton axle load.
5. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
6. Vertical concrete curbs shall be used to separate driving areas from exterior fixtures such as fuel pumps, vacuums, menu boards, canopy supports, and landscaped islands.
7. Any land use that conducts sales from a vehicle such as a food truck or trailer, or from any other structure for an outdoor food or beverage vendor, that is in one place for more than 7 consecutive days is not classified as a “Drive-Through and Drive-In Sales or Service” use and is prohibited within the Village.
8. Minimum Require Off-Street Parking: Refer to the parking requirements of the other land uses on the site, such as “Indoor Sales and Service” land uses for a gas station/convenience store.
(10) Indoor Commercial Entertainment.
Includes all uses that provide entertainment services entirely within an enclosed building, or where outdoor entertainment facilities are present, the land area of such facilities is not greater than 15 percent of the gross floor area indoors. Indoor Commercial Entertainment uses often have operating hours that extend significantly later than most other commercial land uses. Examples of such land uses include restaurants, brewpubs, taverns, theaters, health or fitness centers, other indoor private recreation centers, training studios (dance, art, martial arts, etc.), bowling alleys, arcades, roller rinks, indoor shooting ranges, and pool halls. Does not include any “Micro-beverage Production Facility” or “Adult Entertainment or Adult-Oriented Establishment,” which instead are listed and regulated separately. Does not include permanent or seasonal dining establishments in which products are grown and served on the same farm, which are instead regulated as “On-site Agricultural Retail” uses.
Performance Standards:
1. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types through Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-24
2. Where the limited outdoor space allowed for Indoor Commercial Entertainment uses allows for the service or consumption of alcohol, the use requires a conditional use permit and is subject to the performance standards associated with an “Outdoor Alcohol Area” in Section 94.4.09(17).
3. Air domes may be allowed to house all or part of the indoor commercial entertainment use by conditional use permit.
4. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per every three patron seats, or the maximum capacity of the establishment (whichever is greater).
(11) Outdoor Commercial Entertainment.
Includes all principal uses that provide entertainment services partially or wholly outside of an enclosed building. Such activities often have the potential to be associated with nuisances related to noise, lighting, dust, trash, and late operating hours. Examples include outdoor commercial swimming pools, health or fitness centers where the area of outdoor facilities is greater than 15 percent of the gross floor area indoors, driving ranges, miniature golf facilities, amusement parks, drive-in theaters, go-cart tracks, racetracks, trap clubs, and shooting ranges. Does not include any golf course or “Adult Entertainment or Adult-oriented Establishment,” which instead are listed and regulated separately.
Performance Standards:
1. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
2. Activity areas (including movie screens) shall not be visible from any residentially zoned property.
3. Shall at all times meet the noise standards in Section 94.12.13.
4. Where the limited outdoor space allowed for Indoor Commercial Entertainment uses allows for the service or consumption of alcohol, the use shall require a conditional use permit be subject to the performance standards associated with an “Outdoor Alcohol Area” in Section 94.4.09(17).
5. The keeping of horses and other non-domesticated animals may be permitted where accessory and integral to the principal use, where “Agricultural Use” standards in Section 94.4.03(1) related to the keeping of farm animals are met, and where other chapters including Chapter 10 of the Code are met.
6. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space for every three persons at the maximum capacity of the establishment.
(12) Commercial Animal Establishment.
Includes uses that provide for the care, treatment, grooming, and/or boarding of animals as a principal use of the property. Examples include commercial stables, pet shops, grooming shops, boarding kennels, animal shelters, and veterinary facilities. A boarding kennel is a facility where dogs, cats, horses, or other animals are kept for 24 hours or more for boarding, training or similar purposes for compensation. Exercise yards, fields, training areas, and trails associated with such land uses are considered accessory to such land uses and do not require separate approvals.
Performance Standards:
1. As part of the permit approval, the Village may establish a limit on the number of animals that are serviced or boarded. No boarding kennels or other commercial animal establishments including outdoor activities or overnight stays are allowed in the B-1 or B-2 districts.
2. Special events such as shows, exhibitions, and contests shall only be permitted when a temporary use permit or special event permit has been secured.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types through Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-25
3. Commercial stables and boarding facilities for horses or other riding animals are subject to all “Agricultural Use” standards in Section 94.4.03(1) related to the keeping of farm animals.
4. All principal structures and outdoor containment areas for horses or other riding animals shall be no less than 100 feet from any residential zoning district.
5. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
6. Shall meet all performance standards in Article 12, including but not limited to odor standards in Section 94.12.15..12.15.
7. In the FP zoning district, the use must meet the standards set forth in Section 94.4.03(2) for an Agricultural-Related Use.
8. Commercial kennels and animal boarding facilities are subject to the requirements and licensing standards set forth in Chapter 10 of the Code.
9. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per every 1,000 square feet of indoor Gross Floor Area.
[Amended via Ord. 17-010, 4/19/2017]
(13) Bed and Breakfast.
Exclusively indoor lodging facilities that provide meals only to paying lodgers, and in which the operator is also a resident of the premises. Such land uses must be licensed by the State. They may provide indoor recreational facilities for the exclusive use of their customers. This use classification does not include a “Boarding House,” which instead is separately regulated.
Performance Standards:
1. The dwelling unit in which the Bed and Breakfast takes place shall be the principal residence of the operator/owner and said operator/owner shall live on the premises when the Bed and Breakfast establishment is active.
2. Shall meet all requirements of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
3. The maximum stay for any occupants of a Bed and Breakfast establishment shall be 14 days.
4. Each operator shall keep a list of names of all persons staying at the Bed and Breakfast establishment. This list shall be kept on file for a period of one year. Such list shall be available for inspection by the Zoning Administrator at any time.
5. Meals may only be served to residents and overnight guests.
6. If alcoholic beverages of any kind are to be served on the premises, the owner of the establishment shall first obtain the appropriate licenses.
7. Prior to opening for business, every bed and breakfast establishment shall obtain a permit from the Village Clerk (or Town Clerk if in an Extraterritorial Zoning Area) by application made upon a form furnished by said officer. Such permit shall be void upon the sale or transfer of the property ownership. A bed and breakfast permit shall be valid until terminated by action of the Village Clerk for violation of the provisions of this Chapter or of State regulations.
8. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per each bedroom in addition to standard requirements for principal residential use.
(14) Boarding House.
Includes any residential use renting rooms, or providing rooms as part of an employment package on a farm, where each room does not contain a private bathroom facility or full kitchen. Also commonly referred to as a “rooming house.” Does not include any “Multi-Family Residence”, “Community Living Arrangement,” “Institutional Residential,” “Bed and Breakfast” uses, which are separately classified and regulated.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types through Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-26
Performance Standards:
1. Uses that meet the definition of a Boarding House above, and the performance standards below, shall only be allowed where listed in Figures 3.04 and 3.05.
2. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property and public rights-of-way.
3. Each Boarding House may have no more than eight boarders and bedrooms for boarders.
4. The Boarding House must meet all design standards applicable to Multi-Family Residences in Section 94.10.03.
5. Except within the AR district, the operator of the Boarding House must live within the same building as the boarders.
6. If within the AR district:
a. All boarders must be workers on the farm where the Boarding House is located.
b. There may not be more than one boarder per every 20 acres on the farm.
c. Wis. Stat. §103.92, regarding migrant labor camps, may also apply.
7. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per room for rent, plus one space per each employee on the largest work shift.
[Amended via Ord. 16-046, 12/21/2016; Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19]
(15) Campground.
A parcel of land designed, maintained, intended, or used for the purposes of providing a location for two or more camping units and designed and approved for overnight accommodation. A campground may be the sole principal use of a property, or part of a range of principal uses on a property (e.g., a component of a park, school forest, or other recreational facility).
Performance Standards:
1. The application for a conditional use permit shall include the following information:
a. A written description of the proposed operation, including proposed months of operation; desired types of camping units; other ancillary uses proposed for the site; and assurances that the campground will be developed and operated in accordance with all approved plans.
b. A campground plan map(s), drawn to scale, and including the proposed layout; location of camp sites, roads, parking areas, site boundaries; topography lines; minimum required yards; existing and proposed buildings and other structures; common recreational facilities; water supplies; sanitary waste disposal systems; grading plan and stormwater management system meeting the requirements of this Chapter; covered refuse storage areas; existing natural features including waterways, wetlands, floodplains, and shoreland areas; existing and proposed vegetation and recreation areas, and any other information the Zoning Administrator shall deem necessary. Professional engineering assistance is encouraged in such design, especially of access roadways, camping unit siting, site grading and stormwater management, and utility placement.
2. Any subsequent expansion beyond its approved number of sites and units or density of site or units, and construction of new or expanded recreational or service facilities shall require a new conditional use permit. Any modification of an approved plan which only moves sites and units or accessory buildings or recreational facilities shall only require site plan approval.
3. No single camping unit shall be occupied by the same party for a period of time longer than six continuous months in any 12-month period, except as may be further limited by State Statutes or Administrative Rules.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types through Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-27
4. Campground shall have direct access to a public road, with no more than two camp road access points to each abutting public road for the first 100 camp sites, plus one additional access for each 100 sites thereafter. Access to public roads shall also meet applicable requirements of Chapter 71 of the Weston Municipal Code.
5. Camp sites and access roads shall be located, graded, and maintained so as to provide each site with positive site drainage.
6. Minimum lot size for any campground established after March 18, 2015 shall be 10 acres.
7. Maximum gross density shall be eight individual camp sites or camping units per acre of active camping area. Active camping area consists of camp sites and land supporting the camp sites including access roads, recreational facilities, and other permanent campground infrastructure.
8. Individual camp sites shall be at least 1,200 square feet in area. Each camp site shall be clearly marked with an alpha or numeric symbol on a sign which is clearly visible from an access road.
9. There shall be a minimum separation of 10 feet between camping units. Any accessory structure on the campsite, such as but not limited to, a deck, porch, awning, or storage structure shall be considered part of the camping unit for purposes of this separation requirement. The total footprint of these accessory structures plus the camping unit shall not exceed 400 square feet.
10. Separate areas may be designated as a campground for group camping in tents. Within each group camping area, no more than 20 tents containing no more than 80 persons per acre shall be permitted. The group camping area must be provided with proper sanitary service as required by State Statutes.
11. Each campground may have up to two single-family dwellings for the private use and occupation of the owners and caretakers of the campground.
12. Each campground may, for only those persons camping on site, registered as guests or visitors or persons making a bona fide visit to check out the campground, or otherwise paying for the use of the campground, provide for purchases of sundry supplies, cooked meals, and drinks including alcoholic beverages, if so licensed.
13. Each campground may accommodate common recreational facilities and amenities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, and other similar facilities. These facilities shall be considered a part of the active camping area.
14. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property and public roads.
15. Each campground established after March 18, 2015 shall provide a minimum of 200 square feet per camping unit or one continuous acre of common recreation open space, whichever is greater. Yard areas within minimum required setbacks around the perimeter of the campground and land within landscaped transitional yards may not be counted towards meeting this requirement.
16. Each campground or camping resort shall be maintained under a single management so that responsibility can be easily placed for cleaning of common facilities such as water supply, sewage disposal station, toilet, laundry, and washrooms, and refuse areas, and for enforcement of camp site cleanliness.
17. The number of camping cabins within a campground shall not exceed 15 percent of the total number of camping units in the campground.
18. Each campground shall comply with all state regulations applicable to campgrounds, except as may be permitted through other licenses or approvals from the state.
19. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: 1.5 spaces per campsite.
(16) Commercial Indoor Lodging.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types through Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-28
Includes land uses that provide overnight housing in more than one individual room or suite of rooms, each room or suite having a private bathroom, including hotels and motels. Such land uses may provide in-room or in-suite kitchens and may also provide indoor recreational facilities for the exclusive use of their customers. Restaurants, arcades, fitness centers, and other on-site facilities available to non-lodgers are not considered accessory uses and therefore require review as a separate principal land use. This land use category does not include “Bed and Breakfast” or “Tourist Rooming House” uses, which are instead listed and regulated separately.
Performance Standards:
1. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
2. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per bedroom, plus one space for each employee on the largest work shift.
(17) Tourist Rooming House.
A permanent dwelling unit where sleeping accommodations are offered for pay to tourists or transients for periods of time of 7 days or fewer. Commercial lodgings consisting of structures with rentable rooms or suites shall instead be regulated as a “Commercial Indoor Lodging” use (or if a room in a residence operated by the primary resident, a “Bed and Breakfast”). Also, does not include any “Boarding House,” which is described and regulated separately. Any restaurant, arcade, fitness center, and other on-site facility available to non-lodgers is not considered an accessory use and therefore requires review as a separate principal land use.
Performance Standards:
1. The use must meet all performance standards associated with the type of dwelling in which it is located.
2. Occupancy shall be limited to two persons per bedroom, plus an additional two persons. At no time may the number of guests exceed eight regardless of the number of bedrooms in the unit. Two exits are required for each bedroom.
3. The appearance of use of the Tourist Rooming House shall not be altered in a manner that would cause the premises to differ from a typical dwelling unit either by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs, or noise exceeding Section 94.12.13.
4. No recreational vehicle may be used for living or sleeping purposes as part of a Tourist Rooming House.
5. The use must be licensed by the State of Wisconsin.
6. Required Off-Street Parking: A minimum/maximum of one space per bedroom.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19]
(18) Adult Entertainment or Adult-oriented Establishment.
Any exhibition of any motion pictures, live performance, display or dance of any type, which has as its dominant theme, or is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on, any actual or simulated specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or the removal of articles of clothing to appear totally nude or to display a nude genital area or female nude breasts. Also, an adult bookstore having as its stock in trade, for sale, rent, lease, inspection or viewing, books, films, videocassettes, CDs, SD cards, flash drives, internet connection, magazines or other periodicals that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specific sexual activities or specific anatomical areas, and in conjunction therewith have facilities for the presentation of adult-oriented films, movies or live performances, for observation by patrons.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types through Section 94.4.05: Commercial Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-29
Performance Standards:
1. Shall be further regulated under Chapter 18, Article 2 of the Code.
2. Shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any residentially zoned property; and a minimum of 1,000 feet from any existing school, church, public library, “Institutional Residential” land use, “Active Outdoor Public Recreation” land use, or another Adult Entertainment or Adult-oriented Establishment.
3. Exterior signage shall be in accordance with that permitted for the zoning district within which the use is located. One additional exterior wall sign with an area of 2 square feet that reads “admittance to adults only” shall be placed near or on each customer entrance, along with hours of operation.
4. The use shall not admit minors on the premise and shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and Village laws and ordinances regulating alcoholic beverages and obscenity.
5. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per 300 square feet of Gross Floor Area, or one space per person at the maximum capacity of the establishment (whichever is greater).
(19) Large Retail and Commercial Service Development.
See Section 94.10.06 for description and performance standards.
(20) Micro-beverage Production Facility.
A type of beer, wine, spirits, or coffee production facility that produces limited amounts of product per year, and often includes a tasting room and on-site purchase of beer and related products, including gifts and food. Includes microbreweries, micro-distilleries, micro-wineries/small wineries, and micro-roasteries/small batch roasters that meet the following performance standards. In the event such a use exceeds one or more of the following performance standards, either at time of commencement or via growth, it shall instead be considered a “Light Industrial” land use. As defined in Article 17, brewpubs are also regulated separately as an “Indoor Commercial Entertainment” use.
Performance Standards:
1. Shall not exceed the following production quantities per year: microbrewery, 15,000 barrels or equivalent; micro-distillery, 10,000 gallons or equivalent; micro-winery, 15,000 gallons or equivalent; micro-roastery, 15,000 pounds or equivalent.
2. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
3. Shall meet all performance standards in Article 12, including but not limited to odor standards in Section 94.12.15..12.15.
4. Must provide evidence of valid State license before commencing operations or at any time upon the request of the Zoning Administrator.
5. If located outside of an industrial district, the following standards apply:
a. The area used for production may not exceed 10,000 square feet.
b. The operation must install odor-reducing filters or other equipment to minimize the impact on nearby properties.
c. No outdoor growing of product used in the operation. Outdoor storage shall be limited to grain silos designed to be compatible with the principal building materials and colors. No other materials or equipment shall be stored outdoors.
6. Minimum required off-street parking: one space per every three patron seats, or the maximum capacity of the establishment (whichever is greater), plus one space for every employee engaged in production.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.06: Storage or Disposal Land Use Types through Section 94.4.06: Storage or Disposal Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-30
Section 94.4.06: Storage or Disposal Land Use Types
(1) Indoor Storage or Wholesaling.
Uses primarily oriented to the receiving, holding, and shipping of packaged materials for a single business or a single group of businesses. With the exception of loading and parking facilities, such land uses are contained entirely within an enclosed building. Examples include warehouse facilities, long-term indoor storage facilities, and joint warehouse and storage facilities. Retail outlets associated with this use shall be considered accessory uses, which are separately listed and regulated.
Performance Standards:
1. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
2. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per 2,000 square feet of Gross Floor Area.
(2) Outdoor Storage or Wholesaling.
Uses primarily oriented to the receiving, holding, and shipping of packaged materials for a single business or a single group of businesses, and where any activity beyond loading and parking is located outdoors. Examples of include contractors' outdoor storage yards, equipment yards, lumber yards, coal yards, landscaping materials yards, construction materials yards, and shipping materials yards. Such land uses do not include the storage of inoperative vehicles or equipment, or other materials typically associated with a “Junkyard or Salvage Yard” use, which is separately listed and regulated.
Performance Standards:
1. Within the LI Light Industrial zoning district, outdoor storage yards be located or expanded within 300 feet of residentially zoned property shall first require a conditional use permit, and all other outdoor storage yards in the LI district shall be a permitted use. In either case, all of the following standards shall be met.
2. All outdoor storage areas shall be located no closer to a residentially zoned property than the required minimum setback for buildings on the subject property.
3. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
4. All outdoor storage areas shall be completely enclosed by any permitted combination of buildings, structures, walls, and/or fencing. Such walls or fencing shall be designed to completely screen all stored materials from view from non-industrially zoned areas and public rights-of-way, up to the maximum fence heights allowed under Section 94.9.03.
5. The storage of items shall not be permitted in the minimum required front yard.
6. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space for every 10,000 square feet of Gross Storage Area, plus one space per each employee on the largest work shift.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19]
(3) Personal Storage Facility.
Includes indoor storage of items entirely within partitioned buildings with individual access to each partitioned area. Such storage areas may be available on either a condominium or rental basis. Also known as mini-warehouses.
Performance Standards:
1. In addition to the building design standards in Section 94.10.03, buildings and facility shall be designed to minimize adverse visual impacts on nearby developments. The color, exterior
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.06: Storage or Disposal Land Use Types through Section 94.4.06: Storage or Disposal Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-31
materials, and orientation of proposed buildings and other structures shall complement surrounding development and be consistent with any building design standards within the Comprehensive Plan.
2. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property and public rights-of-way.
3. The Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee may restrict or limit unit doors facing a public street right-of-way or property not in an industrial zoning district, or may otherwise require that any such doors be screened from view with berms, landscaping, and/or opaque fencing.
4. Facility shall be limited to indoor storage of household items and similar durable goods. No live animals, perishable items, odor producing materials (see Section 94.12.15), flammable or explosive materials (see Section 94.12.17), toxic or noxious materials (see Section 94.12.18), or hazardous materials (see Section 94.12.20) shall be stored on site.
5. No storage unit may have any other function aside from storage, including but not limited to any retail, wholesale, workshop, hobby shop, manufacturing, residential, lodging, or service use.
6. No outdoor storage of materials shall be permitted on site, with the exception of an outdoor trash or recycling receptacle, if proposed and approved as part of the site plan and screened in accordance with Section 94.12.06.
7. To prevent unauthorized access, each storage unit shall be outfitted with quality commercial locks and the Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee may require gated access to the facility and/or security fencing.
8. The Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee may require that the project be equipped with a digital security camera(s) that records site activity, with footage made available to the Everest Metro Police Department upon suspicion of criminal activity.
9. All storage units shall gain access from the interior of the building or site, as opposed to direct access from units to public streets.
10. The Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee may deny or limit a conditional use permit, where required, if it determines that the location, size, quantity, job or tax base creation, or other applicable characteristics of the proposed facility are incompatible with the economic development goals and objectives of the Village, including those within the Comprehensive Plan and any approved tax incremental district project plan.
11. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space for each employee on the largest work shift.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19]
(4) Junkyard or Salvage Yard.
Any land or structures used for a salvaging operation including but not limited to the above-ground, outdoor storage and/or sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, and any other discarded materials intended for sale or recycling; and/or the collection, dismantlement, storage, or salvage of two or more unlicensed and/or inoperative vehicles. Recycling facilities involving on-site outdoor storage of salvage materials are included in this land use.
Performance Standards:
1. All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines.
2. All outdoor storage areas shall be completely enclosed by any permitted combination of buildings, structures, walls, and/or fencing. Such walls or fencing shall be designed to completely screen all stored materials from view from off site, up to the maximum fence heights allowed under Section 94.12.03.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.06: Storage or Disposal Land Use Types through Section 94.4.06: Storage or Disposal Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-32
3. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
4. Activity and storage areas shall not be permitted in the minimum required front yard.
5. Shall not involve the storage, handling, or collection of hazardous materials, including any of the materials listed in Section 94.9.20.
6. A license must be also obtained pursuant to Chapter 18, Article V of the Code for the proposed use.
7. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space for every 20,000 square feet of Gross Storage Area, plus one space for each employee on the largest work shift.
(5) Solid Waste Disposal, Composting, and/or Recycling Facility.
Any use dedicated to the collection, storage, processing, and/or disposal of solid wastes as defined by Wis. Stat. § 289.01(33), organic materials for composting or for off-site energy production, and/or materials for recycling.
Performance Standards:
1. In addition to the information normally required for conditional use permit applications, the application shall include the following information:
a. A written description of the proposed operation, including the types and quantities of the materials that would be kept, stored, or processed; the proposed date to begin operations; existing natural features on and adjacent to the site; where materials would be hauled from and to and over what roads; types, quantities, and frequency of use of equipment to move, process, and haul materials within and to and from the site; whether, which, and how frequently sorting, burning, processing, and other activities would be performed on site; description and elevations of all temporary and permanent structures; proposed hours and days of operation; any special measures that will be used for spill prevention and control, dust control, and environmental protection; methods to keep all public roads free of all mud, debris, and dust; assurances that the site will be developed and operated in accordance with all approved plans and all village, county, state, and federal regulations; and a listing of all applicable regulations, licenses, and permits required.
b. A site or operations plan map, drawn to scale by a qualified professional, and including site boundaries; existing contour lines; existing roads, driveways, entrances, and utilities; existing natural features including lakes, streams, floodplains, wetlands, and shoreland areas; all dwellings and private and municipal wells within 1,000 feet; location of the proposed staging areas, fueling, fuel storage, and material and equipment storage areas; proposed location and surfacing of roads, driveways, and site access points; proposed phasing plan, if any; proposed and fencing of property and gating of access points; proposed locations of stockpiles; proposed location and types of bufferyards, screening berms, and landscaping; and proposed temporary and permanent structures, including scales and offices.
c. An erosion control plan, drawn to scale by a professional engineer, meeting all applicable Village, state, and county requirements.
d. A reclamation plan clearly depicting proposed stages of restoration, proposed contours following restoration, and proposed land use.
2. The applicant shall obtain all required Federal, State, County permits and licenses, as well as any other Village permits and/or licenses, necessary to operate the facility. The applicant shall maintain requirements set forth by these permits and licenses, and abide any standards set therein, as well as any other ordinances and statutes applicable to the operation. The applicant shall provide copies of all required permits and licenses, and inspections and reports thereunder,
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.06: Storage or Disposal Land Use Types through Section 94.4.06: Storage or Disposal Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-33
to the Village Zoning Administrator immediately upon applicant receipt or in another timeframe specified by the conditional use permit.
3. All buildings, structures, storage, and activity areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from all lot lines.
4. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders.
5. Operations shall not involve the on-site holding, storage, processing or disposal of hazardous materials, food scraps, or other vermin-attracting materials.
6. Outdoor material stockpiles shall be limited to no more than 30 feet in height, except as may be specifically prescribed by the Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee by conditional use permit.
7. All performance standards in Article 12 shall be met.
8. The use shall be established and maintained so as to not create a fire hazard as determined by the Fire Inspector.
9. Trucking activity shall be limited to a maximum number of trips per day as indicated in the Plan Commission/Extraterritorial Zoning Committee approved operational plan. A written request to exceed the maximum number of trips for a specific limited period of time not to exceed 30 days may be approved in advance by the Zoning Administrator, where he or she determines that exceptional circumstances are present. Exceptions exceeding 30 days must first be approved by the Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee.
10. To prevent tracking of mud onto public roads, access driveways for all new and expanded uses shall be hard surfaced within one 100 feet of public roads, unless the adjacent road is not hard surfaced.
11. All public roads to all such uses shall be kept free of all mud, debris, and dust by sweeping or other means.
12. Access to the site shall only be through points designated as entrances on the site or operations plan. Such access points shall be secured when the site is not in operation.
13. The conditional use permit may include limits on the amount of time the use shall remain in operation and/or hours and days of operation.
14. The conditional use permit may include provisions for the upgrade, repair, and maintenance of public roads serving the use, which shall depend on the intensity of the operation and the existing condition and capacity of such roads. A bond or other performance guarantee for such work may be required as part of the conditional use permit provided that a clear relationship is established between the operation and the need for road upgrades, repair, and maintenance.
15. If any public road is damaged or destroyed as a result of any such use, the owner shall restore or pay for the restoration of the same to an acceptable condition and value. The owner shall have the right to show and bear the burden of proof in showing that the indicated damage was not the result of its operation.
16. For all such facilities, including facilities established prior to March 18, 2015, noise levels shall be kept at or below allowable limits under Section 94.12.13. The owner may be required to verify, through use of appropriate equipment and an analysis technique approved by the Zoning Administrator, that such limits are met. If the Zoning Administrator determines that noise requirements under Section 94.12.13 are not met, he or she may enforce such requirements per Section 94.16.19 and/or refer the matter to the Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee. The Commission or Committee may require additional conditions or mechanisms to control noise in a manner that meets ordinance requirements, or may enact proceedings under subsection 17 below.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.06: Storage or Disposal Land Use Types through Section 94.4.06: Storage or Disposal Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-34
17. Approval shall be subject to amendment or revocation if non-compliance with approved plans, this subsection, or approval conditions is identified.
18. Approved operations shall be subject to periodic review to ensure compliance with the conditional use permit, including but not limited to approved limitations over the portion of the lot or parcel where activities may occur.
19. Any conditional use permit issued for such use shall not be transferable to a new owner of the property, except via a new or amended conditional use permit. In other words, the conditional use permit shall not run with the land.
20. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space for each employee on the largest work shift, plus parking spaces for expected patrons of the facility as indicated in the approved conditional use permit.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19]
(6) Auction Yard.
A use or parcel dedicated to the regular auctioning of products, generally produced at another location and transported to the site for the auction.
Performance Standards:
1. In addition to the information normally required for conditional use permit applications, the application shall include the following information:
a. A written description of the proposed operation, including the types and quantities of the materials that would be auctioned; the proposed date to begin operations; existing natural features on and adjacent to the site; where materials would kept; description and elevations of all temporary and permanent structures and parking; proposed hours and days of operation; any special measures that will be used for spill prevention and control, dust control, or environmental protection; methods to keep all public roads free of all mud, debris, and dust; assurances that the site will be developed and operated in accordance with all approved plans and all village, county, state, and federal regulations; and a listing of all applicable regulations, licenses, and permits required.
b. A site or operations plan map, drawn to scale by a qualified professional, and including site boundaries; existing contour lines; existing roads, driveways, entrances, and utilities; existing natural features including lakes, streams, floodplains, wetlands, and shoreland areas; location of the proposed auction, storage, staging, and parking areas; proposed location and surfacing of roads, driveways, and site access points; and proposed temporary and permanent structures.
2. The use shall comply with all county, State and Federal regulations at all times.
3. All buildings, structures, storage, and activity areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from all lot lines.
4. Operations shall not involve the on-site holding, storage, auctioning, processing, or disposal of hazardous materials, food scraps, or other vermin-attracting materials.
5. Outdoor material stockpiles shall be limited to no more than 30 feet in height.
6. No odor shall be created that exceeds the standard in Section 94.12.13.
7. The level of noise generated by the facility or equipment meet the noise standards in Section 94.12.13.
8. Access to the site shall only be through points designated as entrances on the site or operations plan. Such access points shall be secured when the site is not in operation.
9. Hours or days of operation may be limited by the Village.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.07: Transportation Land Use Types through Section 94.4.07: Transportation Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-35
10. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space for each employee on the largest work shift, plus additional on-site parking in suitable quantity and location to accommodate projected and actual traffic.
Section 94.4.07: Transportation Land Use Types
(1) Off-Site Parking.
Includes any areas used for the parking of vehicles that are fully registered, licensed, and operative, which are not accessory to another principal use on the same lot.
Performance Standards:
1. All off-site parking areas must be hard surfaced as defined in Section 94.17.04.
2. Must meet landscaping and other applicable general performance standards of this Chapter.
(2) Airport or Heliport.
A facility providing takeoff, landing, servicing, storage, and other services for air transportation vehicles. The operation of any type of air transportation vehicle (including ultralight aircraft, hang gliders, parasails, and related equipment, but excepting model aircraft) within the jurisdiction of this Chapter shall occur only in conjunction with an approved Airport or Heliport land use. Does not include helipads that are accessory to certain uses, such as hospitals.
Performance Standards:
1. All buildings, structures, outdoor airplane or helicopter storage areas, and any other activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines.
2. All crops, trees, structures, fences, storage areas, and parking areas shall be located and setback from all runways in accordance with an airport master plan developed by the applicant in accordance with FAA guidelines.
3. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per each employee on the largest work shift, plus one space per every leasable hangar space, plus sufficient parking required for any other approved on-site use.
(3) Freight Terminal and Mass Transportation Depot.
Lands and buildings representing either end of one or more truck carrier line(s) principally serving several businesses, bus storage yards or garages, bus transfer stations, train stations, or similar facilities focused on the storage or staging of multiple trucks, busses, train cars, and/or other large vehicles designed to carry goods or passengers. Such uses may have some or all of the following facilities: large vehicle storage and/or staging yards, multiple loading docks, management offices, indoor and outdoor storage yards, fueling stations, weighing stations, parking areas, vehicle maintenance and repair facilities serving the use, and other related facilities.
Performance Standards:
1. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
2. For freight terminals and train stations, all buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines abutting residentially zoned property.
3. For freight terminals and train stations, all outdoor storage areas and vehicles shall be completely enclosed by any permitted combination of buildings, structures, walls, and/or fencing. Such walls or fencing shall be designed to completely screen all stored materials and vehicles from view from non-industrial zoned areas and public rights-of-way, up to the maximum fence heights
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.07: Transportation Land Use Types through Section 94.4.07: Transportation Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-36
allowed under Section 94.12.03. For other types of transportation depot uses, landscaping installed to screen the vehicles from view are sufficient meet this requirement (but not outdoor storage areas).
4. Activity and storage areas shall not be permitted in the minimum required front yard setback, except for employee or patron parking.
5. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per each onsite employee on the largest work shift and one space for each four passengers for uses where patrons are parking on-site.
[Amended via Ord. 16-044, 10/20/2016]
(4) Distribution Center.
Facilities oriented to the short-term indoor storage and possible repackaging and reshipment of the materials and products of a single user. Retail outlets associated with this use shall be considered accessory uses, which are separately listed and regulated.
Performance Standards:
1. A conditional use permit and a bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
2. All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines abutting residentially zoned property.
3. All outdoor storage areas shall be completely enclosed by any permitted combination of buildings, structures, walls, and/or fencing. Such walls or fencing shall be designed to completely screen all stored materials from view from non-industrial zoned areas and public rights-of-way, up to the maximum fence heights allowed under Section 94.12.03.
4. Activity and storage areas shall not be permitted in the minimum required front yard.
5. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per each employee on the largest work shift.
[Amended via Ord. 17-032, 9/21/2017]
(5) Livestock or Farm Commodity Trucking.
A type of freight service dedicated primarily to movement of locally produced agricultural products principally serving one or more farms or lumber operations, and which may have some or all of the following facilities: yards, docks, management offices, storage sheds, buildings and/or outdoor storage areas, freight stations, and truck maintenance and repair facilities. Trucking services not specifically related to local agriculture production shall instead be regulated as a “Freight Terminal and Mass Transportation Depot.”
Performance Standards:
1. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
2. All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines abutting residentially zoned property.
3. All outdoor storage areas shall be completely enclosed by any permitted combination of buildings, structures, walls, and/or fencing. Such walls or fencing shall be designed to completely screen all stored materials from view from non-industrial zoned areas and public rights-of-way, up to the maximum fence heights allowed under Section 94.12.03.
4. Activity and storage areas shall not be permitted in the minimum required front yard.
5. Shall meet all performance standards in Article 12, including but not limited to odor standards in Section 94.12.15..12.15.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.08: Industrial Land Use Types through Section 94.4.08: Industrial Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-37
6. In the FP zoning district, the Livestock or Farm Commodity Trucking use must meet the standards set forth in Section 94.4.03(2) for an Agricultural-Related Use.
7. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per each employee on the largest work shift.
[Amended via Ord. 16-044, 10/20/2016]
Section 94.4.08: Industrial Land Use Types
(1) Light Industrial.
Industrial facilities, manufacturing operations, and contractor shops at which all operations are conducted entirely within an enclosed building, with the exception of fully screened outdoor storage and loading operations. Light industrial facilities are those which are not associated with nuisances such as odor, noise, heat, vibration, and radiation detectable at the property line and which do not pose a significant safety hazard such as danger of explosion. A “Light Industrial” land use may conduct retail sales activity as an accessory use in accordance with the requirements of Section 94.4.09(13). Landscape contractors and indoor aquaculture uses, which include the farming of aquatic organisms (plants and animals) under controlled conditions that are located entirely within an enclosed building and utilize recirculating (closed) system technology (including aquaponics), are considered “Light Industrial” uses. Primary food processing activities involving the processing of cabbage, fish and fish products, and meat products shall be considered and regulated as “Heavy Industrial” land uses. Breweries, distilleries, wineries, and coffee roasters that exceed one or more limitations of the “Micro-beverage Production Facility” land use are considered “Light Industrial” uses. Crematoriums shall be considered “Heavy Industrial” uses, except where accessory to a funeral home and where serving only customers of the funeral home.
Performance Standards:
1. All activities shall be conducted entirely within the confines of a building, except for parking, circulation, loading and unloading, and fully screened outdoor storage.
2. All outdoor storage areas shall be completely enclosed by any permitted combination of buildings, structures, walls, and/or fencing. Such walls or fencing shall be designed to completely screen all stored materials from view from all adjacent properties and rights-of-way, up to the maximum fence heights allowed under Section 94.12.03.
3. No loading, unloading, or storage shall be permitted in the minimum required front yard.
4. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
5. The use shall comply with all of the performance standards in Article 12.
6. For indoor aquaculture uses, the following additional performance standards shall apply:
a. Indoor aquaculture operations shall be connected to the municipal water and sanitary sewer system and all wastewater shall be discharged to the municipal sanitary sewer system.
b. Applicants wishing to establish indoor aquaculture operations shall prepare and submit a report outlining the estimated average daily water usage and quantity of wastewater discharge.
c. On-site processing of seafood is permitted, provided the activity is conducted entirely within an enclosed building and no odors are detectable from the property line.
d. The on-site retail sale of seafood or vegetables shall be considered an “Indoor Sales Incidental to Storage or Light Industrial Land Use” subject to the provisions of Section 94.4.09(13).
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.08: Industrial Land Use Types through Section 94.4.08: Industrial Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-38
e. On-site composting shall be permitted, provided compost areas are fully screened on all four sides and comply with all county, state, and federal rules, regulations, and permitting requirements.
7. New Light Industrial development within the AR and RM zoning districts shall be served by public sanitary sewer and water services.
8. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: One space per each employee on the largest work shift.
[Amended via Ord. 16-046, 12/21/2016]
(2) Heavy Industrial.
Industrial facilities at which operations have one or more of the following characteristics: conducted partially or wholly outside of an enclosed building (not including loading/unloading operations); associated with nuisances such as odor, noise, heat, vibration, and radiation detectable at the property line; and/or involving materials that pose a significant safety hazard (such as danger of explosion). Examples of “Heavy Industrial” land uses include slaughter houses; tanneries; primary meat processing and fish processing; cabbage processing; alcoholic beverage producers other than breweries and wineries; paper, pulp, or paperboard producers; chemical and allied product producers (except drug producers); petroleum and coal product producers; asphalt, concrete, or cement producers; stone, clay, or glass product producers; power production facilities (power plants); primary metal producers; heavy machinery producers; electrical distribution equipment producers; electrical industrial apparatus producers; transportation vehicle producers; commercial sanitary sewage treatment plants; railroad switching yards; and recycling facilities not involving the on-site storage of salvage materials.
Performance Standards:
1. A bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
2. All indoor activity areas and outdoor storage areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from residentially zoned property, “Institutional Residential” uses, or “Indoor Institutional” uses.
3. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per each employee on the largest work shift.
(3) Communications Tower.
Includes all free-standing broadcasting, receiving, or relay structures, and similar principal land uses; and any office, studio, or other land uses directly related to the function of the tower. See land use descriptions and regulations associated with “Exterior Communication Devices” regulated as accessory uses later in this Section, where, unlike Communications Towers, the communications use is clearly incidental to the principal use on the site. It is the policy of the Village to encourage the placement of communications devices on pre-existing towers and other support structures (e.g., water towers) over the erection of new Communications Towers.
Performance Standards:
1. Each application for conditional use permit, site plan approval, and/or building permit under this subsection shall include the following information:
a. The name and business address of, and the contact individual for, the applicant.
b. The location of the proposed or affected Communications Tower or other support structure.
c. The location of the proposed equipment and network components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and associated equipment.
d. If the application is for a “substantially modification” to an existing Communications Tower or other support structure, a construction plan which describes the proposed modifications
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.08: Industrial Land Use Types through Section 94.4.08: Industrial Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-39
to the support structure and the equipment and network components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and related equipment associated with the proposed modifications. For purposes of this subsection (3), “substantial modification” means the modification of a Communications Tower, including the mounting of an antenna on such a structure, that does any of the following:
i. For structures with an overall height of 200 feet or less, increases the overall height of the structure by more than 20 feet.
ii. For structures with an overall height of more than 200 feet, increases the overall height of the structure by 10 percent or more.
iii. Measured at the level of the appurtenance added to the structure as a result of the modification, increases the width of the support structure by 20 feet or more, unless a larger area is necessary for collocation.
iv. Increases the square footage of an existing equipment compound to a total area of more than 2,500 square feet.
e. If the application is to construct a new Communications Tower, a construction plan which describes the proposed mobile service support structure and the equipment and network components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and related equipment to be placed on or around the new mobile service support structure.
f. If an application is to construct a new Communications Tower, an explanation as to why the applicant chose the proposed location and why the applicant did not choose collocation, including a sworn statement from an individual who has responsibility over the placement of the mobile service support structure attesting that collocation within the applicant's search ring would not result in the same mobile service functionality, coverage, and capacity; is technically infeasible; or is economically burdensome to the mobile service provider.
g. Evidence and information to indicate compliance or intent to obtain compliance with other applicable provisions of this subsection and Chapter.
2. Each Communications Tower and modification thereto shall be erected and installed in accordance with the state electrical code adopted by reference in the National Electrical Code, Federal Communications Commission and the instructions of the manufacturer. In cases of conflict, the stricter requirements shall govern.
3. If an application is to construct a new Communications Tower, the Village may consult with a third party to verify that collocation on an existing Communication Tower or other support structure within the applicant’s search ring would not result in the same mobile service functionality, coverage, and capacity; is technically infeasible; or is economically burdensome to the mobile service provider. All costs and expenses associated with such consultation shall be borne by the applicant, except for travel expenses. Failure to pay such costs and expenses or provide related information to the third-party consultant shall be grounds for denial of the conditional use permit.
4. Each Communications Tower shall be placed or constructed so it can be utilized for the collocation of additional antenna arrays to the extent technologically and economically feasible. The Village shall, unless it is shown to be unreasonable, condition the granting of each conditional use permit upon the applicant placing or constructing the Communications Tower to accommodate, at a minimum height of 150 feet, the collocation of two additional antenna arrays similar in size and function to that placed on the Tower by the applicant. Collocation sites need not be available on the Tower as initially placed or constructed, provided that the Tower will support the later addition of the required number of collocation sites at the specified minimum height. The holder of each conditional use permit under this subsection (3) and the predecessor
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.08: Industrial Land Use Types through Section 94.4.08: Industrial Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-40
Chapter shall make the collocation sites required hereunder available for the placement of technologically compatible antenna arrays and equipment upon contractual provisions that are standard in the industry and at prevailing market rates allowing the permit holder to recoup the cost of providing the collocation sites and a fair return on investment.
5. Each Communications Tower and associated equipment shall, to the extent determined possible by the Zoning Administrator, match the color of existing facilities and be installed in a fashion to lessen the visual impacts of such installation. Accessory buildings, if required, shall be constructed to be compatible with the surrounding or adjacent buildings by virtue of their design, materials, textures, and colors.
6. For Communications Towers erected after March 18, 2015, and in conjunction with the installation of new ground mounted buildings or equipment totaling 300 square feet or greater, the applicant shall provide a bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property. Other landscaping requirements of Article 11 shall also apply.
7. A new or amended conditional use permit and site plan shall be required for a “substantial modification” to an existing Communication Tower. Neither a conditional use permit nor site plan approval shall be required for any modification including collocation that is not defined as a “substantial modification,” but a building permit shall be required.
8. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a Communications Tower erected after March 18, 2015, the applicant shall provide a written agreement stating that if the Communications Tower, antennas, or transmitters are unused for a period exceeding 12 months, the applicant shall remove the tower, antennas, or transmitters upon written request from the Zoning Administrator at no cost to the Village within 60 days of such request. If such listed items are not removed within 60 days of such notification, the Village may remove the items at the expense of the holder of the conditional use permit. Within 30 days of the date on which the tower use ceases, the permit holder shall provide the Village with written notice of the cessation of use. A performance bond or deposit of $20,000 shall be required to ensure compliance with all applicable requirements for removal of the Communications Tower and equipment.
9. The owner of any Communications Tower shall maintain insurance against liability for personal injury, death, or property damage caused by the maintenance and/or operation of the Communications Tower and accessory structures with a single combined limit of not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. The policy shall contain a provision that it may not be canceled or materially modified without the approval of the Village. The owner shall provide the Village with a certificate of such insurance before issuance of a building permit and upon each policy renewal thereafter.
10. Upon written inquiry from the Village, the recipient of a conditional use permit under this subsection (3) shall have the burden of presenting credible evidence establishing the continued compliance with the approved plans and all conditions placed upon the conditional use permit. Failure to establish compliance with the approved plans and all conditions placed upon the conditional use permit shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. If the Village determines that it is necessary to consult with a third party to ascertain compliance with conditions on a conditional use permit, all costs and expenses associated with such consultation shall be borne by the holder of subject conditional use permit, except for travel expenses. Failure to pay such costs and expenses or provide information requested by the Village shall be grounds for revocation of the conditional use permit.
11. Upon written inquiry from the Village, any owner or operator of a Communications Tower shall provide information on the Tower, including but not limited to available sites on the Tower for potential co-locators; evidence that such collocation sites are in fact available for the placement of technologically compatible antenna arrays and equipment upon contractual provisions that are
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.08: Industrial Land Use Types through Section 94.4.08: Industrial Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-41
standard in the industry and at prevailing market rates allowing the Tower owner to recoup the cost of providing the collocation sites and a fair return on investment; contact information for future co-location inquiries that the Village may receive; and number and placement of antenna arrays and ground mounted equipment, type of service provided (e.g., 4G LTE, etc.), contact information, and expiration dates of user agreements or leases associated all current users of the Tower.
12. In its evaluation of any permit or plan approval for a Communications Tower, the limitations under Wis. Stat. §§ 66.0404(4) and 66.0406(2) shall apply.
13. In the FP zoning district, the following additional standards shall also be met:
a. The use and its location in the farmland preservation zoning district are consistent with the purposes of the farmland preservation zoning district.
b. The use and its location in the farmland preservation zoning district are reasonable and appropriate, considering alternative locations, or are specifically approved under state or federal law.
c. The use is reasonably designed to minimize the conversion of land, at and around the site of the use, from agricultural use or open space use.
d. The use does not substantially impair or limit the current or future agricultural use of surrounding parcels of land that are zoned for or legally restricted to agricultural use.
e. Construction damage to land remaining in agricultural use is minimized and repaired to the extent feasible.
14. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per each employee vehicle needed for ongoing maintenance.
(4) Non-Metallic Mineral Extraction.
Any land uses involving the removal of soil, clay, sand, gravel, rock, minerals, peat, or other material in excess of that required for approved on-site development or agricultural activities. Wisconsin Statutes may limit Village regulation of non-metallic mineral extraction operations associated with projects completed by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation.
Performance Standards:
1. In addition to the information normally required for conditional use permit applications, each application for approval of a new or expanded Non-Metallic Mineral Extraction Operation shall include the following information:
a. A written description of the proposed operation, including the types and quantities of the materials that would be extracted; proposed dates to begin extraction, end extraction, and complete reclamation; geologic composition and depth and thickness of the mineral deposit; existing use of the land and proposed use after reclamation; existing natural and archaeological features on and adjacent to the site; where extracted materials would be hauled and over what roads; types, quantities, and frequency of use of equipment to extract, process, and haul; types of materials and equipment used or stored on site; whether and how frequently blasting, drilling, mining, crushing, screening, washing, refueling, fuel storage, asphalt batching, or concrete mixing would be performed on site; if washing is to be performed, estimated daily quantity of water required, its source and its disposition; whether excavation will occur below the water table and, if so, how ground water quality will be protected; description and elevations of all temporary or permanent structures; proposed hours and days of operation; any special measures that will be used for spill prevention and control, dust control, or environmental protection; if within the FP district, justification that the use meets all standards associated with such district; and assurances that the site will be
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.08: Industrial Land Use Types through Section 94.4.08: Industrial Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-42
developed, operated, and reclaimed in accordance with all approved plans and all county, state, and federal regulations, including a listing of all applicable regulations.
b. A site or operations plan map, drawn to scale by a qualified professional, and including site boundaries; existing contour lines; existing roads, driveways, and utilities; existing natural features including lakes, streams, floodplains, wetlands, and shoreland areas; all dwellings and private and municipal wells within 1,000 feet; location of the proposed extraction, staging areas, fueling, fuel storage, and equipment storage areas; proposed location and surfacing of roads, driveways, and site access points; proposed phasing plan, if any; proposed fencing of property and gating of access points; proposed locations of stockpiles; proposed location and types of screening berms, fencing, and/or landscaping; and proposed temporary and permanent structures, including scales and offices.
c. An erosion control plan, drawn to scale by a professional engineer, meeting all applicable Village, state, and county requirements.
d. A reclamation plan prepared in accordance with the Wisconsin Administrative Code and the Marathon County non-metallic mining reclamation ordinance, and clearly depicting proposed stages of restoration, proposed contours following restoration, depth of topsoil and vegetative cover, and proposed land use.
2. Each Non-Metallic Mineral Extraction Operation, regardless of when established, shall have on file with the Zoning Administrator current operational, erosion control, and reclamation plans covering the subject matter in subsection 1. above. Operations established before March 18, 2015 shall operate and restore the site in compliance with previously approved plans and conditions; with the provisions of this chapter; and to assure public safety, minimization of nuisances, and proper restoration of the site, provided that such requirements shall not be economically and technically unreasonable with respect to existing conditions.
3. The applicant shall obtain all required Federal, State, County permits and licenses, as well as any other Village permits and/or licenses, necessary to operate the Non-Metallic Mineral Extraction operation. The applicant shall maintain requirements set forth by these permits and licenses, and abide any standards set therein, as well as any other ordinances and statutes applicable to the operation. The applicant shall provide copies of all required permits and licenses, and inspections and reports thereunder, to the Village Zoning Administrator immediately upon applicant receipt or in another timeframe specified by the conditional use permit.
4. For new and expanded operations, a bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) shall be provided along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property and public rights-of-way.
5. The conditional use permit may include limits on the amount of time the non-metallic mineral extraction use shall remain in operation and/or hours and days of operation.
6. The conditional use permit may include restrictions and/or hours for blasting, drilling, screening, asphalt batching, washing, and other processing.
7. All mineral extraction activities and washing, crushing and similar processing shall be at least 200 feet from any right-of-way or property line. All ancillary operations, such as offices, parking areas, and stockpiles, shall be at least 100 feet from any right-of-way or property line. This provision shall apply to all Non-Metallic Mineral Extraction operations, including pre-existing ones, except to the extent that buildings, structures, and surface activity areas were closer than specified as of March 18, 2015.
8. To prevent tracking of mud onto public roads, access driveways for all new and expanded Non-Metallic Mineral Extraction operations shall be hard surfaced within one 100 feet of public roads, unless the adjacent road is not hard surfaced.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.08: Industrial Land Use Types through Section 94.4.08: Industrial Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-43
9. All public roads to all Non-Metallic Mineral Extraction operations, including operations established prior to March 18, 2015, shall be kept free of all mud, debris, and dust by sweeping or other means.
10. Access to all Non-Metallic Mineral Extraction sites shall only be through points designated as entrances on the site or operations plan map or as otherwise legally established. The operator shall secure such access points when the site is not in operation.
11. For all Non-Metallic Mineral Extraction operations, the site and driveway shall be sprayed to control dust, except when the temperature is below freezing. Spraying may also be required in and around the excavation pit to further reduce dust. All operations and sites, regardless of when established, shall also meet the air pollution standards in Section 94.12.14.
12. The conditional use permit may include provisions for the upgrade, repair, and maintenance of public roads serving the use, which shall depend on the intensity of the operation and the existing condition and capacity of such roads. A bond or other performance guarantee for such work may be required as part of the conditional use permit provided that a clear relationship is established between the operation and the need for road upgrades, repair, and maintenance.
13. If any public road is damaged or destroyed as a result of any Non-Metallic Mineral Extraction operation, including operations established prior to March 18, 2015, the owner shall restore or pay for the restoration of the same to an acceptable condition and value. The owner shall have the right to show and bear the burden of proof in showing that the indicated damage was not the result of its operation.
14. On-site bulk fuel storage areas and areas for fueling of equipment shall be located in accordance with the Wisconsin Administrative Code and State Statutes. A conditional use permit granted for a new or expanded operation may also require that such areas, facilities, and equipment be located above the water table to minimize the potential for groundwater contamination.
15. If blasting, drilling, or other processing is requested and approved as part of the conditional use permit, additional standards or conditions may be applied to the conditional use permit with relation to frequency, dust, noise and vibration levels, notice to neighbors, pre-inspection of neighboring basements and wells, and claims procedures in accordance with the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
16. All approved blasting shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code Chapter SPS 307. The owner shall notify the Village Zoning Administrator, and any others as specified by law or under the conditional use permit, of blasting days and times at least three (3) days in advance of such blasting. The owner may be required to verify, such as through hiring a professional engineering firm, that vibrations and other impacts associated with actual blasting activities are within the limits prescribed by Wis. Admin. Code and the conditional use permit.
17. For all Non-Metallic Mineral Extraction operations, including operations established prior to March 18, 2015, noise levels shall be kept at or below allowable limits under Section 94.12.13. The owner may be required to verify, through use of appropriate equipment and an analysis technique approved by the Zoning Administrator, that such limits are met. If the Zoning Administrator determines that noise requirements under Section 94.12.13 are not met, he or she may enforce such requirements per Section 94.16.19 and/or refer the matter to the Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee. The Commission or Committee may require additional conditions or mechanisms to control noise in a manner that meets ordinance requirements, or may enact proceedings under subsection 20 below.
18. For Non-Metallic Mineral Extraction operations established or expanded after March 18, 2015, the area of extraction shall be completely enclosed by a security fence meeting applicable requirements of Section 94.12.03, or maintained at a slope not to exceed 3:1.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
through Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-44
19. The owner of each Non-Metallic Mineral Extraction operation, regardless of when established, shall maintain insurance against liability for personal injury, death, or property damage caused by the maintenance and/or operation of the Non-Metallic Mineral Extraction operation and accessory structures. Such insurance policy shall have with a single combined limit of not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and contain a provision that it may not be canceled or materially modified without the approval of the Village. The owner shall provide the Zoning Administrator with a certificate of such insurance before issuance of a building permit, upon each policy renewal thereafter, and otherwise upon written request.
20. Upon written inquiry from the Village, each Non-Metallic Mineral Extraction operation, regardless of when established, shall have the burden of presenting credible evidence establishing the continued compliance with applicable provisions of this subsection (4), and approved plans and conditions placed upon the conditional use permit or any other prior or subsequent Village approval. Failure to establish compliance with applicable provision, the approved plans, and all conditions placed upon the conditional use permit or other Village approval shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. If the Village determines that it is necessary to consult with a third party to ascertain compliance, all costs and expenses associated with such consultation shall be borne by the owner of the Non-Metallic Mineral Extraction operation. Failure to pay such costs and expenses or provide information requested by the Village shall be grounds for revocation of the conditional use permit or other Village approval, and/or enforcement under the provisions of this chapter.
21. Any conditional use permit issued for a Non-Metallic Mineral Extraction operation shall not be transferable to a new owner of the property, except via a new or amended conditional use permit. In other words, the conditional use permit shall not run with the land.
22. Within the FP district, such use shall also be subject to the following additional limitations:
a. The operation complies with subch. I of Wis. Stat. § 295 and rules promulgated under that subchapter, with applicable provisions of the local ordinance under §§ 295.13 or 295.14, and with any applicable requirements of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation concerning the restoration of nonmetallic mining sites.
b. The operation and its location in the FP district are consistent with the purposes of that district.
c. The operation and its location in the FP district are reasonable and appropriate, considering alternative locations outside the FP district, or are specifically approved under state or federal law.
d. The operation is reasonably designed to minimize the conversion of land around the extraction site from agricultural use or open space use.
e. The operation does not substantially impair or limit the current or future agricultural use of surrounding parcels of land that are zoned for or legally restricted to agricultural use.
23. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per each employee on the largest work shift.
[Amended via Ord. 16-025, 5/18/2016; Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19]
Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use Types
(1) Detached Accessory Structure (for Non-residential Use).
An accessory structure serving a non-residential principal land use and building (e.g., an industry or commercial service use), but not attached to the principal building.
Performance Standards:
1. Any such structure exceeding 2,000 square feet or the maximum height for an accessory structure established in Figures 5.04(2) and 5.05(2) shall be regulated as a principal structure.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
through Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-45
2. No Detached Accessory Structure (for Non-residential Use) shall be constructed on any lot prior to establishment of a principal use on that same lot, unless otherwise stated in this Chapter.
3. Each Detached Accessory Structure (for Non-residential Use), shall be designed to withstand a minimum of a 40-pounds per square foot of snow load.
4. See Figures 5.02(1) and 5.02(2) for setback, floor area, and coverage standards associated with Detached Accessory Structures in non-residential zoning districts.
5. Except within an agricultural zoning district, no hoop building or structure of similar design shall be permitted as a Detached Accessory Structure (for Non-residential Use), except on a temporary basis for a maximum of five consecutive days within a 30-day period for a special event such as a sale or on the property following issuance of a temporary use permit.
6. No Detached Accessory Structure (for Non-residential Use) shall be occupied as a dwelling unit or otherwise used for human habitation, unless it has first been approved for such use by the Building Inspector and meet all applicable code requirements for a dwelling of the State for a dwelling and under Section 94.4.09(8).
7. Each Detached Accessory Structure (for Non-residential Use) shall meet associated building and site design standards in Section 94.10.03.
(2) Detached Accessory Structure (for Residential Use).
An accessory structure serving a residential principal land use and building (e.g., a house or apartment building), but not attached to the principal building. Includes detached residential garages and carports (where permitted) designed primarily to shelter parked passenger vehicles, utility sheds as defined in Section 94.17.04, private recreation structures such as gazebos, and detached elevated decks or walkways associated with residential uses. All structures that are utilized for Agricultural Land Use Types (as listed in Section 94.4.03), that exceed 2,000 square feet in floor area, are within a rural and open space or RM zoning district, or are on parcels over 10 acres in area shall instead be regulated as a principal structure, and not as a “Detached Accessory Structure.”
Figure 4.09(2): Detached Accessory Structure (for Residential Use) Allowances Principal Land Use Zoning District Maximum Permitted Type and Quantity of Detached Accessory Structure 1 Minimum Distance from Other Buildings 2
Single-Family Detached Residence
FP, RM, AR and RR-5
Maximum of five 3
10 feet
Any other zoning district
1 Detached Garage; and
1 Utility Shed; and
1 Gazebo
10 feet
Two-Family Residence
Any district where principal building located
1 Utility Shed per Housing Unit
10 feet
Multi-Family Residence
Any district where principal building located
*As approved through Site Plan Procedures
10 feet
Manufactured Home or Mobile Home
MH
1 Utility Shed 4 and 1 Carport 5 or 1 Detached Garage 6
5 feet from the accompanying home and 10 feet from all other buildings
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
through Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-46
1 The terms detached garage, utility shed, gazebo and carport are defined in Section 94.17.04.
2 See Figures 5.01(1) and 5.01(2) for maximum floor areas, maximum lot coverage, minimum property line setbacks, and maximum heights relating to detached accessory buildings.
3 Except where approved by the Plan Commission as part of an approved site plan.
4 Each Utility Shed within the MH zoning district shall not be greater than 144 square feet in floor area with a 5-foot building separation.
5 Each Carport within the MH zoning district shall not be greater than 200 square feet in floor area with a maximum width of 10 feet.
6 Each Detached Garage within the MH zoning district shall not be greater than 344 square feet in floor area with a maximum width of 14 feet.
Performance Standards:
1. No Detached Accessory Structure (for Residential Use) shall be constructed on any lot prior to establishment of a principal use on that same lot.
2. Except within the AR and RM zoning districts, no hoop building, tarp shed, or carport shall be a permitted as a Detached Accessory Structure (for Residential Use), except on a temporary basis for a maximum of five consecutive days within a 30-day period for a special event such as a sale on the property following issuance of a temporary use permit.
3. The roof of each Detached Accessory Structure (for Residential Use), including those permitted under standard 2, shall be designed to withstand a minimum of a 40-pounds per square foot of snow load.
4. All driveways built to serve Detached Accessory Structures (for Residential Use) are subject to associated standards under Section 94.12.08. Each Detached Accessory Structure (for Residential Use) shall be served by a driveway connected to a public road if used to shelter a motor vehicle or trailer, or where vegetative ground cover to an overhead door cannot be maintained in the determination of the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector.
5. The exterior walls of each Detached Accessory Structure (for Residential Use) shall be sided with wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, Masonite, horizontal vinyl or metal lap siding, or similar material approved by the Zoning Administrator. Vertical siding is also allowed in all RM and rural and open space zoning districts aside from RR-2. All exterior siding shall extend to the top of the foundation. If the top of the foundation is below grade, the siding shall extend to the ground.
6. Roofs of Detached Accessory Structures (for Residential Use) shall be surfaced with any of the following materials: wood shakes; asphalt, composition, or wood shingles; clay, concrete or metal tiles; slate; built-up gravel materials; screw down metal roofing; rubber membrane (for flat roofs or roofs with no greater than a 1:12 pitch); or similar material approved by the Zoning Administrator.
7. Pole or ladder constructed buildings shall be permitted only within the RM and rural and open space zoning districts, except for the RR-2 district, and shall be subject to subsections 5. and 6. of this section.
8. No Detached Accessory Structure (for Residential Use) shall involve or include the conduct of any business, trade, or industry, except for home occupations and residential businesses as described and limited elsewhere in this Article 4.
9. No Detached Accessory Structure (for Residential Use) shall be occupied as a dwelling unit or otherwise used for human habitation, unless it has first been approved for such use by the Building Inspector and meets all applicable requirements of the State for a dwelling and under Section 94.4.09(8).
10. In all residential, RR-2 and non-residential and mixed-use zoning districts, and for all Multi-family Residences regardless of district, no portion of a Detached Accessory Structure (for Residential Use) shall occupy any land between the principal building on a residential lot and a
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
through Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-47
street right-of-way, except where approved by the Plan Commission as part of an approved site plan.
11. See Figures 5.01(1) and 5.01(2) for other setback, floor area, building height, and coverage standards associated with Detached Accessory Structures in residential zoning districts. Maximum floor area and total building coverage shall not exceed the maximums set forth in Figure 5.01(1), except as allowed by a conditional use permit, subject to the procedures in Section 94.16.06 and all of the following standards for the Detached Accessory Structure:
a. Not taller or have more floors above ground level than the principal building.
b. Has a similar roof slope and overhang width as the principal building. If the principal building has multiple roof slopes and/or overhang widths, the roof slopes and widths of the accessory structure shall reflect those principal building roof characteristics that are most visible from the public street.
c. Shingles or other roof surface shall be of a similar material and color as the roof surface of the principal building.
d. Siding shall be of a similar material and color as the siding on the principal building, except that where the siding on the principal building is stone or brick, another compatible material may be selected.
e. May not be located further toward the front lot line than the principal building.
f. Shall meet all setback requirements normally applicable to principal buildings per Figure 5.01(2).
12. Detached garages serving Multi-Family Residences shall be accompanied by a bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) between the garage and (a) the public right-of-way and (b) a property line abutting any residentially zoned property.
[Amended via Ord. 16-034, 8/18/2016; Ord. 16-046, 12/21/2016; Ord. 17-015, 6/21/2017; Ord 17-026 8/23/2017; Ord. 17-036, 11/24/2017; Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19; Ord. 19-015, 9/19/19]
(3) Family Day Care Home (4 to 8 Children).
An occupied residence in which a qualified person(s) provides child care for four to eight children. Does not include a child provided care by his or her legal guardian or his or her parent, grandparent, great-grandparent, stepparent, brother, sister, first cousin, nephew, niece, uncle, or aunt of a child, whether by blood, marriage, or legal adoption. The care of fewer than four children is not subject to the regulations of this Chapter. These shall not be considered “Home Occupations” or “Residential Businesses” for purposes of this Chapter.
Performance Standards:
1. Facility must be licensed by the State and follow rules and procedures in Wis. Stats. § 48.65 and 66.1017(1)(a) and DCF 202, Wis. Admin. Code, including but not limited to physical plant, equipment, and open space requirements.
2. Each Family Day Care Home must be conducted by one or more members of the immediate family residing on the premises, with no outside employees conducting care on site.
3. The use must meet all performance standards associated with the type of dwelling in which it is located.
4. There shall be no exterior alterations to the dwelling that change the character thereof as a dwelling.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
through Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-48
(4) Intermediate Day Care Home (9 to 15 Children).
An occupied residence in which a qualified person(s) provides child care for 9 to 15 children. These shall not be considered “Home Occupations” or “Residential Businesses” for purposes of this Chapter.
Performance Standards:
1. Facility must be licensed by the State and follow rules and procedures in Wis. Stat. § 48.65 and DCF 202 and 251, Wis. Admin. Code, as applicable, including but not limited to physical plant, equipment, and open space requirements.
2. Each Intermediate Day Care Home must be conducted by one or more members of the immediate family residing on the premises.
3. Subject to Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee approval, an Intermediate Day Care Home may employ up to one employee living off-site.
4. The Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee may impose additional limitations on the percentage of the property and/or buildings that may be devoted to the use.
5. The use must meet all performance standards associated with the type of dwelling in which it is located.
6. There shall be no exterior alterations to the dwelling that change the character thereof as a dwelling, except that signage shall be as permitted for Intermediate Day Care Homes in Article 13.
7. Each Intermediate Day Care Home shall provide for drop-off and pick-up of children in a manner that the Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee determines is safe and not impactful to traffic movement and the character of the neighborhood.
8. No dwelling unit in a Two-family Residence or Multi-family Residence, and no mobile or manufactured home, may serve as an Intermediate Day Care Home.
9. No Intermediate Day Care Home shall endanger the public health and safety or interfere with the enjoyment of other parcels in the neighborhood.
10. No residence may serve as both an Intermediate Day Care Home and a Home Occupation or Residential Business.
11. Each conditional use permit for an Intermediate Day Care Home shall run with the applicant and not with the land.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19]
(5) Home Occupation.
A low-impact economic activity performed within a dwelling unit and/or its attached garage, where the principal use of the lot is the residence of the person conducting the economic activity.
Performance Standards:
1. The occupation shall be conducted only within the dwelling and/or an attached garage.
2. The area used to conduct the Home Occupation shall not exceed 25 percent of the improved square footage of the dwelling unit, excluding the garage, and shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of any floor.
3. A Home Occupation shall be undertaken only by a member of the immediate family residing on the premises.
4. There shall be no exterior alterations to the dwelling that change the character thereof as a dwelling, except for signage. Signage shall be as permitted for Home Occupations in Article 13.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
through Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-49
5. No activity, materials, goods or equipment incidental to the Home Occupation shall be externally visible, except for one licensed car, van, or light duty truck used for the Home Occupation and external storage normally allowed for the principal residential use.
6. No Home Occupation shall endanger the public health and safety or interfere with the enjoyment of other parcels in the neighborhood.
7. No mechanical or electrical equipment may be used other than such as customarily incidental to domestic use or that creates any disturbance at the property line.
8. The use shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for more than the occasional delivery of materials to or from the premises.
9. No occupied residence may serve as both a Home Occupation and a Family or Intermediate Day Care Home, except if approved by conditional use permit and meeting the performance standards for a Residential Business use.
10. No Home Occupation, combined with the principal residential use of the property, shall generate more than 15 vehicle trips per day.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19]
(6) Residential Business.
Compared to a “Home Occupation,” a higher-impact economic activity performed in a dwelling unit, its attached garage, and/or its “Detached Accessory Structure (for Residential Use),” where the principal use of the lot remains the residence of the person primarily conducting the economic activity.
Performance Standards:
1. A Residential Business may be conducted within the dwelling, an attached garage, and/or in a permanent Detached Accessory Structure (for Residential Use).
2. The area used to conduct the Residential Business shall not exceed 25 percent of the improved square footage of the principal dwelling unit, excluding any attached garage.
3. The Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee may impose additional limitations on the percentage of the property and/or buildings that may be devoted to the occupation.
4. Subject to Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee approval, a Residential Business may employ up to one employee living off-site, provided an immediate family member residing on site is the principal owner and operator of the business.
5. No activity, materials, goods or equipment incidental to the Residential Business shall be externally visible, except for one licensed car, van, or light duty truck used for the Residential Business and external storage normally allowed for the principal residential use.
6. No Residential Business may include retail sales other than items produced or value added on site. The Plan Commission may prohibit or limit the on-site sale of items or products produced or enhanced on the premises.
7. No Residential Business shall endanger the public health and safety or interfere with the enjoyment of other parcels in the neighborhood.
8. No mechanical or electrical equipment may be used that creates any disturbance at the property line.
9. Signage shall be as permitted for Residential Businesses in Article 13.
10. No occupied residence may serve as both a Residential Business and an Intermediate Day Care Home.
11. Each conditional use permit for a Residential Business shall run with the applicant and not with the land.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
through Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-50
[Amended via Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19]
(7) In-Home Suite.
An area within a “Single-Family Detached Residence” dwelling unit that may contain separate kitchen, dining, bathroom, laundry, living, sleeping, and/or recreation areas. A permanent interior, non-locking access way between the habitable area of the principal dwelling and the In-Home Suite is required. A separate outdoor access to a shared garage may be provided. Distinguished from an “Accessory Dwelling Unit,” which is a separately listed and regulated land use.
Performance Standards:
1. Each In-Home Suite shall be considered a part of the principal dwelling unit for purposes of this Chapter.
2. The principal dwelling unit and the In-Home Suite shall together appear from the outside as one single-family detached residence.
3. A separate address and utility connection or meters for the In-Home Suite is not permitted.
4. An all-weather interior access between the main habitable area of the principal dwelling and the In-Home Suite shall be maintained at all times. Connections through attics, basements, garages, porches, or non-living areas shall not be sufficient to meet the requirement for connected interior access. A connecting door may be used to separate the In-Home Suite from the rest of the dwelling provided that it is a non-locking door. Doors to bedrooms and bathrooms are exempt from the non-locking requirement.
5. A separate driveway, garage, or walled garage area shall not be permitted. A separate connecting door between the In-Home Suite and the garage may be provided.
6. Direct incidental access to the In-Home Suite from the building exterior may be provided via exterior porches, patios, and decks, but external stairs providing principal access to a second story In-Home Suite shall be prohibited.
7. When an application is submitted for a building permit to accommodate what is explicitly listed as, or could possibly serve as, an In-Home Suite, the building plan shall be marked as "Not a separate dwelling unit nor apartment," and a signed letter from the applicant stating agreement with the performance standards in this subsection shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator.
(8) Accessory Dwelling Unit.
A residential dwelling unit located on the same lot as a “Single-Family Detached Residence”, either as part of the same building as the “Single-Family Detached Residence” or in a detached building. Accessory Dwelling Units are sometimes also referred to as granny flats. An Accessory Dwelling Unit is different from an “In-Home Suite” in that an interior physical connection between the Accessory Dwelling Unit and the primary “Single-Family Detached Residence” is not required for the former. The “Single-Family Detached Residence”/Accessory Dwelling Unit combination is different from a “Two-Family Residence” because the former may be in separate buildings and because they are subject to different performance standards.
Performance Standards:
1. The gross floor area of the Accessory Dwelling Unit shall not exceed 50 percent of the principal dwelling’s gross floor area, or 1,500 square feet, whichever is less.
2. The appearance or character of the “Single-Family Detached Residence” must not be significantly altered so that its appearance is no longer that of a single-family dwelling.
3. The Accessory Dwelling Unit shall not be sold separately from the “Single-Family Detached Residence,” or the land under the Accessory Dwelling Unit divided from the land occupied by the “Single-Family Detached Residence.”
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
through Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-51
4. Attached Accessory Dwelling Units shall adhere to the setback requirements and standards applicable to principal structures in the applicable zoning district. Detached Accessory Dwelling Units shall adhere to the setback requirements and standards applicable to accessory structures in the applicable zoning district.
5. The occupants of the Accessory Dwelling Unit shall not exceed one family plus one unrelated person, or two unrelated individuals.
(9) Animal Fancier.
An accessory use wherein a person who owns or keeps, within or adjoining a residence, four to ten dogs or five to ten cats for personal and noncommercial purposes, which are limited to hunting, tracking, exhibition in dog shows, obedience trials, field trials, dog sledding, animal foster rescue or to enhance or perpetuate a given breed, and who has secured a license for such activity in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and Chapter 10 of the Code.
(10) Keeping of Farm Animals on Residential Lots and School Sites.
The keeping or raising of farm animals on a residential lot or school sites, in zoning districts where allowed under Figure 3.04 and where such activity is clearly accessory to the principal residential use, as opposed to a principal “Agricultural Use.” Farm animals are as defined in Article 17. The animals may be kept for show, breeding, or products that are predominantly consumed or used by the residents of the same lot. Gardening and residential composting are allowed in all zoning districts.
Performance Standards:
1. All animals shall be kept within a completely enclosed, covered area to the rear of the residence.
2. Animal enclosure areas may not exceed 20 percent of the lot area.
3. Use shall meet all performance standards in Article 12, including odor standards in Section 94.12.15..12.15.
4. Any slaughtering shall take place in a completely enclosed building.
5. The use of mechanized farm equipment and on-site sale of food or fur are prohibited.
6. To be considered an accessory use within any RR zoning district:
a. The only permitted farm animals are up to 8 chickens, up to 8 ducks, and bees.
b. All animal enclosures and beehives shall meet the minimum interior side and rear setback requirements for detached accessory buildings per Figure 5.01(2).
c. No animal enclosure shall be located closer than 10 feet from the principal building.
d. The minimum lot size for the keeping of farm animals is two acres (three acres for bees).
e. The raising or keeping of farm animals shall be permitted at a density not to exceed one animal unit per every acre owned, not considering fractional amounts of acreage.
7. Within the AR and RM zoning districts:
a. The keeping or raising or hogs or fur-bearing animals as an accessory use to the principal residential use, as opposed to a principal “Agricultural Use,” shall not be permitted.
b. The raising or keeping of farm animals shall be permitted at a density not to exceed one animal unit per every acre owned, not considering fractional amounts of acreage. The definition of an animal unit is in Section 94.17.04. The Zoning Administrator may approve modifications and exceptions to this animal unit density standard if, each year the normal density standard is to be exceeded, the land owner provides conservation compliance documentation from Marathon County signifying that the keeping of a higher density of animal units is in compliance with all NR 151 Agricultural Runoff Performance Standards and Prohibitions.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
through Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-52
c. Animal enclosures may be no closer than 50 feet from any lot line, except that beehives and poultry houses for not more than eight chickens or ducks need only meet the minimum setback requirement for detached accessory buildings in Figure 5.01(2).
8. The keeping of bees shall be governed by the following additional regulations:
a. No more than one beehive shall be kept for each 5,000 square feet of lot area.
b. The front of any beehive shall face away from the property line of the residential property closest to the beehive. A “flyway barrier” consisting of a solid fence of six feet in height or a dense hedge at least six feet in height shall be placed along the side of the beehive that contains the entrance to the hive, be located within five feet of the hive, and extend at least two feet on either side of the hive. No such flyway barrier shall be required if all beehives are located at least 25 feet from all property lines.
c. A supply of fresh water shall be maintained in a location readily accessible to all bee colonies on the site throughout the day to prevent bees from congregating at neighboring swimming pools or other sources of water on nearby properties.
d. No Africanized bees may be kept.
[Amended via Ord. 16-046, 12/21/2016; Ord. 17-034, 11/24/2017]
(11) Company Cafeteria.
A food service operation that provides food only to company employees and their guests, meets state food service requirements, and is located on the same property as a principal land use engaged in an operation other than food service.
(12) Company Provided On-Site Amenities
An accessory use located on the same site as a principal land use, with such accessory use providing an amenity or benefit reserved solely for the use of company employees, their families, and their occasional guests. Such accessory uses may be devoted to recreation, health, wellness, child care, training, and other similar employee and guest support activities as determined by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may also apply to a “Company Provided On-Site Amenities” use those performance standards in this Article that are normally applicable when such use is a principal use of a premises. Such uses may require further licensing by the State.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19]
(13) Indoor Sales Incidental to Storage or Light Industrial Land Use.
Includes any retail sales activity conducted exclusively indoors that is incidental to a principal land use such as warehousing, wholesaling, or any “Light Industrial” land use on the same site.
Performance Standards:
1. The total gross floor area devoted to sales activity shall not exceed 25 percent of the total gross floor area of the buildings on the property. Areas devoted to uses such as custom ceramics, glass, wood, paper, fabric, and similar crafts may exceed 5,000 square feet with the granting of a conditional use permit.
2. The indoor sales area shall by physically separated by a wall from other activity areas.
3. Parking requirement: Adequate parking, per the requirements for “Indoor Sales or Service” land uses, shall be provided for customers. Said parking shall be in addition to that required for the “Light Industrial” or other uses on the lot.
(14) Light Industrial Activities Incidental to Indoor Sales or Services.
Any “Light Industrial” use conducted exclusively indoors that is incidental to another principal land use such as “Indoor Sales or Service” land use on the same site.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
through Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-53
Performance Standards:
1. Must be conducted exclusively indoors and with doors and windows to the building closed.
2. Floor area devoted to light industrial activities must not exceed 20 percent of the total floor area of the buildings in the property, or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less.
3. Must be physically separated by a wall from other activity areas that are available for public access.
4. Must not generate any noise, odor, or vibration at any property line.
5. May only operate between the hours of 7 a.m. and 6 p.m., Monday through Friday.
(15) Outdoor Display Incidental to Indoor Sales or Service.
Any “Outdoor Display” use as defined in Section (d)(6) of this Section that does not exceed 15 percent of the total sales area of the principal building on the site, or 15 percent of the Gross Floor Area of the principal use(s) with which it is associated, whichever is less.
Performance Standards:
1. Shall comply with all conditions applicable to a principal “Outdoor Display” principal use.
(16) Outdoor Alcohol Area.
Outdoor Alcohol Areas are those that serve or allow for the consumption of alcohol outside of the principal structure, generally associated with an approved “Indoor Commercial Entertainment” use such as a restaurant, tavern, bar, and/or live music venue, but possibly also certain “Indoor Institutional” uses and other land uses. Examples of Outdoor Alcohol Areas include, but are not limited to, beer gardens and outdoor dining and recreational areas (e.g., volleyball courts) that allow the consumption of alcohol.
Performance Standards: The following standards shall apply to all Outdoor Alcohol Areas established or expanded after March 18, 2015, except as specifically indicated below:
1. In the zoning districts where they are allowed, Outdoor Alcohol Areas that are proposed to be within 300 feet of residentially zoned property and/or propose hours different than subsection 6 shall first require a conditional use permit, and all other Outdoor Alcohol Areas shall be a permitted use. In either case, all of the following standards shall be met.
2. Non-temporary Outdoor Alcohol Areas shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any residential use in any zoning district and provide a bufferyard meeting the requirements of Section 94.11.02(3)(d) along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
3. The maximum allowable area for an Outdoor Alcohol Area shall not exceed 50 percent of the indoor gross floor area where accessory to a principal “Indoor Commercial Entertainment” use.
4. As may be limited by State Statute or rule, the exterior of the Outdoor Alcohol Area shall be enclosed with a fence or wall, which shall be decorative except for temporary areas as determined by the Zoning Administrator. Emergency exits shall be provided in accordance with applicable Fire and Building Codes.
5. Except as a temporary use or in conjunction with a recreational use, an Outdoor Alcohol Area must be located on an impervious surface or hard all-weather decking material. No parking lot or driveway shall be used for any Outdoor Alcohol Area established or expanded after February 23, 2018, unless the pavement is professionally replaced or overlaid with a raised non-asphaltic material to establish the Outdoor Alcohol Area as a protected and deliberately designed space for persons outside of vehicles.
6. Except where otherwise specified by the conditional use permit, Outdoor Alcohol Areas shall not open earlier than 7 a.m. or remain open later than 11 p.m. on any day.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
through Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-54
7. Except where otherwise limited by conditional use permit, Outdoor Alcohol Areas may play amplified music, whether live or recorded and may have speakers, microphones, televisions, or other audio or video devices provided all noise standards established in Section 94.12.13 are met.
8. Outdoor Alcohol Areas shall at all times comply with all applicable regulations concerning accessibility and nondiscrimination in the providing of service.
9. All applications for conditional use permit or site plan approval for an Outdoor Alcohol Area shall include operational details and site plan details addressing each of the requirements above in addition to the requirements for site plan review in Section 94.16.09. Any application for this use directly abutting a public right-of-way, parking lot, or driveway shall include details regarding the specific location of street, parking lot, or driveway improvements, and how the activity will be kept off of the street, parking lot, or driveway.
10. Each Outdoor Alcohol Area shall meet all state and local permit and license requirements before commencing operations and at all times during operation, including but not limited to a local liquor license and a Wisconsin Department of Health and Family Services to operate said establishment pursuant to Wis. Stat. Chapter 254.
11. Minimum Parking Off-Street Requirements: one space for every three persons at the maximum capacity of the Outdoor Alcohol Area. No conversion of space formally utilized for parking spaces to the Outdoor Alcohol Area shall reduce the number of parking spaces serving all uses on the premises below, or further below, the minimums under this chapter.
[Amended via Ord. 18-007, 2/23/2018; Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19]
(17) Small Exterior Communication Device.
Includes roof top antennas 15 feet in height or less as measured from the highest part of the roof to the top of the antenna and satellite dishes with an area of 7 square feet or less, generally used for television, radio, telephone, or internet reception, but allowable for other forms of transmission or reception (except for cellular and digital communication facilities).
Performance Standards:
1. Small Exterior Communications Devices shall meet setback standards applicable to accessory structures.
2. Small Exterior Communications Devices shall be erected and installed in accordance with the state electrical code adopted by reference in the National Electrical Code, Federal Communications Commission, and the instructions of the manufacturer.
(18) Large Exterior Communications Device.
Includes any apparatus capable of sending and/or receiving communications from a transmitter or a transmitter relay, and consisting of satellite dishes with a diameter greater than 7 square feet; antennas greater than 15 feet in height as measured from highest part of the roof to the top of the antenna; and/or ground-mounted antenna arrays. Does not include any commercial cellular and digital communication facilities that are mounted on a “Communications Tower,” which instead is described and regulated as a principal use earlier in this Article.
Performance Standards:
1. No Large Exterior Communications Device shall be erected or installed within the front yard or street side yard. In non-residential districts, if reasonable reception of signals is not possible within an interior side or rear yard placement due to the physical characteristics of the lot and area, such facility may be placed in the front yard or street side yard, or on a building roof. Any ground-mounted device and its supporting structure shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any interior side or rear property line.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
through Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-55
2. There shall be not more than one Large Exterior Communications Device per residentially zoned lot. On residentially zoned lands, Large Exterior Communications Devices shall not be allowed on rooftops, and the total height of ground-mounted signal receiving devices and any platform or structure upon which said device is mounted or affixed shall not exceed 12 feet in height as measured from the ground to the highest point of the device.
3. Signal receiving antennas attached to any structure shall be permitted only if the structure is properly constructed to carry all imposed loading and complies with applicable state and local building code requirements. The Zoning Administrator may require engineering calculations.
4. The signal receiving antenna shall not exceed 15 feet in diameter, except for systems used to provide community antenna television services or cellular transmission.
5. In non-residential zoning districts, ground-mounted signal receiving devices, including any platform or structure upon which said device is mounted or affixed, may not exceed 18 feet in height.
6. All such devices shall be permanently mounted in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications for installation. All such installations shall meet a minimum wind load design velocity of 80 MPH.
7. Large Exterior Communication Devices shall be erected and installed in accordance with the Wisconsin State electrical code adopted by reference in the National Electrical Code, Federal Communications Commission, and the instructions of the manufacturer. In cases of conflict, the stricter requirements shall govern. All cable used to conduct current or signals from the signal receiving antenna to the receivers shall be installed underground unless installation site conditions preclude underground installation. If a signal receiving antenna is to be used by two or more residential property owners, all interconnecting electrical connections, cables, and conduits must also be underground. The location of all such underground lines, cables, and conduits shall be shown on the application for a permit. All signal receiving antennas shall be grounded against direct lightning strikes.
8. No form of advertising or identification sign or mural is allowed on the any part of the device other than the customary manufacturer's identification and warning plates.
9. Communications devices shall be filtered, positioned, and/or shielded so as to prevent the emission and reflection of any electromagnetic radiation that would cause any harmful interference with the radio and/or television broadcasting or reception on the same or adjacent properties. In the event that harmful interference is caused subsequent to its installation, the owner of the communications device shall promptly take steps to eliminate the harmful interference in accordance with Federal Communications Commission regulations.
10. Supporting structures and equipment for antennas and satellite dishes shall be screened with foundation landscaping, decorative fencing, or placement within a building.
11. The installation and use of all signal receiving antennas shall be in conformity with the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and regulations adopted thereunder.
12. In making a recommendation on each conditional use permit application for an amateur radio antennae that exceeds the one or more thresholds for a “Small Exterior Communications Device,” the Plan Commission shall make reasonable efforts to formulate reasonable conditions and the minimal practical restrictions that will allow for the approval of such facilities and shall deny such application only if it finds that the requested use, if installed and operated in accordance with all reasonable conditions and restrictions, will cause a significant danger to the public safety or welfare. It shall be a condition to each conditional use permit for an amateur radio antenna that the operation of the amateur radio service using such antennae shall at all times be maintained in compliance with the applicable regulations and permit conditions issued by the Federal Communications Commission.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
through Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-56
(19) Geothermal Energy System (GES).
A Geothermal Energy System (GES) is a central heating and/or cooling system that uses the moderate temperatures of subsurface ground or a body of water to assist with the heating or cooling of a building or a building’s water. A GES requires an underground heat exchanger, in the form of a network of underground or underwater pipes or tubes filled with a liquid medium (refrigerant, water mixed with anti-freeze, or water). The liquid medium within the heat exchanger is transferred between a structure and the heat exchanger via pumps. In an Open Loop GES, ground or surface water is continuously drawn from an outside source through the heat exchanger pipes and discharged after use. In a Closed Loop GES, the system is designed so that heat exchanger fluid does not come in direct contact with soils, groundwater, or surface water.
Performance Standards:
1. Mechanical pumps used to move water between heat exchangers structures shall be located entirely within principal or accessory structures.
2. Underground GES pipes or tubes shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from any lot line, public right-of-way, buried utility line, utility easement, and permanently protected natural resource area.
3. Underground GESs shall comply with state requirements regarding setbacks from private or public water wells.
4. Earth moving or drilling activities associated with installation or maintenance of the underground element of GES heat exchangers shall comply with applicable erosion control requirements.
5. Installation of a GES within a WHP Wellhead Protection Area Overlay District shall be allowed subject to review and approval by the Director of Public Works and in accordance with all applicable licensing and permit requirements.
6. All activities, materials, structures, and products associated with the installation and maintenance of a GES shall comply with applicable state-approved standards and drilling permit procedures and shall meet the certification standards established by the IGSHPA or other professional geothermal system accreditation association recognized by the State of Wisconsin. Materials shall be able to withstand long-term exposure to the levels of moisture and/or acidity of soils of the site.
7. Open loop GESs using only water as the heat exchange fluid shall be permitted. GESs may not be installed directly in a navigable body of water, and discharged water shall meet the state requirements for thermal and other water pollutants. Discharged water shall not be directed onto adjacent property or interfere with the function of on-site or off-site stormwater management structures.
8. In closed loop GESs, only heat exchange fluids certified by the State of Wisconsin for use with underground heat exchangers may be utilized. Heat exchange fluids shall not pose a contamination hazard to ground water quality. Fluids removed from closed loop heat exchangers shall be disposed of in accordance with State and Federal requirements and shall not be discharged onto neighboring properties.
(20) Small Wind Energy System.
Equipment and associated facilities that convert and then store or transfer energy from the wind into usable forms of energy with an installed nameplate capacity of not more than 100 kilowatts each and a total installed nameplate capacity of not more than 300 kilowatts.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
through Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-57
Performance Standards: The following performance standards shall apply to any new Small Wind Energy System, and to any expansion or other material change to any existing Small Wind Energy System:
1. Shall be subject to all definitions, provisions, and requirements of Wis. Admin. Code PSC § 128 and Wis. Stat. § 66.0401 that are applicable to Small Wind Energy Systems, including the owner’s and the Village’s responsibilities under such requirements, except as limited by the standards below.
2. The height and setback of a Small Wind Energy System near airports, heliports, or helipads shall be as follows:
a. If near a public use airport, shall comply with If near a public use airport, shall comply with Wis. Stat. §§Wis. Stat. §§ 114.135 or 114.136, or if no 114.135 or 114.136, or if no applicable height or setback provision is contained in such sections, shall complapplicable height or setback provision is contained in such sections, shall comply with y with Federal Aviation Administration obstructioFederal Aviation Administration obstruction standards in 14 CFR Part 77.n standards in 14 CFR Part 77.
b. If near a private use airport or private heliport/helipad at a medical facility used for air If near a private use airport or private heliport/helipad at a medical facility used for air ambulance service, shall comply with Federal Aviation Administration obstruction stambulance service, shall comply with Federal Aviation Administration obstruction standards andards for private use airports or public use heliports/helipads, respectively.for private use airports or public use heliports/helipads, respectively.
c. If the Small Wind Energy System includes turbineIf the Small Wind Energy System includes turbine--mounted lighting, such lighting shall mounted lighting, such lighting shall include include shielding or control systems approved by the Federal Aviation Administration to reduce visibility of lighting to individuals on the ground, to the extent determined practical by the Zoning Administrator.
3. No No Small Wind Energy System, or an expansion or material change to an existing System, shall Wind Energy System, or an expansion or material change to an existing System, shall be constructed prior to obtaining be constructed prior to obtaining zoninzoning and building permitsg and building permits. In addition to . In addition to meeting zoning meeting zoning permit and building permit application requirementspermit and building permit application requirements, the applicant shall submit all application , the applicant shall submit all application materials required under materials required under Wis. Admin. Code Wis. Admin. Code PSC PSC §§128.30(2), as limited for Small Wind Energy 128.30(2), as limited for Small Wind Energy Systems by Systems by Wis.Wis. Admin. Code Admin. Code PSC PSC §§128.60, along with i128.60, along with information showing that the applicant has complied with the notice requirements in Wis. Admin. Code PSC §128.105 and Wis. Admin. Code PSC §128.30(5), with such notices also providing contact information for the Zoning Administrator.
4. After receiving an application for zoning and building permit approval for a Small Wind Energy System (or expansion or material change thereto), the Zoning Administrator shall:
a. Determine the completeness of the application, and notifDetermine the completeness of the application, and notify the applicant in writing whether y the applicant in writing whether the application is complete or incomplete no later than 15 days after the day the application the application is complete or incomplete no later than 15 days after the day the application is filed. is filed.
b. Publish a Class I notice per WisPublish a Class I notice per Wis.. StatStat.. §§66.0401(4)(a)1, including a brief description of the 66.0401(4)(a)1, including a brief description of the proposed Small Wind Enproposed Small Wind Energy System, its proposed location, the locations where the ergy System, its proposed location, the locations where the application is available for public review, the method and time period for the submission of application is available for public review, the method and time period for the submission of public comments, and the approximate schedule for review of the application by the public comments, and the approximate schedule for review of the application by the VillageVillage. .
c. Make the aMake the application available for public review at the pplication available for public review at the nearest publicnearest public library library to the proposed to the proposed installation installation and at the and at the Zoning Administrator’s Zoning Administrator’s office. office.
d. Accept written public comments on the application for 20 days after the Class I notice is Accept written public comments on the application for 20 days after the Class I notice is published, or until the apublished, or until the administrative hearing is held, whichever is later.dministrative hearing is held, whichever is later.
e. Prior to action on the Prior to action on the zoning and building zoning and building permit, conduct an administrative hearing to permit, conduct an administrative hearing to obtain comments on and to inform the public about the proposed Small Wind Energy obtain comments on and to inform the public about the proposed Small Wind Energy System.System.
f. Either grant or deny the lanEither grant or deny the land use permit within 60 days of the submittal of a complete d use permit within 60 days of the submittal of a complete application.application.
5. The Village may hire professional consultants to assist with the review and processing of the application. In addition to paying the required permit fees, the applicant for any Large Wind Energy System shall reimburse the Village for such consultant time, within 30 days of receipt of
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
through Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-58
an invoice from the Village, per the requirements and limitations in Wis. Admin. Code PSC § 128.32(5)(b).
6. Per PSC 128.33(5), the Zoning Administrator may require a written report from the owner of an approved Small Wind Energy System, no greater than once per year, documenting compliance over the previous calendar year with the requirements of this Chapter, Wis. Admin. Code PSC §128, Wis. Stat. § 66.0401, approved plans, conditions of approval, the requirement to maintain the System in good repair and operating condition; including all necessary state and federal permits and approvals; and including the maintenance log for each wind turbine. The log must contain the date and time maintenance was performed, the nature of the maintenance performed, and the reason for the maintenance. Such written report shall be provided within 60 days of Zoning Administrator request.
7. In the event that the Village determines that a Small Wind Energy System does not comply with the requirements of this Chapter, Wis. Admin. Code PSC §128, Wis. Stat. § 66.0401, approved plans, conditions of approval, and the requirement to maintain the System in good repair and operating condition, the zoning and building permits may be revoked per normal procedures associated with such permits.
8. Consistent with Wis. Admin. Code PSC §§128.12(2) and128.18(3)(am), and Wis. Stat. Chapter 91, in the FP zoning district, the Small Wind Energy System shall be subject to the following additional standards:
a. The use and its location are consistent with the purpose of the FP district.The use and its location are consistent with the purpose of the FP district.
b. The use and its location are reasonable and appropriate, considering alternative locations, or The use and its location are reasonable and appropriate, considering alternative locations, or are specifically approare specifically approved under state or federal law.ved under state or federal law.
c. The use does not substantially impair or limit the current or future agricultural use of The use does not substantially impair or limit the current or future agricultural use of surrounding parcels of land that are zoned for or legally restricted to agricultural use.surrounding parcels of land that are zoned for or legally restricted to agricultural use.
(21) Small Solar Energy System.
A Small Solar Energy System is an energy system that converts solar energy to usable thermal, mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy, where such solar energy system is accessory to the principal use of the lot (such as a solar panel system providing energy for a dwelling on the same lot), and primarily supplies energy to such principal use.
Performance Standards:
1. Rooftop, ground-mounted, and building-mounted solar energy systems shall comply with the height limits and minimum required yards for principal structures.
2. The requirements of Wisconsin Statutes, including but not limited to Wis. Stat. §§ 66.0401 and 66.0403, shall apply to all Small Solar Energy Systems.
(22) Outdoor Solid Fuel Furnace.
An outdoor accessory structure designed to heat air or water through a fire and then transmit that heated air or liquid to a different structure for direct use and/or structural heating.
Performance Standards:
1. Shall be set back a minimum of 75 feet from all property lines and roads and 100 feet from any dwelling unit on an adjacent property.
2. If less than 300 feet from any dwelling unit on an adjacent property, the smoke stack shall be required to be raised to the height of the roofline of the dwelling that the furnace serves and a Class A (triple wall) chimney pipe shall be installed to facilitate the dispersion of smoke.
3. Shall be prohibited on lots less than three acres in area.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
through Section 94.4.09: Accessory & Miscellaneous Land Use
Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-59
4. Fuel shall only be natural wood (not painted, stained, or treated), wood pellets, corn products, biomass pellets or other listed fuels specifically permitted by the manufacturer's instructions, such as fuel oil, coal, natural gas or propane backup.
5. Shall be required to have a spark arrestor if the manufacture's specifications allow such spark arrestor.
6. Shall comply with SPS 323.045, Wis. Adm. Code, and the Uniform Dwelling Code. Design shall also be laboratory tested and listed to comply with appropriate safety standards, such as Underwriters Laboratories or American National Standards Institute standards.
7. Shall be constructed, established, installed, operated and maintained in conformance with the manufacturer's instructions and the requirements of this Chapter. In the event of a conflict, the requirements of this Chapter shall apply unless the manufacturer's instructions are stricter in which case the manufacturer's instructions shall apply.
(23) Private Lake (Pond).
A manmade water body containing water year-round.
Performance Standards:
1. The slope of the proposed pond is no steeper than three to one.
2. The perimeter of the pond and all other associated disturbed areas shall be planted to vegetation within five days of completion of the excavation or construction. In cases where pond construction occurs during frozen soil conditions the establishment of vegetation cover may be delayed until soils have thawed.
3. The private lake or pond must meet the setback requirements normally applicable to a principal building in the associated zoning district.
4. The stocking of a private lake or pond with fish for personal use shall be permitted. Commercial fish hatcheries shall be regulated as an “Agricultural Use.” Commercial fishing ponds shall be regulated as an “Outdoor Commercial Entertainment.”
(24) Vehicle Course or Track.
Any privately-operated track, course, circuit, strip, or loop designed for use by motorized vehicles such as automobiles, trucks, ATVs, motorcycles, motocross bikes, “dirt bikes,” snowmobiles, go-carts, or boats, where an accessory use. Such uses occasionally are operated for recreational purposes for family use. This use shall meet the following performance standards:
Performance Standards:
1. Minimum lot size shall be 5 acres.
2. If such use abuts any residentially zoned or used property, all track facilities shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from such property and such use shall not be permitted to have night lighting nor operate between 8 p.m. and 8 a.m.
3. Such uses may be subject to enforcement actions under nuisance law and Article 12 for noise, dust, or other impacts..
(25) Donation DropDonation Drop--Off Box or Vending MachineOff Box or Vending Machine..
A free
A free--standing receptacle located outside of a building that is used either to (a) automatically dispense standing receptacle located outside of a building that is used either to (a) automatically dispense small consumer goods, such as small consumer goods, such as beverages, candy, and DVDs, when money is inserted, or (b) collect beverages, candy, and DVDs, when money is inserted, or (b) collect clothing, shoes, or other contributions, generally collected from persons not occupying the premises on clothing, shoes, or other contributions, generally collected from persons not occupying the premises on which the receptacle is located and with such contributions generally intended for rewhich the receptacle is located and with such contributions generally intended for reuse elsewhere.use elsewhere. The The term does not include a trash container or recycling bin designed to contain waste from a household, term does not include a trash container or recycling bin designed to contain waste from a household, business, or other land use on the same premise.business, or other land use on the same premise.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.10: Temporary Land Use Types through Section 94.4.10: Temporary Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-60
Performance Standards: The following standards shall apply to all Donation DropDonation Drop--Off BoxOff Box or or Vending MachinesVending Machines installed after March 18, 2015, and for pre-existing installations to the extent determined practical by the Village approval authority in cases where site plan approval is required for a new or expanded activity on the parcel per Section 94.3.03(10):
1. Shall require issuance of a zoning permit prior to installation, which shall be issued only upon evidence of compliance with this subsection and receipt of written authorization by the property receipt of written authorization by the property owner, or his legal owner, or his legal representative.representative.
2. Shall be setback from property lines a distance equal to accessory buildings in the district.
3. Must be placed on a hard, all-weather surface.
4. Shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation nor be located in a public right-of-way or approved parking space.
5. Shall not be placed in a fire lane, loading zone, or any other location that may cause hazardous Shall not be placed in a fire lane, loading zone, or any other location that may cause hazardous conditions, constitute a threat to the public safety, or create a condition detrimental to surrounding conditions, constitute a threat to the public safety, or create a condition detrimental to surrounding land uses and developments.land uses and developments.
6. May May be constructed of painted metal, rubber, wood, or plastic and shall be properly maintained in be constructed of painted metal, rubber, wood, or plastic and shall be properly maintained in a safe and good condition. a safe and good condition.
7. Shall not be accompanied by any items stored or left outside of the container that houses the Donation Drop-Off Box or Vending Machine. The area around each Donation DropThe area around each Donation Drop--Off Box or Off Box or Vending Machine shall be maintained by the property owner, free of litter and any other Vending Machine shall be maintained by the property owner, free of litter and any other undesirable materials. All donated items must be collected and stored in the Donation Dropundesirable materials. All donated items must be collected and stored in the Donation Drop--Off Off Box.Box.
8. Each Donation DropEach Donation Drop--OOff Box shallff Box shall::
a. HHave a firmly closing lidave a firmly closing lid..
b. HHave a cave a capacity no greater than six apacity no greater than six cubic yards.cubic yards.
c. Not Not exceed seven exceed seven feet in height. feet in height.
d. BBe clearly marked to identify the specific items and materials requested to be left for donation, e clearly marked to identify the specific items and materials requested to be left for donation, the name of the operator or ownersthe name of the operator or owners of the donation container, and a telephone number where of the donation container, and a telephone number where the owner, operator or agent of the owner or operator may be reached at any time. the owner, operator or agent of the owner or operator may be reached at any time.
e. DDisplay a notice stating that no items or materials shall be left outside of the Donation Dropisplay a notice stating that no items or materials shall be left outside of the Donation Drop--Off Box. Off Box.
9. Each DonatiEach Donation Dropon Drop--Off Box or Vending MachineOff Box or Vending Machine not located or maintained in compliance with not located or maintained in compliance with this Article shall bthis Article shall be subject to revocation of the zoning pe subject to revocation of the zoning permitermit or other enforcement actions under or other enforcement actions under this Chapterthis Chapter..
Section 94.4.10: Temporary Land Use Types
(1) Temporary Outdoor Sales.
Includes the short-term display and/or sale of any items outside the confines of a building. Examples of this land use include but are not limited to seasonal garden shops, tent sales, flea markets, and church sales. This category does not include “Garage, Yard, Estate, and In-Home Sales”, “Seasonal Outdoor Sales of Farm Products” (including farmers markets) or “Drive-in or Drive-Through Sales or Service.”
Performance Standards:
1. Each such use shall not exceed 120 days in any calendar year, except via Plan Commission approval of a site plan under Section 94.16.09.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.10: Temporary Land Use Types through Section 94.4.10: Temporary Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-61
2. In commercial and industrial zoning districts, the products displayed and sold outdoors shall be of the same general nature as the permanent retail activity conducted on the property.
3. Within the PR district and within public parks in other zoning districts, Temporary Outdoor Sales are permitted only in conjunction with a Village approved festival or other event.
4. There shall be no evidence of the Temporary Outdoor Sales use 24 hours before or after the sales are permitted, either on-site or off-site.
5. No fireworks stands are permitted.
6. Hoop buildings and structures of similar design shall be a permitted for a maximum of five consecutive days within a 30-day period, shall comply with Chapter 34, Fire Prevention and Protection, and shall in non-residential and mixed-use zoning districts require a tent permit from the Fire Department.
7. The applicant and operator shall comply with temporary use review and approval procedures in Section 94.16.07. A temporary use permit shall only be issued to the owner/operator of the associated permanent use of the property.
8. The applicant or operator shall provide a layout of the activities, and additional details if requested by the Zoning Administrator.
(2) Garage, Yard, Estate, and In-Home Sales.
Includes the short-term display and sales of household products in a residence, residential garage, driveway, or yard, whether for one or multiple families.
Performance Standards:
1. Shall be limited to properties in residential use.
2. Shall be permitted in association with a two-family and multiple family residence only in a private driveway from the residential unit to the public street or in a garage serving a two- to four-unit building. Sales within parking lots, common driveways, or yard areas of two-family or multiple family residences are not permitted.
3. May only be conducted by or on behalf of the occupants of the residence.
4. Shall be limited to a maximum of four sales per year, with a maximum duration of three days per sale.
5. Shall not require a temporary use review and approval under Section 94.16.07.
6. No hoop buildings or structures of similar design shall be used in conjunction with the sale.
7. Signs shall meet applicable one-time event sign standards in Section 94.13.08 No sign shall be placed in the public right-of-way, except with the express consent of the Zoning Administrator.
[Amended via Ord. 15-021, 10/21/2015]
(3) Outdoor Assembly or Special Event.
Includes any organized assembly of more than 200 persons, outdoors, including church festivals, community events, and other similar activities open to the public, but excluding one-time and occasional auctions, weddings, funerals, family reunions, and other similar private events. Also includes special events as defined in Chapter 67 of the Code.
Performance Standards:
1. Activities shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation, including vehicular sight distances.
2. Adequate parking, drinking water, toilet facilities, and crowd control shall be provided.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.10: Temporary Land Use Types through Section 94.4.10: Temporary Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-62
3. If the subject property is located within or adjacent to a residentially zoned area, activities shall be limited to daylight hours, unless licensed for longer hours.
4. Each such use or activity shall not exceed 14 days per quarter.
5. The applicant and operator shall comply with temporary use review and approval procedures in Section 94.16.07.
(4) Contractor's Project Office.
Includes any structure containing an on-site construction management office for an active construction project.
Performance Standards:
1. Facility may be installed no sooner than 10 days before construction commences and shall be removed within 10 days of issuance of an occupancy permit for all structures on the construction site.
2. The applicant shall comply with temporary use review and approval procedures in Section 94.16.07.
(5) Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage Facility.
Includes any structure or outdoor storage area designed for the on-site storage of construction equipment and/or materials for an active construction project.
Performance Standards:
1. Facility may be installed no sooner than 10 days before construction commences and shall be removed within 10 days of issuance of an occupancy permit for all structures on the construction site.
2. The applicant shall comply with temporary use review and approval procedures in Section 94.16.07.
(6) Relocatable Building.
Includes any manufactured building that serves as a temporary building, supplementing permanent buildings on the site, but not including other temporary uses or buildings included in this Section. Examples include temporary classrooms and temporary manufacturing facilities.
Performance Standards:
1. The building shall conform to all setback and height regulations for principal buildings in the associated zoning district, as provided in Article 5.
2. The building shall conform to all building code regulations.
3. Each such building shall not be placed on a site for more than 120 days in any calendar year, except by conditional use permit.
4. The applicant shall comply with temporary use review and approval procedures in Section 94.16.07.
(7) On-Site Real Estate Sales Office.
Includes any building that serves as an on-site sales office for a development project.
Performance Standards:
1. Facility may be installed no sooner than 10 days before construction commences.
2. The office shall be removed or converted to a permitted land use within 10 days of the completion of sales activity.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.10: Temporary Land Use Types through Section 94.4.10: Temporary Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-63
3. The applicant shall comply with temporary use review and approval procedures in Section 94.16.07.
(8) Seasonal Outdoor Sales of Farm Products.
Includes outdoor display and sales of farm products on a seasonal basis as an accessory use, including but not limited to seasonal roadside stands, farmers markets, and Christmas tree lots.
Performance Standards:
1. Outside of agricultural zoning districts, such uses shall be limited to the sale of holiday trees and associated products, except where conducted by organizations that are tax-exempt under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
2. The display of products shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation, including vehicular sight distances.
3. If subject property is located adjacent to residentially zoned property, sales and display activities shall be limited to daylight hours.
4. Each such use shall not exceed 120 days in any calendar year.
5. Roadside stands, less than 200 square feet in area, shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from the existing road right-of-way line and 20 feet from any other lot line.
6. Shall comply with temporary use review and approval procedures in Section 94.16.07.
(9) Temporary Portable Storage Container.
A portable storage container designed and used primarily for temporary storage of household goods and other such materials for use on a limited basis on residential property. Also known as a “pod.”
Performance Standards:
1. The container shall be permitted on the property for up to 30 days associated with each change of occupancy as defined by a recorded change in property ownership or valid lease.
2. The Temporary Portable Storage Container cannot encroach on the public right-of-way, neighboring property, sidewalk, or be placed in the street. The unit must be sited on a hard surface as defined in Section 94.17.04.
3. Shall comply with temporary use review and approval procedures in Section 94.16.07.
(10) Temporary Shelter.
Shelters that are typically supported by poles, have a fabric, metal, or vinyl roof and/or sides, and are usually used to shelter automobiles, boats, recreational vehicles, temporary sales use, and gatherings of people on a temporary basis. These structures are not designed for the snow loading that can occur during the winter months.
Performance Standards:
1. Shall be a permitted as a temporary use only, for a maximum of five consecutive days within a 30-day period.
2. Shall comply with Chapter 34, Fire Prevention and Protection of the Code.
3. Shall comply with temporary use review and approval procedures in Section 94.16.07.
(11) Temporary Agricultural Structure.
Temporary structures normally accessory and incidental to farming operations.
Performance Standards:
1. Shall be a permitted as a temporary use only, for a maximum of 180 days.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.10: Temporary Land Use Types through Section 94.4.10: Temporary Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-64
2. The parcel the structure is proposed to be located on shall be a minimum of 40 acres in area.
3. The structure shall conform to the underlying zoning district’s setback regulations.
4. The structure must be affixed to the ground or a structure to prevent the wind from relocating the structure.
5. Need not comply with temporary use review and approval procedures in Section 94.16.07.
(12) Temporary Unscreened Outdoor Storage Accessory to an Industrial Use.
Provisions for the temporary unscreened or marginally screened outdoor storage of products, equipment, or supplies used by a principal “Light Industrial” or “Heavy Industrial” use on the same property, intended to address one-time and rare occasions of heavy activity in the business.
Performance Standards:
1. Shall be a permitted as a temporary use only, for a maximum of 90 days.
2. The building shall conform to all setback regulations for principal buildings.
3. Must be sited on a hard surface or gravel surface.
4. Shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation, including vehicular sight distances.
5. The Zoning Administrator may limit such storage to only those uses and lots where a site plan approved after March 18, 2015 designated the possibility of a Temporary Unscreened Outdoor Storage Accessory to an Industrial Use.
6. The Zoning Administrator may require measures to screen or buffer the storage area, or direct the placement to a location that minimizes visual impact, to the extent practical.
7. Shall comply with temporary use review and approval procedures in Section 94.16.07.
(13) Temporary Sales by Mobile Food Vendors
Includes the short-term sale of products and foods outside the confines of a building. Foods and beverages are made by the licensed mobile food vendor. Examples of this land use category include, but are not limited to, mobile retail food establishment, temporary retail food establishment, pushcart, ice cream vendor and temporary food stands. This category does not include “Seasonal Sales of Farm Products” (including farmers’ markets), “Drive-in or Drive-through Sales or Service,” or licensed mobile food vendors associated with a licensed and approved “Outdoor Assembly or Special Event.”
Performance Standards:
1. Each such use shall require the issuance of a “Mobile Food Vendor” License from the Village Clerk per Section 18.148 of the Municipal Code.
2. Vending shall only be permitted to operate between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 30 minutes after the provided closing hours for Class “B” licensed alcohol establishments as provided in Wis. Stat. §125.32(3).
3. No mobile food vending unit may be set up at any one location for more than a 7-day period. Mobile food vending units that operate out of a motorized vehicle shall be parked in a parking stall overnight as to not inhibit traffic flow.
4. All mobile food vendor units shall be located on a hard or gravel surface, as defined by this Chapter.
5. All mobile food vendor units shall adhere to the setbacks of the hard or gravel surface of the respected zoning district as defined in Figure 5.02(2) Non-residential District Setbacks and Height Standards within this Chapter.
6. Written permission from the property owner or designee granting the permission to vend food from a mobile food vending unit on their property.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.10: Temporary Land Use Types through Section 94.4.10: Temporary Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-65
7. No mobile food vendor unit shall be located or operate within a rural, open space or residentially zoned district, with the exception of the PR – Parks and Recreation district or unless the mobile food vendor is identified under Section 18.148(d)(2) of Licensing.
8. No mobile food vendor unit shall be located or operate within the right-of-way, which includes, but not limited to, the street and sidewalk, with the exception of a mobile ice cream vendor. No vending shall be made in a public street from a vehicle or other on-street unit except from the curbside of said vehicle or on-street unit. Vehicle or pedestrian flow shall not be impeded in any way. All vending from the right-of-way shall cease at sunset.
9. No mobile food vendor unit shall be located within 10 feet of a fire hydrant or designated bus stop and shall not be located within the vision triangle as described in Chapter 71.
10. No mobile food vendor unit shall be located on the same parcel or any adjacent parcel where a business is selling the same or similar products during the hours of operation of said business, unless written permission is granted by the owner of said business and such documentation is provided with the required application.
11. No mobile food vendor unit shall be located or operating within 1000 feet of school property during school hours, unless written permission is granted by the school superintendent or designee and such documentation is provided with the required application.
12. It shall be prohibited for any mobile food vendor units to be connected to any public source of water, sewer or electricity.
13. The utilization of public property, such as light poles, utility pole, planters is prohibited.
14. The utilization of a drive-up or drive-through window for motorized vehicles is prohibited.
15. The licensee or designated operator of the mobile food vendor unit shall be present at all times during which food is being displayed and sold, except that the operator may leave his/her vending location and mobile vending unit unattended during lawful vending hours for a maximum of 30 minutes per day.
16. The Everest Metropolitan Police Department or the Village shall have the authority to remove or cause the removal of any mobile food vendor unit, any of its accessories or product that is in violation of this chapter or poses a risk to the health, safety or welfare of the general public. In addition to any forfeiture that may be imposed, the violator shall also be liable for any removal, towing and storage charges incurred by the Village or any of its associated agencies as a result.
17. Any signs that are attached to the mobile vending unit are exempt from the requirements of filing a sign permit but shall adhere to all regulations within Article 13.
[Amended via Ord. 16-021, 4/20/2016]
(14) Temporary Asphalt, Batch or Concrete, Stone Crushing and/or Processing Operations
Where not accessory to a non-metallic mineral extraction operation, this temporary use shall be proposed in conjunction with and exclusively serving a specific public highway or road improvement, other public works project, or large scale construction project warranting on-site processing in the Zoning Administrator’s opinion that benefits the Village and/or the Extraterritorial Zoning District, subject to the issuance of a temporary use permit and the following performance standards.
Performance Standards:
1. The permitted length of time of operation are as follows:
a. All temporary use permits within the Village for any such operation shall not exceed a six-month (6) period.
i. An extension of the permit may only be considered for up to one year by conditional use permit. Projects proposed to exceed 1-year must qualify as a Solid Waste Disposal, Composting and/or Recycling Facility as defined in Section 94.4.06(5).
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.10: Temporary Land Use Types through Section 94.4.10: Temporary Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-66
b. All temporary use permits within the Extraterritorial Zoning District for any such operation shall only be considered by conditional use permit.
i. Projects proposed to exceed 1-year must qualify as a Solid Waste Disposal, Composting and/or Recycling Facility as defined in Section 94.4.06(5)
2. Batch plants and material processing operations shall only be permitted as a temporary use within the AR Agriculture and Residential district, Non-Residential, and Mixed-Use Districts; or within a Subdivision where the preliminary plat has been approved or construction phase authorized within the preceding year.
3. All temporary use permit applications shall include detailed site and operational plans, which describe the specific nature of the proposed operation, justification for why the operation needs to be performed on-site; the specific project(s) which the operation would supply; types and quantities of materials and processes; types, quantities, and frequency of use of equipment to move, process, and haul materials within and to and from the site; where materials would be hauled from and to and over what routes and roads; any special measures that will be used for spill prevention and control, dust control, and environmental protection; methods to keep all public roads free of all mud, debris, and dust; number of employees; proposed days and hours of operation; proposed time length of operation; other state, county, or federal permits required; public safety measures including fencing; evidence of adequate insurance, and contact information for all on-site managers/supervisors.
4. All applications shall include a detailed map of the impacted areas showing the designated truck routes and frequency of travel. All off-site travel shall be restricted to arterial and collector streets and highways unless prior written approval is received from the Director of Public Works to use other streets.
5. A bond or other performance guarantee for such work may be required as part of the temporary use permit provided that a clear relationship is established between the operation and the need for road upgrades, repair, and maintenance.
6. All applications shall include a detailed site plan in accordance with Section 94.16.09 and shall also include the following:
a. Location of all fences or other screening mechanisms;
b. Location of processing equipment and areas and material and equipment storage areas;
c. The proposed type and amount of material being processed and/or stored;
d. Employee parking; and
e. An erosion control plan, drawn to scale by a professional engineer, meeting all applicable Village, State, and County requirements.
f. Other location-specific items required under subsection 3 indicated.
7. Driveway access of the operation shall adhere to Section 94.12.08 and Chapter 71 of the Municipal Code.
8. Batch plants and material processing operations proposed within 1,000 feet of any residential land use (not including undeveloped subdivisions) shall also have to obtain a conditional use permit per Section 94.16.06.
9. On-site bulk fuel storage areas and areas for fueling of equipment shall be located in accordance with the Wisconsin Administrative Code and State Statutes. Fuel storage located within the Wellhead Protection Zones shall require a conditional use permit per Section 94.6.03 to minimize the potential for groundwater contamination.
10. Depending on the nature of the use, the Zoning Administrator may require a reclamation plan clearly depicting the restoration of the property, proposed contours, depth of topsoil, vegetative cover and the proposed land use. A bond or letter of credit may be required to cover the costs of
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.10: Temporary Land Use Types through Section 94.4.10: Temporary Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-67
reclamation in the event that the applicant fails to complete the process or is unable to due to other circumstances. The amount is determined by the preexisting conditions of the site.
11. At maximum, the operation of the batch plants and material processing uses shall be permitted between the hours of 7:00AM through 5:00PM, Monday through Friday; and between 7:00AM and 12:00PM on Saturday. Transportation of materials to and from the site shall not occur outside of these hours when within 1,000 feet of an existing residential land use. The entire project area shall be screened from view from all neighboring parcels and rights-of-way.
12. To prevent tracking of mud onto public roads, access driveways shall be hard surfaced within one 100 feet of public roads, unless the adjacent road is not hard surfaced. This requirement may be satisfied with the use of a tracking pad as part of the erosion control plan.
13. Material processed on site shall be only used for the project specified on the permit application. If it has been determined by the Zoning Administrator that other activities are occurring within the proposed site area unrelated to the specified project the temporary use permit shall be revoked.
14. All public roads to all operations shall be kept free of all mud, debris, and dust.
15. Operation sites and driveways shall be sprayed to control dust, except when the temperature is below freezing. All operations and sites shall also meet the air pollution standards in Section 94.12.14.
16. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking: one space per each employee on the largest work shift.
[Amended via Ord. 16-032, 8/18/2016]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
Section 94.4.10: Temporary Land Use Types through Section 94.4.10: Temporary Land Use Types
Article 4: LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND STANDARDS 4-68
Page intentionally left blank
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: MARCH 19, 2020
Article 5: DENSITY, INTENSITY AND BULK REGULATIONS 5-1
Article 5: DENSITY, INTENSITY AND BULK REGULATIONS
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: MARCH 19, 2020
Section 94.5.01: Purpose through Section 94.5.04: Intrusions into Required Yards
Article 5: DENSITY, INTENSITY AND BULK REGULATIONS 5-2
Section 94.5.01: Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to establish base density, intensity, and dimensional requirements for each standard zoning district.
Section 94.5.02: Location of Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations
(1) Except where otherwise expressly stated, all lots and improvements within the Rural, Open Space and Residential standard zoning districts shall comply with the regulations prescribed in Figures 5.01(1) and (2), and all lots and improvements within ll lots and improvements within nnonon--residentialresidential standard zoning districtstandard zoning districts shalls shall comply with the comply with the regulations regulations prescribed in prescribed in Figures 5.02(1) and (2).
(2) Allowable yard setback adjustments, intrusions into required yards, and exceptions to maximum height are found in Sections 5.03 through 5.05. Substandard lots, nonconforming uses, nonconforming structures, and nonconforming sites legally created before establishment of these requirements are addressed in Article 15.
Section 94.5.03: Yard Setback Adjustments
(1) Limitations on Yard Setback Adjustments
(a) No yard shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such yard less than the minimum required by this Chapter. If an existing yard is less than the minimum required, it shall not be reduced further, except where exempted by the provisions of this Section.
(b) No required yard or lot area allocated to satisfy the minimum yard or lot area requirements for one building or structure shall be used to satisfy the minimum yard or lot area requirement for another building or structure.
(2) Front Yard Setback and Corner Lot Street Side Yard Setback Adjustment
The required front or street side yard setback for a principal structure may be reduced on any lot where more than 50 percent of the same-type principal structures on the same block face do not meet the required front yard or street side yard setback. In such instances, the required front yard or street side yard setback for the proposed structure shall be the average of all the same-type principal structures on the same block face.
Section 94.5.04: Intrusions into Required Yards
The minimum setbacks listed in Figures 5.01(2), 5.02(2), and 5.03(2) establish the minimum required yards/setbacks in the associated zoning districts, except that the following intrusions by buildings and structures are permitted into the minimum required yards:
(1) Permitted Intrusions into Required Front and Street Side Yards.
(a) Chimneys, flues, sills, pilasters, lintels, cornices, eaves, gutters, satellite dishes with a diameter of 20 inches or less, and other architectural and ornamental features attached to a building, provided they do not extend more than two and one-half feet into the required yard.
(b) Yard lights, ornamental lights, and nameplate signs, provided they comply with applicable exterior lighting requirements of Section 94.12.11.
(c) Terraces, steps, open walled porches, decks, stoops, or similar appurtenances to residential buildings that do not extend above the floor level of the adjacent building entrance, provided they do not locate closer than 20 feet to any front or street lot line.
(d) Fences, in accordance with Section 94.12.03.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: MARCH 19, 2020
Section 94.5.05: Exceptions to Maximum Height
Regulations; Collaborative Opportunities
through Section 94.5.05: Exceptions to Maximum Height
Regulations; Collaborative Opportunities
Article 5: DENSITY, INTENSITY AND BULK REGULATIONS 5-3
(e) Lawn ornaments and flag poles, provided that in residential zoning districts flag poles do not exceed 35 feet in height and lawn ornaments do not exceed 6 feet in height, and that flag poles are constructed with footings that extend not less than 42 inches below the existing ground level unless secured in another manner verified by a structural engineer.
(f) Stormwater retention and detention ponds and stormwater related structures.
(2) Permitted Intrusions into Required Interior Side Yards.
(a) Chimneys, flues, sills, pilasters, lintels, cornices, eaves, gutters, satellite dishes with a diameter of 20 inches or less, and other ornamental features attached to a building, provided they do not extend more than two and one-half feet into the required yard.
(b) Fences, in accordance with Section 94.12.03.
(c) Fire escapes that do not extend more than three feet into the required yard.
(d) Lawn ornaments and flag poles, provided that in residential zoning districts flag poles do not exceed 35 feet in height and all lawn ornaments do not exceed 6 feet in height, and that flag poles are constructed with footings that extend not less than 42 inches below the existing ground level unless secured in another manner verified by a structural engineer.
(e) Stormwater retention and detention ponds and stormwater related structures.
(3) Permitted Intrusions into Required Rear Yards.
(a) Terraces, steps, uncovered porches, decks, stoops, or similar appurtenances to residential buildings, provided they do not locate closer than 20 feet to the rear lot line.
(b) Chimneys, flues, sills, pilasters, lintels, cornices, eaves, gutters, satellite dishes with a diameter of 20 inches or less, and other architectural and ornamental features attached to a building, provided they do not extend more than two and one-half feet into the minimum required yard.
(c) Fences, in accordance with Section 94.12.03.
(d) Fire escapes that do not extend more than three feet into the minimum required yard.
(e) Lawn ornaments, play sets, tree houses, trampolines, and flag poles, provided that in residential zoning districts flag poles do not exceed 35 feet in height and all other lawn ornaments do not exceed 6 feet in height, that flag poles are constructed with footings that extend not less than 42 inches below the existing ground level unless secured in another manner verified by a structural engineer, and that tree houses are not intended for human habitation.
(f) Stormwater retention and detention ponds and stormwater related structures.
[Amended via Ord. 16-043, 10/20/2016]
Section 94.5.05: Exceptions to Maximum Height Regulations; Collaborative Opportunities
(1) Exceptions: The maximum building heights listed in Figures 5.01(2), 5.02(2), and 5.03(2) are the maximum permitted heights for all buildings and structures in the associated zoning districts, except for
(a) Church spires; belfries; cupolas and domes that do not contain useable space; public monuments; water towers; telecommunication towers; fire and hose towers; flag poles; and farm structures such as barns, silos, and grain elevators.
(b) Any building or structure not listed in subsection (a), subject to the granting of a conditional use permit that specifically states the maximum permitted height of the proposed building or structure.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: MARCH 19, 2020
Section 94.5.06: Building Area and Coverage Inclusions and
Exclusions
through Section 94.5.07: Landscape Surface Ratio Inclusions and
Exclusions
Article 5: DENSITY, INTENSITY AND BULK REGULATIONS 5-4
(2) Criteria for the Granting of Exceptions: For a structure described under subsection (1) to exceed the maximum building heights in Figures 5.01(2), 5.02(2), and 5.03(2), all of the following criteria must be met:
(a) The structure must be constructed with footings that extend not less than 42 inches below the existing ground level, or a greater depth if required by the Building Code.
(b) The structure will be set back from all property lines consistent with the applicable requirements of Figures 5.01(2), 5.02(2), and 5.03(2), or with any permitted intrusions in Section 94.5.06.
(c) The placement of the structure will not have an undue negative impact on light and air on adjacent properties, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator.
(3) Relationship to AH Airport Height Limitation Overlay District: In the event of conflict between the exceptions authorized under subsection (1) and the maximum heights permitted under Section 94.6.04, the maximum heights under Section 94.6.04 shall control.
(4) Collaboration with Telecommunication Providers: As part of the approval of building permits for structures listed in subsection (1), the Village encourages collaboration with telecommunication providers to collocate antenna arrays on such structures as a means to increase phone and internet access and minimize the proliferation of stand-alone telecommunication towers.
Section 94.5.06: Building Area and Coverage Inclusions and Exclusions
(1) The maximum accessory structure floor areas listed in Figure 5.01(1) are the maximum permitted areas for all buildings and structures in the associated zoning districts, except for farm structures such as barns, silos, and grain elevators in those districts where such structures are used for agricultural purposes.
(2) In all districts, all principal and accessory structures rising one or more feet above the immediate surrounding grade, including garages, sheds, carports, roofed or walled storage areas, covered or uncovered decks, gazebos, boathouses, and above-ground swimming pools shall be counted toward the calculation of building coverage. No other structures or improvements shall be counted.
Section 94.5.07: Landscape Surface Ratio Inclusions and Exclusions
(1) In all districts, except as allowed in subsection (2), no impervious surfaces, including gravel, shall count toward the calculation of landscape surface area.
(2) Minor or temporary impervious surfaces such as landscaping retaining walls, planters, bird baths, lawn statues, seasonal decorative displays, poles for clothes drying, flag poles, portable play structures such as swing sets and trampolines, stormwater management basins and swales, and grass roofs shall count toward the calculation of landscape surface area.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: MARCH 19, 2020
Section 94.5.07: Landscape Surface Ratio Inclusions and
Exclusions
through Section 94.5.07: Landscape Surface Ratio Inclusions and
Exclusions
Article 5: DENSITY, INTENSITY AND BULK REGULATIONS 5-5
Figure 5.01(1): Rural, Open Space and Residential District Lot Dimension and Intensity Standards Zoning District Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width (ft) Minimum Public Street Frontage (ft) Maximum Total Building Coverage Maximum Accessory Structure Floor Area (sf) (a) Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR)
FP Farmland Preservation
20 acres
300
60
N/A
N/A
N/A
AR Agriculture and Residential
20 acres(f)(g)
300(f)
60
N/A
1,600(h)
N/A
RR-2 Rural Residential 2 Acres
2.0 acres
150
60
20%
1,600
N/A
RR-5 Rural Residential 5 Acres
5.0 acres
200
60
20%
1,600(h)
N/A
PR Parks and Recreation
N/A
N/A
N/A
10%
N/A
75%
SF-L Single Family – Large Lot
20,000 sf
100
50
30%
1,000
50%
SF-S Single Family – Small Lot
10,000 sf
80
40
40%
800
40%
2F Two Family Residential (c)
10,000 sf
80 (b)
40
40%
800
40%
MF Multi Family Residential (d)
1,600 sf/studio dwelling unit + 400 sf per each bedroom
100 (b)
40
40%
10% of Lot Area
30%
MH Manufactured Home
5,000 sf/home (e)
50
N/A
40%
350
30%
(a) Maximum Accessory Structure floor area may be increased by Conditional Use Permit as provided under Section 94.16.06 and per the standards in Section 94.4.09(2).
(b) For zero lot line structures, each separate lot must be at least 50 feet in width.
(c) SingleSingle--Family Detached Residences within the 2F district shall comply with the SFFamily Detached Residences within the 2F district shall comply with the SF--S district requirements.S district requirements.
(d) Single-Family Detached Residences within the MF district shall comply with the SF-S district requirements. Two-family Residences within the MF District shall comply with 2F district requirements.
(e) Total area of each “Manufactured Home Community” shall be a minimum of 10 acres.
(f) Instead of a 20-acre minimum lot size, land in the AR district may be developed at a density of one residential lot per 20 acres and a minimum lot size of 2.0 acres and minimum lot width of 150 feet. See Section 94.5.08 for further description and method of calculation for regulating at a one residential lot per 20-acre density in the AR district.
(g) Parcel size in the AR district to be calculated based on gross acreage, including roads and navigable waters within the deeded parcel. Each such parcel meets the 20-acre minimum, even if net acreage is less than 20 acres following the removal of roads and navigable waters, if such removal does not reduce the gross acreage by greater than 15% for corner parcels or 10% for all other parcels.
(h) Maximum Accessory Structure Floor Area is increased to 2,500 square feet on parcels that exceed 10 acres.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: MARCH 19, 2020
Section 94.5.07: Landscape Surface Ratio Inclusions and
Exclusions
through Section 94.5.07: Landscape Surface Ratio Inclusions and
Exclusions
Article 5: DENSITY, INTENSITY AND BULK REGULATIONS 5-6
[Amended via Ord. 15-022, 10/21/2015; Ord. 16-014, 4/20/2016; Ord. 16-035, 8/18/2016; Ord. 17-038, 12/20/2017; Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19; Ord. 20-005, 3/19/2020]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: MARCH 19, 2020
Section 94.5.07: Landscape Surface Ratio Inclusions and
Exclusions
through Section 94.5.07: Landscape Surface Ratio Inclusions and
Exclusions
Article 5: DENSITY, INTENSITY AND BULK REGULATIONS 5-7
Figure 5.01(2): Rural, Open Space and Residential District Setback and Height Standards Zoning District Minimum Setbacks (ft) (b) Minimum Building Separation (ft) Maximum Building Height Principal Residential Building including Attached Garage Detached Accessory Building (a) Hard or Gravel Surface (d) Principal Building Accessory Building Front (a) Street Side (a) Interior Side Rear Interior Side (c) Rear Interior Side or Rear Front or Street (a) Feet Floors Feet Floors
FP
50
30
20
40
15
15
15
10
10
NA
NA
NA
NA
AR
50
30
20
40
15
15
15
10
10
35
2.5
35
2.5
RR-2
50
30
20
40
15
15
15
10
10
35
2.5
35
2.5
RR-5
50
30
20
40
15
15
15
10
10
35
2.5
35
2.5
PR
30
30
12
20
12
12
6
10
10
35
2.5
25
2
SF-L
50
30
12
20
6
6
6
10
10
35
2.5
15
1
SF-S
30
20
8
20
6
6
6
10
10
35
2.5
15
1
2F (e)
30
30
8
20
6
6
6
10
10
35
2.5
15
1
MF (f)
30
30
8
20
6
6
6
10
10
50
4
15
1
MH
20(g)
20(g)
6
10
6
6
6
10
10(h)
20
1
15
1
(a) See See Section 94Section 94.4.09(2) for standards related to detached .4.09(2) for standards related to detached accessory buildings located within front yard areas, minimum separation requirements associated wiaccessory buildings located within front yard areas, minimum separation requirements associated with detached th detached accessory buildingsaccessory buildings, and other standards associated with detached accessory structures. , and other standards associated with detached accessory structures.
(b) Additional setbacks may be required along zoning districtAdditional setbacks may be required along zoning district boundaries for bufferyardsboundaries for bufferyards, if required for the particular land use under Article 4 or , if required for the particular land use under Article 4 or Section 94Section 94.11.11.02(3)(d).02(3)(d)..
(c) Minimum Minimum streetstreet side yard setbacks are equal to the minimum street side setback for the principal structure.side yard setbacks are equal to the minimum street side setback for the principal structure.
(d) Includes all gravelIncludes all gravel and hard surfaces as defined in Section 94.17.04and hard surfaces as defined in Section 94.17.04, along with recreational vehicles, along with recreational vehicles. This setback excludes intrusions required for driveway ent. This setback excludes intrusions required for driveway entrances and rances and permitted or required for cross access driveways and pedestrian ways; shared driveways; and shared parking lots.permitted or required for cross access driveways and pedestrian ways; shared driveways; and shared parking lots.
(e) SingleSingle--FamilyFamily Detached ResidencesDetached Residences shall comply with the requirements for the shall comply with the requirements for the SFSF--SS ddistrict.istrict.
(f) SingleSingle--Family Family Detached ResidencesDetached Residences shall shall comply with comply with requirements of the requirements of the SFSF--SS District. TwoDistrict. Two--Family Family ResidencesResidences shall comply with the requirements for the shall comply with the requirements for the 2F2F ddistrictistrict..
(g) A minimum 100A minimum 100--foot wide buffer must be provided around the perimeter of foot wide buffer must be provided around the perimeter of each each ““Manufactured Manufactured Home Community.”Home Community.”
(h) See Section 94.4.09(2) for further requirements regarding setbacks for Detached Accessory Structures (for Residential Use).See Section 94.4.09(2) for further requirements regarding setbacks for Detached Accessory Structures (for Residential Use).
[Amended via Ord
[Amended via Ord 1717--026, 8/026, 8/2323/2017/2017; Ord 20; Ord 20--005, 3/19/2020005, 3/19/2020]]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: MARCH 19, 2020
Section 94.5.07: Landscape Surface Ratio Inclusions and
Exclusions
through Section 94.5.07: Landscape Surface Ratio Inclusions and
Exclusions
Article 5: DENSITY, INTENSITY AND BULK REGULATIONS 5-8
Figure 5.01(3): Representation of Dimensional Standards Terms on Typical Lot
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: MARCH 19, 2020
Section 94.5.07: Landscape Surface Ratio Inclusions and
Exclusions
through Section 94.5.07: Landscape Surface Ratio Inclusions and
Exclusions
Article 5: DENSITY, INTENSITY AND BULK REGULATIONS 5-9
Figure 5.01(4): Different Yard and Setback Areas in a Variety of Different Lot Configurations
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: MARCH 19, 2020
Section 94.5.07: Landscape Surface Ratio Inclusions and
Exclusions
through Section 94.5.07: Landscape Surface Ratio Inclusions and
Exclusions
Article 5: DENSITY, INTENSITY AND BULK REGULATIONS 5-10
Figure 5.02(1): Non-residential District Density and Intensity Standards Zoning District Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width (ft) Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) Max Floor Area Ratio (FAR) (a) Minimum Public Street Lot Frontage (ft)
INT Institutional
20,000 sf
80
40
20%
0.5
B-1 Neighborhood Business
20,000 sf
80
40
20%
0.5
B-2 Highway Business
30,000 sf
80
40
20%
1.0
B-3 General Business
30,000 sf
80
40
20%
0.5
BP Business Park
40,000 sf
100
50
20%
1.5
LI Light Industrial
30,000 sf
80
40
15%
0.5
GI General Industrial
40,000 sf
100
50
10%
1.0
RM Rural Mix
20 acres (b)
300
60
N/A
0.1
(a) Does not include structured parking or underground parking.
(b) Parcel size in the RM district to be calculated based on gross acreage, including roads and navigable waters within the deeded parcel. Each such parcel meets the 20-acre minimum, even if net acreage is less than 20 acres following the removal of roads and navigable waters, if such removal does not reduce the gross acreage by greater than 15% for corner parcels or 10% for all other parcels.
[Amended via Ord. 16-046, 12/21/2016; Ord 17-026, 8/23/2017; Ord. 19-001, 1/23/19]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: MARCH 19, 2020
Section 94.5.07: Landscape Surface Ratio Inclusions and
Exclusions
through Section 94.5.07: Landscape Surface Ratio Inclusions and
Exclusions
Article 5: DENSITY, INTENSITY AND BULK REGULATIONS 5-11
Figure 5.02(2): Non-residential District Setback and Height Standards Zoning District Minimum Setbacks (ft) (b) Minimum Building Separation (ft) Maximum Building Height (stories/ft, whichever is greater) Principal Building to Front and Street Side Lot Lines (a) Principal Building to Interior Side Lot Line Principal Building to Rear Lot Line Accessory Building to Interior Side/Rear Lot Line (a) (d) Hard or Gravel Surface (c) Front or Street Side Interior Side or Rear Principal Buildings Accessory Buildings
INT Institutional
20
8
20
3
15
10
10
3/45
1/20
B-1 Neighborhood Business
10
6
10
3
10
5
10
3/45
1/20
B-2 Highway Business
30
12
20
6
15
10
10
3/45
1/20
B-3 General Business
30
12
20
6
15
10
10
3/45
1/20
BP Business Park
30
12
20
10
15
10
10
4/60
1/20
LI Light Industrial
30
12
20
10
10
5
10
2/30
1/20
GI General Industrial
40
15
30
10
10
5
10
4/60
2/35
RM Rural Mix
50
30
20
40
15
10
10
3/45
2.5/35
(a)
(a) SeSee e Section 94Section 94.4.09(1) for standards related to .4.09(1) for standards related to detached accessory buildings located within front yard areas, minimum separation requirements associated with detached detached accessory buildings located within front yard areas, minimum separation requirements associated with detached accessory structures, and other standards associated with detached accessory structures.accessory structures, and other standards associated with detached accessory structures.
(b)
(b) Additional setbacks may be required along zoAdditional setbacks may be required along zoning district boundaries for bufferyards, if required for a particular land use in Article 4 or ning district boundaries for bufferyards, if required for a particular land use in Article 4 or Section 94Section 94.11.11.02.02(3)(3)(d).(d).
(c)
(c) Includes all gravelIncludes all gravel and hard surfaces as defined in Section 94.17.04and hard surfaces as defined in Section 94.17.04.. This setback excludes intrusions required for driveway entrances and permitted or required for cross This setback excludes intrusions required for driveway entrances and permitted or required for cross access driveways and pedestrian ways; shared driveways; and shared parking lots.access driveways and pedestrian ways; shared driveways; and shared parking lots.
(d)
(d) Front and street side yard setbacks for accessory Front and street side yard setbacks for accessory structures as the same as the minimum front and street side setback for the principal structure.structures as the same as the minimum front and street side setback for the principal structure.
[Amended via Ord. 16-046, 12/21/2016; Ord. 17-026, 8/23/2017]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: MARCH 19, 2020
Section 94.5.08: Calculating Maximum Permitted Density
in AR District
through Section 94.5.08: Calculating Maximum Permitted Density
in AR District
Article 5: DENSITY, INTENSITY AND BULK REGULATIONS 5-12
Section 94.5.08: Calculating Maximum Permitted Density in AR District .5.08: Calculating Maximum Permitted Density in AR District
(1) Calculation Method. The method described in this Section shall be used to calculate the maximum permitted number of dwelling units on lands in the AR Agriculture and Residential district.
(a) Determine Parcel(s) to be used in Calculation. Determine whether calculation of maximum residential density will be based on a single parcel (e.g., a single ¼ ¼ section of land), or on all lands in contiguous common ownership. Generally, maximum density will be calculated on a parcel basis. However, when there is more than one common contiguous parcel, the applicant is encouraged to include all AR zoned lands in contiguous common ownership in the calculation.
(b) Measure Parcel/Ownership Area. Measure the “gross site area” of the individual parcel or contiguous common ownership lands, including all roads and navigable waters that are within the deed parcel.
(c) Incorporate Density Factor. Divide the gross site area by 20 and round up if any fractional amount is equal to ½ or greater. This is the total number of dwelling units that are permitted on the lands zoned AR, including preexisting dwellings and other preexisting principal uses.
(d) Small Parcels. Individual, legally created parcels that are less than 20 acres in gross site area in the AR district shall be allowed a total of one dwelling unit. No further residential dwelling units or principal land uses shall be permitted while the land remains under AR zoning on individual parcels less than 20 acres.
(e) Figure 5.03 shows one of several possible approaches of how the total of 4 dwelling units might be constructed on an 80-acre example contiguous common ownership tract zoned AR.
[Amended via Ord. 16-015, 4/20/2016]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: MARCH 19, 2020
Section 94.5.08: Calculating Maximum Permitted Density
in AR District
through Section 94.5.08: Calculating Maximum Permitted Density
in AR District
Article 5: DENSITY, INTENSITY AND BULK REGULATIONS 5-13
Figure 5.03: Example of “1 per 20” Density in AR Zoning District
(2) Demarcation on Official Zoning Map. Upon the date of the first permit for a residential dwelling unit or other principal use under the provisions of this Section, the Zoning Administrator shall mark the associated parcel or set of contiguous common ownership lands as AR-C (with the “C” representing cluster) on the Official Zoning Map. The Zoning Administrator shall keep track of the total number of dwelling units or other principal uses created and remaining on each parcel or set of contiguous common ownership lands from the date of that first permit and may also mark remaining dwelling units for each parcel or set of contiguous common ownership lands on the Official Zoning Map. All additional dwelling units or other principal uses following that initial date shall conform to the maximum density calculated for the parcel or contiguous common ownership lands as such lands were sized and configured on that initial date.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: MARCH 19, 2020
Section 94.5.08: Calculating Maximum Permitted Density
in AR District
through Section 94.5.08: Calculating Maximum Permitted Density
in AR District
Article 5: DENSITY, INTENSITY AND BULK REGULATIONS 5-14
(3) Recorded Document Required. In conjunction with the division of the first residential lot or permitting of the first new residence on a parcel in the AR zoning district, the landowner must record a document in the Marathon County Register of Deeds Office reflecting how the allotted number of dwelling units are to be allocated among the affected parcels. This shall be done prior to the recording of any land division, and in a form approved by the Zoning Administrator. Subsequent modifications to any such recorded document, changing the allotment or assignment of principal uses or otherwise, shall be permitted only upon advance written authorization of the Zoning Administrator. The land owner shall then record a new or amended document showing the modifications.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Article 6: OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 6-1
Article 6: OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.6.01: Purpose and Application of Overlay
Districts
through Section 94.6.02: D Design Overlay District
Article 6: OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 6-2
Section 94.6.01: Purpose and Application of Overlay Districts
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to establish and convey overlay zoning districts wherein certain additional requirements are superimposed on the underlying standard zoning districts set forth in Article 2 of this Chapter. Each overlay district is intended to address a special land use circumstance beyond those addressed by the underlying standard zoning district.
(2) Representation on Zoning Map. Except where otherwise stated, the overlay zoning districts described in this Article are represented on the Official Zoning Map (or on a separate Official Overlay Zoning Map). The boundaries or presence of each overlay zoning district may be amended via the rezoning procedure in Section 94.16.03.
(3) Other Overlay Zoning Districts. Floodplain, shoreland, and shoreland-wetland overlay zoning districts are described in separate articles of this Chapter, as each is adopted, maintained, enforced, and from time to time amended under unique state statutory requirements.
Section 94.6.02: D Design Overlay District
(1) Description and Purpose. The D Design overlay district is intended to codify unique and specific site and building design standards to preserve and enhance the appearance, character, and property values of key districts within the Village. The unique design standards applicable within each D district are either included in this section or within separate plans or ordinances duly adopted by the Village Board, as indicated in this section.
(2) D Design Overlay District Boundaries. The boundaries of each D overlay district are as depicted on the Official Zoning Map and/or Official Overlay Zoning Map. A unique suffix is applied to each D district related to its geographic area or district name.
(3) Established D Design Overlay Districts. The following D Design overlay districts, and documents within which design standards are located, are as follows:
(a) D-CONDO Condominium Overlay. The Village Board hereby exercises the authority set forth in Wis. Stat. § 703.27 in the regulation of condominiums. This Chapter does not impose a greater burden or restriction and does not provide a lower level of service to a condominium than would be imposed or is imposed if the condominium ownership were under a different form of ownership.
1. Rezoning to the D-CONDO district shall be per Section 94.16.02. In addition to the normal rezoning application requirements in that section, the applicant shall submit a condominium plat and site plan meeting the requirements of Section 94.16.09.
2. No use or structure in the D-CONDO district shall be established, maintained, or expanded except in conformity with a condominium plat and site plan approved under Section 94.16.09. Such requirements and conditions made a part of an approved condominium plat and site plan shall be, along with the site plan itself, construed to be and enforced as a part of this Chapter.
3. Within the D-CONDO overlay district, the only permitted uses shall be residences in the condominium form of ownership, Community Garden, Passive Outdoor Public Recreation, Active Outdoor Public Recreation, Public Service or Utility, Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents), Detached Accessory Structure (for Residential Use), Family Day Care Home (4-8 children), Home Occupation, and Private Lake (Pond).
4. Density, Intensity and Bulk Regulations in Article 5 shall be applied to each development within the D-CONDO district to the extent determined practical by the Village approval authority at the time of rezoning to the D-CONDO district, or subsequent condominium plat and site plan amendment approved by the Village.
5. Each D-CONDO district shall be no less than two acres in area.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.6.02: D Design Overlay District through Section 94.6.02: D Design Overlay District
Article 6: OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 6-3
6. Each interior condominium site shall be at least 24 feet in width. Each condominium site located on a corner of a public street shall be at least 48 feet in width. Each interior condominium site that is intended to be at the end of a row of attached condominium units shall be at least 34 feet wide.
7. Each condominium development shall not exceed a density of seven dwelling units per acre, not including street rights-of-way and stormwater detention areas.
8. No more than four condominium units shall be built in a row having the same building line. In a condominium building having more than four dwelling units, the required minimum offset in the building line shall be three feet. No single condominium building shall exceed 250 feet in any horizontal dimension.
(b) D-RT Rail-to-Trail Overlay. This district is intended to establish unique controls for lands, buildings, and uses adjacent to the Mountain Bay Trail and other potential “rail-to-trail” conversions in the Village, while still providing for an appealing environment for recreational use of the trail. This district promotes coordinated site planning as a means to achieve flexibility from certain provisions normally applicable to development in the underlying standard zoning district.
1. Rezoning to the D-RT overlay district shall be per Section 94.16.02. In addition to the normal rezoning application requirements in that section, the applicant shall submit a site plan meeting the requirements of Section 94.16.09, along with a written explanation of why D-RT zoning is desired and how the standards of this subsection will be met.
2. No use in the D-RT district shall be established, maintained, or expanded except in conformity with a site plan approved under Section 94.16.09. Such requirements and conditions made a part of an approved site plan shall be, along with the site plan itself, construed to be and enforced as a part of this Chapter.
3. Specific lot size, density, open space, building location, height, size, floor area, screening and other such requirements within each site zoned D-RT shall be based upon determination as to their appropriateness to the proposed uses or structures as they relate to the total environmental concept of the development, and consistent with the purpose of this Chapter. The D-RT district does not allow any greater range of land uses than that allowed within the underlying standard zoning district.
4. Design of and relative to adjoining properties, streets, sidewalks, street lighting, storm drainage, lot size, lot arrangement, screening, or other elements of the site development shall be based upon determination as to the appropriate standards necessary to effectively implement the specific function in the specific situation, and compatible with the trail. In no case shall minimal standards be less than those necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare in the determination of the Village.
5. The site plan shall be prepared with competent professional advice and guidance and shall produce significant benefits in terms of improved environmental design in the determination of the Village approval authorities.
6. The site plan shall reflect sensitive consideration of the physical nature of the site with particular concern for conservation of natural features, preservation of open spaces, careful consideration of terrain and landscaping which protects and enhances the recreational use of the trail, and proper drainage and preservation of natural terrain wherever appropriate.
7. The site plan shall serve to implement the spirit and intent of the Village’s Comprehensive Plan and Parks and Open Space Plan, especially as related to preservation of conservation and recreation areas, creation of common open spaces, and establishment of a diversified and interesting development pattern.
8. The proposed design shall be functional in terms of circulation, parking, emergency services, delivery of other services and utilities, and snowplowing. Applicable building and site design,
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.6.02: D Design Overlay District through Section 94.6.02: D Design Overlay District
Article 6: OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 6-4
landscaping, and performance standards within Articles 10 through 12 shall be met, except where specifically waived or modified by the Plan Commission.
(c) D-CC Commercial Corridor Overlay. The purpose of the D-CC overlay district is to establish a greater development design requirements along the most highly traveled, utilized, and visited roadway corridors in the Village. The objectives are to achieve a more unified vision and development form along these corridors, promote orderly and comprehensive development proposals, direct site and building designs that will stand the test of time, enhance the image of and entryway experiences in the Village, facilitate motor vehicle, bike, and pedestrian movement, enhance the surrounding neighborhoods, and create a unique sense of place. See definition of placemaking in Section 94.17.04. Single-family and two-family dwellings are exempt from the requirements of the D-CC district, and may not benefit from the bonus densities or setbacks if in this overlay district.
1. The maximum allowable floor area ratio (FAR) in the D-CC overlay zone may exceed that allowed in the base zoning district under Figure 5.02(1), per the following schedule (totals are additive):
a. Add 0.5 FAR if outdoor recreational, leisure, plazas, dining, activity, or other similar space is incorporated into the development, not including space in parking lots;
b. Add 0.5 FAR if one or more buildings in the development includes residential uses combined with commercial service, retail, office, and/or institutional uses;
c. Add 0.25 FAR if development includes residential uses in separate buildings from commercial service, retail, office, and/or institutional uses on the same site. Add 0.50 FAR if development includes other features to mitigate the impact of greater density on the environment, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, such as graduated setbacks of upper stories, exceptional building transparency (windows), pervious pavement, and vegetative or active roofs.
2. Where the base zoning district is INT, B-2, B-3, or B-P, the minimum required setback from the principal building to the front and street side lot lines shall be building setbacks in Figure 5.02(2) shall be reduced to 15 feet.
3. The maximum required setback from each new principal building to the front lot line shall be 40 feet, except for multiple building developments where at least 50% of the street frontage is occupied by buildings that meet this requirement.
4. All loading and service areas shall be orientated away from all street frontages. In cases where the parcel is surrounded by right-of-way on three or more sides, this requirement may be waived; however, any such area shall be screened by a landscaped bufferyard as established in Section 94.11.02(3)(d) or by a wall or fence as described below.
5. Parking lots shall be orientated to the rear and/or side of the buildings, and not closer to the front lot line than the principal building except in multiple building developments where at least 50% of the street frontage is occupied by buildings.
6. Parking facilities within a parcel may be shared if multiple uses cooperatively establish and operate parking facilities and if these uses generate parking demands primarily when the remaining uses are not in operation. Applicants shall make an application to the Zoning Administrator for authorization for shared parking. Applicants shall include a draft of the easement establishing formal shared-parking between the applicant and all affected property owners. Shared parking arrangements may be approved by the site plan approval authority upon determination that the above stated off-street parking requirements for each use are met during said use's operational hours.
7. Buildings and parking lots shall be orientated to facilitate and protect pedestrian movement, such as via a pedestrian plaza or promenade. All public and employee building entryways shall be connected via walkways to parking lots.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.6.03: WHP Wellhead Protection Area Overlay
District
through Section 94.6.03: WHP Wellhead Protection Area Overlay
District
Article 6: OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 6-5
8. Wherever practical in the determination of the Zoning Administrator, public roadway access shall be shared, and cross-access driveways and pedestrian ways shall be provided, between adjoining properties.
9. All utility systems including, but not limited to water, electric, gas, sewer, storm water, telephone, fiber optics servicing the site, shall be installed underground.
10. Wall and fences between the street side landscaping area and the building shall not exceed 3 feet in height unless used to screen public plazas, patios, outdoor dining areas or similar permitted outdoor uses in conformance with Section 94.4.05(11). Materials and design of all walls and fences shall be consistent with the architectural theme and materials of the building.
11. Materials and design of all walls, fences, refuse and recycling enclosures, signs, and exterior lighting shall be unified across the site and consistent with the architectural theme of the building. No wall, fence, or enclosure shall exceed 6 feet in height. Roofed enclosures may exceed this limit but shall be no higher than 10 feet in height.
12. If specified in an adopted element of the Village’s Comprehensive Plan for the particular geographic area in which the development is proposed, building, site, landscaping and other design components of the proposed development shall conform to the standards in that Comprehensive Plan element.
13. The Plan Commission may approve a waiver or modification to one or more of the above requirements where it finds such requirement(s) would create practical difficulties in the development of the site and compensating design elements are incorporated.
(d) D-WM Weston Marketplace Overlay. Design requirements are included within the Schofield Avenue Lifestyle Center Master Plan, dated October 19, 2006, amendments made to the Weston Center Master Plan, dated November 6, 2013 and now known as the Weston Marketplace Master Plan and as such plan may be amended or supplemented from time to time by the Plan Commission under the site plan approval procedures in Section 94.16.09. All future buildings depicted in such plan shall utilize materials, architectural design, and signage that are consistent with those used on the constructed “Retail Center #1” in such Plan. The areas around such buildings shall be landscaped in accordance with such Plan.
(e) D-R Renaissance Development Overlay. Design requirements are included within the Renaissance Development Plan, dated December 19, 2007 and as such plan may be amended or supplemented from time to time by the Plan Commission under the site plan approval procedures in Section 94.16.09.
[Amended via Ord. 15-005, 5/22/2015]
Section 94.6.03: WHP Wellhead Protection Area Overlay District
(1) Description and Purpose. The Village depends exclusively on ground water for a safe drinking water supply. Certain land use practices and activities can seriously threaten or degrade ground water quality. The purpose of this Section is to institute land use regulations and restrictions to protect the Village’s municipal water supply and well fields, and to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the residents, employees, and visitors of the Village. The restrictions imposed in this Section are in addition to those of the underlying standard zoning district or any other provisions of this Chapter. This section is established under the authority of Wis. Stat. § 62.23(7)(a) and (c) and Wis. Admin. Code NR Chapter 811.
(2) Wellhead Protection Area Overlay District Boundaries. The regulations of this Section shall apply to land within Wellhead Protection Area district boundaries mapped as “WHP” on the Official Zoning Map and/or Official Overlay Zoning Map. The WHP district is further divided into WHP-A and WHP-B, on the Map, indicating different zones of groundwater contribution to the associated well. WHP-A indicates
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.6.03: WHP Wellhead Protection Area Overlay
District
through Section 94.6.03: WHP Wellhead Protection Area Overlay
District
Article 6: OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 6-6
one-year time of travel to the wellhead (Zone A); WHP-B indicates five year time of travel (Zone B). The list of conditional and prohibited uses in the WHP district varies depending on whether the property is in WHP-A or WHP-B per Figure 6.03.
(3) Separation Distance Requirements. Minimum separation distances listed in Wis. Admin. Code NR Chapter 811 shall be maintained between the well and other potential sources of contamination, per Wis. Admin. Code NR §811.12(5)(d), where such potential sources of contamination were not in existence on the date that the district was first mapped on the Official Zoning Map or Official Overlay Zoning Map in that area and were not in continuous operation following that date. Such potential sources of contamination include, but may not be limited to:
(a) Emergency or standby power system.
(b) Storm water retention or detention pond.
(c) Storm sewer main.
(d) Sanitary sewer main, manhole, lift station.
(e) Storage tank for gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances.
(f) Private on-site wastewater treatment system tank or dispersal component.
(g) Cemetery.
(h) Land application of municipal, commercial, or industrial waste.
(i) Agricultural, industrial, commercial or municipal waste water treatment plant, treatment units, lagoons, or storage structures.
(j) Manure stacks or storage structures.
(k) Solid waste storage, transportation, transfer, incineration, air curtain destructor, processing, wood burning, one-time disposal or small demolition facility.
(l) Sanitary landfill.
(m) Any property with residual groundwater contamination that exceeds NR 140 enforcement standards.
(n) Salt or deicing material storage area.
(4) Conditional and Prohibited Uses. Figure 6.03 lists land uses that are conditional and prohibited (restricted) land uses within the different WHP districts, with a “C” indicating conditional status and a “R” indicating prohibited (or restricted) status. The land uses listed as conditional uses within a particular Wellhead Protection Area overlay district are only allowed if such uses are also listed as permitted or conditional uses in the underlying standard zoning district (See Figures 3.04 and 3.05). Uses marked with a “P” and other uses not listed below are permitted by right in the associated Wellhead Protection Area overlay district, provided that such uses are also permitted by right in the underlying standard zoning district. Any of the following uses that are not allowed in the underlying standard zoning district, per Figures 3.04 and 3.05, may not be established in the Wellhead Protection Area district that overlays that standard zoning district. All uses shall be further subject to the separation standards in subsection (3). Existing potential sources of contamination and land uses as of March 18, 2015 shall be permitted to continue subject to the requirements in subsection (6) below.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.6.03: WHP Wellhead Protection Area Overlay
District
through Section 94.6.03: WHP Wellhead Protection Area Overlay
District
Article 6: OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 6-7
Figure 6.03: Conditional (C), Prohibited (R), and Permitted (P) Uses in WHP Overlay Districts Land Use Status in WHP-A District Status in WHP-B District
Animal confinement facilities
R
C
Asphalt products manufacturing plants
R
C
Automobile fueling, service, painting, repair, and/or maintenance facilities
C
P
Building materials and product sales
C
P
Buried or exposed hydrocarbon- or hazardous chemical storage tanks. Hazardous chemicals are identified by OSHA criteria under 40 CFR Part 370, but not including residential LP gas tanks.
R
C
Car washes
C
P
Cartage and express facilities
C
P
Cemeteries
C
C
Center-pivot or other large-scale irrigated agriculture operations
C
C
Chemical storage, sale, processing, and/or manufacturing facilities
C
C
Coal storage facilities
R
R
Composting and post-consumer material recycling and storage facilities
C
C
Dry cleaning establishments
R
C
Dumping or disposing of garbage, refuse, trash, or demolition material, including landfills but excluding composting and post-consumer recycling and storage facilities
R
R
Electronic circuit assembly plants
C
P
Electroplating plants
C
P
Exterminating shops
R
P
Fertilizer or pesticide manufacturing or storage, facilities
R
C
Foundries and forge plants
C
C
Industrial liquid waste storage areas, indoor.
C
C
Industrial waste storage facilities, outdoor, such as industrial lagoons and pits
R
R
Junk yards and salvage yards
R
C
Manure and animal waste storage facilities, except for animal waste storage facilities regulated by Marathon County
R
C
Metal plating, reduction, and/or refinement plants
C
P
Mineral extraction operations
C
C
Motor and machinery service and assembly shops
C
C
Motor freight terminals, rail yards
C
C
Petroleum products processing
R
C
Pharmaceuticals manufacturing
C
C
Photography studios involving the developing of film and pictures (digital excluded)
C
P
Plastics manufacturing
C
P
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.6.03: WHP Wellhead Protection Area Overlay
District
through Section 94.6.03: WHP Wellhead Protection Area Overlay
District
Article 6: OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 6-8
Land Use Status in WHP-A District Status in WHP-B District
Printing and publishing establishments
C
C
Private on-site wastewater treatment systems designed for 12,000+ gallons per day flow
C
C
Private on-site wastewater treatment systems on new lots under 20,000 square feet
C
P
Pulp and paper manufacturing
C
C
Rendering plants and slaughterhouses
R
R
Salt or de-icing storage facilities
C
C
Septage, wastewater, or sewage spreading, storage, treatment or disposal, outdoor, except for lagoons and pits exclusively for industrial use
R
C
Storage, manufacturing or disposal of toxic or hazardous materials not otherwise listed
R
C
Storage or processing of extremely hazardous substances, radioactive materials or substances listed in Table 1, Wis. Admin. Code NR Chapter 140. (Extremely hazardous substances are identified by SARA/EPCRA criteria under 40 CFR Parts 302 and 355.)
R
R
Underground petroleum products storage tanks, and above-ground petroleum product storage tanks greater than 660 gallons. All new or replaced tanks shall also be installed in compliance with Wis. Admin. Code SPS Chapter 10.
C
P
Woodworking, wood preserving, and wood products manufacturing
C
P
[Amended via Ord. 16-005, 4/20/2016]
(5) Conditional Use Permit Application Review Requirements.
(a) Application. In addition to conditional use permit application requirements in Section 94.16.06, the request shall include an environmental impact study or environmental assessment prepared by a licensed environmental engineer. Said report shall be forwarded to an engineer designated by the Village for recommendation and final decision by the Village. The applicant shall reimburse the Village for all consultant fees associated with this review at the invoiced amount plus administrative costs.
(b) Criteria. General criteria for conditional use permit approval are included within Section 94.16.06(7). In its consideration of conditional use permit applications for one of the listed conditional uses in subsection (4) within the associated Wellhead Protection Area overlay district, the Plan Commission shall also consider the following additional criteria:
1. The Village's responsibility as a public water supplier to protect and preserve public health, safety and welfare.
2. The potential of the proposed use to seriously threaten or degrade groundwater quality.
3. The availability of alternative uses, locations, and operational characteristics, and the cost, effect, and extent of availability of such alternatives.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.6.03: WHP Wellhead Protection Area Overlay
District
through Section 94.6.03: WHP Wellhead Protection Area Overlay
District
Article 6: OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 6-9
4. The proximity of the applicant's property to other potential sources of contamination or vulnerable activities or uses.
5. The then-existing condition of the associated well, well field, well recharge area, and the vulnerability to further contamination.
6. The direction of flow of groundwater and other factors in the area of the applicant's property which may affect the speed of the groundwater flow, including topography, depth of soil, extent of aquifer, depth to water table, and location of private wells.
7. The zone of contribution for, or distance from, the associated well within which the proposed use is located.
8. Any other hydrogeological data or information which is available from any public or private agency or organization.
9. The potential benefit, both economic and social, from the approval of the application.
(c) Approval Conditions. In its approval of any conditional use permit within the Wellhead Protection Area overlay district, the Plan Commission may impose conditions to provide:
1. Environmental and/or safety monitoring to indicate whether the potential sources of contamination may be emitting any contaminants.
2. A financial guarantee in a form and amount determined by the Village for future monitoring and cleanup costs.
3. Any requirement authorized for existing potential sources of contamination and land uses under subsection (6).
(6) Requirements for Existing Potential Sources of Contamination and Land Uses.
(a) At the request of the Zoning Administrator, existing potential sources of contamination and land uses, as defined under Section 94.17.04, shall provide to the Village copies of all federal, state and local facility operation approvals or certificates and ongoing environmental monitoring results.
(b) Existing potential sources of contamination and land uses shall provide additional environmental or safety monitoring as deemed necessary by the Village Board, including the production of any and all environmental statements detailing the extent of chemical use and storage on the property.
(c) Existing potential sources of contamination and land uses, when upgrading or expanding, shall replace equipment or expand in a manner that improves existing environmental and safety technologies and performance. Before such operations upgrade or expand, the owner or operator may be required to obtain conditional use permit and/or site plan approval under this Chapter. If a conditional use under this Section, the operation would be required to comply with all applicable provisions of this Section, to the extent determined practical by the designated Village approval authority.
(d) At the request and to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator, existing potential sources of contamination and land uses shall prepare and file with the Village, a contingency plan for unexpected release of contaminants or other emergency events.
(e) Property owners with an existing agricultural use are exempt from requirements of this section as they relate to restrictions on agricultural uses, but such exemption shall only apply to operations in existence as of the date that the Wellhead Protection Area district was first mapped on the Official Zoning Map in that area, and continually operating after that date.
(7) Violations and Compliance. In the event an individual and/or potential source of contamination within the Wellhead Protection Area district causes the release of any contaminants which endanger the public, in the determination of the Village, the individual and/or potential source of contamination causing said release shall immediately cease and desist and initiate clean-up satisfactory to the Village and
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.6.04: AH Airport Height Limitation Overlay
District
through Section 94.6.04: AH Airport Height Limitation Overlay
District
Article 6: OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 6-10
the other State and Federal regulatory agencies. The person or other entity who releases such contaminants and the person who owns the potential source of contamination whereon the contaminants have been released shall be jointly and severally responsible for the cost of clean-up, consultant or other contractor fees, and all administrative costs for oversight, review and documentation, including for Village employees, contractors, equipment, and mileage. Following any such release, the Village may require additional environmental and/or safety monitoring. As a substitute for or in addition to any other action authorized above and under Section 94.16.19, the Village may commence legal action against the individual and/or potential source of contamination to recover the costs, together with the costs of prosecution.
Section 94.6.04: AH Airport Height Limitation Overlay District
(1) Description and Purpose. The AH Airport Height Limitation Overlay District is intended to regulate the height of structures relative to air travel associated with the Wausau Downtown Airport, in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of airport users and residents and employees within the surrounding area. In addition to the standards in this Section, lands within the AH district may also subject to the regulations set forth in Title 22 of the City of Wausau Municipal Code.
(2) AH Airport Height Limitation Overlay District Boundaries. The AH District extends to many areas under the geographic jurisdiction of this Chapter, limiting the height and use of structures within such jurisdiction. As such, the AH district may not be shown on the Village’s Official Zoning Map and/or Official Overlay Zoning Map. The map listed in subsection (3)(a) serves as the official height limitation zoning map.
(3) AH Airport Height Limitation Overlay District Requirements.
(a) The maximum height above mean sea level of all new or expanded structures shall be as indicated on the Height Limitation Zoning Map, Wausau Downtown Airport, Wausau, WI (Wisconsin Bureau of Aeronautics) dated December 6, 2007, as from time to time amended. The Zoning Administrator may permit a greater height than specified by such Map, if such greater height is favorably recommended by the Bureau of Aeronautics. This requirement shall not be applied retroactively to any structure lawfully erected before December 6, 2007, except if a subsequent vertical expansion of such a structure is sought.
(b) Prior to issuing or authorizing a zoning permit or building permit, the Zoning Administrator may require any information deemed necessary to make a determination regarding compliance with the requirements of AH district (such as exact height, location, and current and finished ground elevation of the structure) and/or refer the application to the airport owner or operator or the Wisconsin Bureau of Aeronautics for recommendation. If the Zoning Administrator elects to refer the application, the normally required timeframe for issuing a zoning permit or building permit under this Chapter and the Building Code shall be extended by ten days.
(c) No use may be made in the AH district that causes interference with radio or electronic facilities associated with the airport and any lighting that makes it difficult to distinguish airport lights, results in glare in pilot’s eyes, or otherwise impairs visibility.
(d) Other than any use that meets the criteria in subsection (c), all allowable uses and structures within the AH District shall comply with all other applicable standards of the underlying standard zoning district and any other applicable overlay district requirements with regard to use and all other requirements.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-1
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.01: Title through Section 94.7.05: General Provisions
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-2
Section 94.7.01: Title
This article shall be known as the Floodplain Zoning Ordinance for the Village of Weston, Marathon County, Wisconsin.
Section 94.7.02: Statutory authorization
This article is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stats. § 61.35 and 62.23, for villages and cities; and the requirements in Wis. Stat. § 87.30.
Section 94.7.03: Finding of fact
Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of this municipality would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general welfare and tax base.
Section 94.7.04: Statement of purpose
This article is intended to regulate floodplain development to:
(1) Protect life, health and property;
(2) Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects;
(3) Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the taxpayers;
(4) Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
(6) Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain;
(7) Discourage the victimization of unwary land and homebuyers;
(8) Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in conflicts between property owners; and
(9) Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain.
Section 94.7.05: General Provisions
(1) Areas to be regulated. This article regulates all areas that would be covered by the regional flood or base flood as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or other maps approved by DNR. Base flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and are shown as AE, A1-30, and AH Zones on the FIRM. Other regulatory zones are displayed as A and AO zones. Regional Flood Elevations (RFE) may be derived from other studies. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply.
(2) Official maps and revisions. The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as A, AE, AH, AO or A1-30 on the maps based on the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) listed below. Any change to the base flood elevations (BFE) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by the DNR and FEMA before it is effective. No changes to regional flood elevations (RFE's) on non-FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions are on file in the office of the zoning administrator, Village of Weston. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply.
(a) Official Maps. Based on the FIS:
1. Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), panel numbers 55073C0412F, 55073C0416F, 55073C0417F, Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), panel numbers 55073C0412F, 55073C0416F, 55073C0417F, 55073C0418F, 55073C0419F, 55073C0438F, 55073C0652F, 55073C0660F, 55073C0700F of 1000, 55073C0418F, 55073C0419F, 55073C0438F, 55073C0652F, 55073C0660F, 55073C0700F of 1000, community panel number 550323, dated July 22, 2010; and panel numbers 55073C0411G acommunity panel number 550323, dated July 22, 2010; and panel numbers 55073C0411G and nd 55073C0413G of 1000, community panel number 550323, dated September 28, 2018; with 55073C0413G of 1000, community panel number 550323, dated September 28, 2018; with
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.05: General Provisions through Section 94.7.05: General Provisions
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-3
corresponding profiles that are based on the Flood Insurance Study FIS dated September 28,
corresponding profiles that are based on the Flood Insurance Study FIS dated September 28, 2018, Volume number 55073CV000B.2018, Volume number 55073CV000B.
2. Approved by:Approved by: The DNR and FEMAThe DNR and FEMA
(b) Official Maps. Based on other studies. Any maps referenced in this section must be approved by the DNR and be more restrictive than those based on the FIS at the site of the proposed development.
(3) Establishment of Floodplain Zoning districts. The regional floodplain areas are divided into three districts as follows:
(a) The Floodway District (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional floodwaters and are contained within AE Zones as shown on the FIRM.
(b) The Floodfringe District (FF) is that portion of the floodplain between the regional flood limits and the floodway and displayed as AE Zones on the FIRM.
(c) The General Floodplain District (GFP) is those areas that may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood and does not have a BFE or floodway boundary determined, including A, AH and AO zones on the FIRM.
(4) Locating floodplain boundaries. Discrepancies between boundaries on the official floodplain zoning map and actual field conditions shall be resolved using the criteria in paragraphs (a) or (b) below. If a significant difference exists, the map shall be amended according to Section 94.7.12. The zoning administrator can rely on a boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land use permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual pre-development field conditions and the basis upon which the district boundary was determined and for initiating any map amendments required under this section. Disputes between the zoning administrator and an applicant over the district boundary line shall be settled according to Section 94.7.11(3)(c). and the criteria in (a) and (b) below. Where the flood profiles are based on established base flood elevations from FIRM, FIMA must approve any map amendment or revision pursuant to Section 94.7.12 Amendments.
(a) If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall determine the district boundary. The regional or base flood elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies.
(b) Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the map scale.
(5) Removal of lands from floodplain. Compliance with the provisions of this ordinance shall not be grounds for removing land from the floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the map is amended pursuant to Section 94.7.12.
(6) Compliance. Any development or use within the areas regulated by this ordinance shall be in compliance with the terms of this ordinance, and other applicable local, state, and federal regulations.
(7) Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this ordinance and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stat. § 13.48(13) applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation is exempt when Wis. Stat. § 30.2022 applies.
(8) Abrogation and greater restrictions.
(a) This article supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance enacted under Wis. Stat. § 61.35 for villages; or Wis. Stat. § 87.30 which relate to floodplains. If another ordinance is more restrictive than this article, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.06: General standards applicable to all
floodplain districts
through Section 94.7.06: General standards applicable to all
floodplain districts
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-4
greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
(b) This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail.
(9) Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article are the minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of the governing body and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. If a provision of this article, required by Wis. Admin. Code NR Chapter 116, is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this ordinance or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this article.
(10) Warning and disclaimer of liability. The flood protection standards in this article are based on engineering experience and research. Larger floods may occur, or the flood height may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply or guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free from flooding and flood damages. This article does not create liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the municipality or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that may result from reliance on this article.
(11) Severability. Should any portion of this article be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be affected.
(12) Annexed areas for cities and villages. The Marathon County floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code NR Chapter 116, and 44 CRF 59-72, National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed lands are described on the Village's official zoning map. County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of the municipal zoning administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and the location of the floodway.
Section 94.7.06: General standards applicable to all floodplain districts
The Village shall review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with flood resistant materials; be constructed to minimize flood damages and to ensure that utility and mechanical equipment is designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the equipment during conditions of flooding. Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above standards. All subdivision proposals (including manufactured home parks) shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data for any development that meets the subdivision definition of this article and all other requirements in Section 97.7.11(1)(b). Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
(1) Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses.
(a) No floodplain development shall:
1. Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development, increasing regional flood height; or
2. Cause any increase in the regional flood height due to floodplain storage area lost.
(b) The zoning administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the proposed development will obstruct flow or cause any increase in the regional flood heights, based on the officially adopted
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.06: General standards applicable to all
floodplain districts
through Section 94.7.06: General standards applicable to all
floodplain districts
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-5
FIRM or other adopted map, unless the provisions of Section 94.7.12 Amendments are met.
(2) Watercourse alterations. No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain shall be issued until the local official has notified in writing all adjacent municipalities, the Department and FEMA regional offices and required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal permits. The standards of Section 94.7.06(1) must be met and the flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date of the watercourse alteration or relocation, and pursuant to Section 94.7.12 Amendments, the Village shall apply for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) from FEMA. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR through the LOMC process.
(3) Chapter 30, 31, Wisconsin Statute Development. Development which requires a permit from the Department, under Wis. Stats. Chapters 30 and 31., such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and amendments to the floodway lines, water surface profiles, BFE's established in the FIS, or other data from the officially adopted FIRM, or other floodplain zoning maps or the floodplain zoning ordinance are made according to Section 94.7.12 Amendments.
(4) Public or private campgrounds. Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the following provisions:
(a) The campground is approved by the Department of Health Services.
(b) A land use permit for the campground is issued by the zoning administrator.
(c) The character of the river system and the elevation of the campground is such that a 72-hour warning of an impending flood can be given to all campground occupants.
(d) There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that offers the minimum notice required under this section to all persons in the campground. This procedure shall include a written agreement between the campground owner, the municipal emergency government coordinator and the chief law enforcement official which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems to be used and the procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for conducting the evacuation.
(e) This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated by the officials identified in subparagraph (d). to remain in compliance with all applicable regulations, including those of the state Department of Health Services and all other applicable regulations.
(f) Only camping units that are fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway use are allowed.
(g) The camping units shall not occupy any site in the campground for more than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours.
(h) All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a written copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period not to exceed 180 days and shall ensure compliance with all the provisions of this section.
(i) The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the campground operator to assure compliance with the terms of this section.
(j) All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive days must meet the applicable
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.07: Floodway district (FW) through Section 94.7.07: Floodway district (FW)
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-6
requirements in either Sections 94.7.07, 94.7.08 or 94.7.09 for the floodplain district in which the structure is located.
(k) The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a flood warning is issued.
(l) All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse collection, electrical service, natural gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
Section 94.7.07: Floodway district (FW)
(1) Applicability. This section applies to all floodway areas on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to Section 94.7.09(4).
(2) Permitted uses. The following open space uses are allowed in the floodway district and the floodway areas of the general floodplain district, if
• They are not prohibited by any other ordinance;
• They meet the standards in Sections 94.7.07(3) and 94.7.07(4); and
• All permits or certificates have been issued according to Section 94.7.11(1).
(a) Agricultural uses, such as: farming, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting.
(b) Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking areas and airport landing strips.
(c) Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill limitations of Section 94.7.07(3)(d).
(d) Uses or structures accessory to open space uses or classified as historic structures that comply with Sections 94.7.07(3) and 94.7.07(4).
(e) Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with Section 94.7.07(3)(d).
(f) Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with Wis. Stats. Chapters 30 and 31.
(g) Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with Section 94.7.07(3)(c).
(3) Standards for developments in floodway areas.
(a) General.
1. Any development in floodway areas shall comply with Section 94.7.06 and have a low flood damage potential.
2. Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects of the proposal according to Section 94.7.06(1):
a. A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular to the watercourse, showing if the proposed development will obstruct flow; or
b. An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional flood height.
3. The zoning administrator shall deny the permit application if the project will cause any increase in the flood elevations upstream or downstream, based on the data submitted for subparagraph
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.07: Floodway district (FW) through Section 94.7.07: Floodway district (FW)
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-7
b. above.
(b) Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by permit if the structures comply with the following criteria:
1. Not designed for human habitation, does not have a high flood damage potential and is constructed to minimize flood damage.
2. Shall have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area, and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade. The openings shall be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
3. Must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement;
4. Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or flood proofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and
5. It must not obstruct flow of flood waters or cause any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood.
(c) Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and bridges may be allowed by permit, if:
1. Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood protection elevation; and
2. Construction meets the development standards of Section 94.7.06(1).
(d) Fill or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may be allowed by permit, if:
1. The requirements of Section 94.7.06(1) are met;
2. No material is deposited in the navigable channel unless a permit is issued by the Department pursuant to Wis. Stat. Chapter 30., and a permit pursuant to s. 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344 has been issued, if applicable, and the other requirements of this section are met;
3. The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and
4. The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
(4) Prohibited uses. All uses not listed as permitted uses in Section 94.7.07(2) are prohibited, including the following uses:
(a) Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those not associated with permanent open-space uses;
(b) Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life;
(c) Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining districts;
(d) Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are removed prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational areas and Department-approved campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code SPS Chapter 383;
(e) Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water, except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code NR Chapters 811 and 812;
(f) Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
(g) Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under section Wis. Admin. Code NR §110.15(3)(b);
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.08: Floodfringe district (FF) through Section 94.7.08: Floodfringe district (FF)
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-8
(h) Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or proposed development located outside the floodway which complies with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied.
Section 94.7.08: Floodfringe district (FF)
(1) Applicability. This section applies to all floodfringe areas shown on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to Section 94.7.09(4).
(2) Permitted uses. Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in the floodfringe district if the standards in Section 94.7.08(3) are met, the use is not prohibited by this or any other ordinance or regulation and all permits or certificates specified in Section 94.7.11(1) have been issued.
(3) Standards for development in the floodfringe. Section 94.7.06(1) shall apply in addition to the following requirements according to the use requested. Any existing structure in the floodfringe must meet the requirements of Section 94.7.10 Nonconforming Uses;
(a) Residential uses. Any habitable structure, including a manufactured home, which is to be newly constructed or moved into the floodfringe area, shall meet or exceed the following standards:
1. The elevation of the lowest floor, excluding the basement or crawlway, shall be at or above the flood protection elevation on fill unless the requirements of 94.7.08(3) can be met. The fill shall be one foot or more above the regional flood elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure.
2. The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood elevation if it is dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation;
3. Contiguous dryland access shall be provided from a structure to land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in subparagraph 4.
4. In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations make compliance with subparagraph 3. above impractical, the municipality may permit new development and substantial improvements where access roads are at or below the regional flood elevation, if:
a. The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided to the structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood event; or
b. The municipality has a DNR-approved emergency evacuation plan.
(b) Accessory structures or uses. Accessory structures shall be constructed with its lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation.
(c) Commercial uses. Any commercial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe shall meet the requirements of Section 94.7.08(3)a. Subject to the requirements of Section 94.7.08(3)e., storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property.
(d) Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or industrial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the flood protection elevation or meet the floodproofing standards in Section 94.7.11(5). Subject to the requirements of Section 94.7.08(3)(e), storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property.
(e) Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with Section 94.7.11(5). Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body during flooding.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.09: General floodplain district (GFP) through Section 94.7.09: General floodplain district (GFP)
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-9
(f) Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain development plans; and
1. When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed essential, construction or repair of such facilities shall only be permitted if they are designed to comply with Section 94.7.11(5);
2. Minor roads or non-essential utilities may be constructed at lower elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the Regional Flood Elevation.
(g) Sewage systems. All sewage disposal systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood water into the system, pursuant to Section 94.7.11(5)(c), to the flood protection elevation and meet the provisions of all local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code SPS Chapter 383.
(h) Wells. All wells shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system, pursuant to Section 94.7.11(5)(c), to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code NR Chapters 811 and NR 812.
(i) Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in floodfringe areas.
(j) Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the provisions of this ordinance.
(k) Manufactured homes.
1. Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage, and prepare, secure approval and file an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and escape routes, with local emergency management authorities.
2. In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall:
a. have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation; and
b. be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally during a flood.
3. Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new manufactured home parks and all single units outside of existing parks, all new, replacement and substantially improved manufactured homes shall meet the residential development standards for the floodfringe in Section 94.7.08(3)(a).
(l) Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that are on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and anchoring requirements in Sections 94.7.08(3)(k)2. and 3. A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
Section 94.7.09: General floodplain district (GFP)
(1) Applicability. The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains mapped as A, AO or AH Zones.
(2) Permitted uses. Pursuant to Section 94.7.09(4), it shall be determined whether the proposed use is located within a floodway or floodfringe area.
Those uses permitted in floodway (Section 94.7.07(2)) and floodfringe areas (Section 94.7.08(2)) are allowed within the general floodplain district, according to the standards of Section 94.7.09(3), provided that all permits or certificates required under Section 94.7.11(1) have been issued.
(3) Standards for development in the general floodplain district. Section 94.7.07 applies to floodway areas, Section 94.7.08 applies to floodfringe areas. The rest of this ordinance applies to either district.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.10: Nonconforming uses through Section 94.7.10: Nonconforming uses
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-10
(a) In AO/AH Zones the structure’s lowest floor must meet one of the following conditions, whichever is greater:
1. at or above the flood protection elevation; or
2. two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade around the structure; or
3. The depth as shown on the FIRM
(b) In AO/AH Zones, provide plans showing adequate drainage paths to guide floodwaters around structures.
(4) Determining floodway and floodfringe limits. Upon receiving an application for development within the general floodplain district, the zoning administrator shall:
(a) Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a plan which shows the proposed development with respect to the general floodplain district limits, stream channel, and existing floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and flood proofing measures; and the flood zone as shown on the FIRM.
(b) Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information deemed necessary by the Department to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation and to determine floodway boundaries:
1. A hydrologic and Hydraulic Study as specified in Section 94.7.11(1)(b)3.
2. Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information;
3. Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage, water supply and sanitary facilities.
Section 94.7.10: Nonconforming uses
(1) General.
(a) Applicability. If these standards conform with Wis. Stat. § 87.30, NR 116.15, Wis. Adm. Code and 44 CR 59-72, they shall apply to all modifications or additions to any nonconforming use or structure and to the use of any structure or premises which was lawful before the passage of this article or any amendment thereto.
(b) The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is not in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance may continue subject to the following conditions:
1. No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure shall be permitted unless they comply with this article. For purposes of this article, the words "modification" and "addition" include, but are not limited to, any alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory structure or use. Maintenance is not considered an extension, modification or addition; these include painting, decorating, paneling and other nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of existing private on-site wastewater treatment or water supply systems or connections to public utilities. Any costs associated with the repair of a damaged structure are not considered maintenance.
The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an extension, modification or addition. The roof of
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.10: Nonconforming uses through Section 94.7.10: Nonconforming uses
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-11
the structure may extend over a portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and egress to the principal structure.
2. If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted and any future use of the property, and any structure or building thereon, shall conform to the applicable requirements of this article;
3. The municipality shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value, the cost of all modifications or additions which have been permitted, and the percentage of the structure's total current value those modifications represent;
4. No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the structure would equal or exceed 50% of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with Section 94.7.08(3)(a). The costs of elevating a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are excluded from the 50% provisions of this paragraph;
5. No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, the cost of which would equal or exceed 50% of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with Section 94.7.08(3)(a).
6. If on a per event basis the total value of the work being done under subparagraphs 4. and 5. equals or exceeds 50% of the present equalized assessed value the work shall not be permitted unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with Section 94.7.08(3)(a).
7. Except as provided in subparagraph 8. below, if any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet the current requirements of this article. A structure is considered substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure to its pre-damaged condition equals or exceeds 50% of the structure’s present equalized assessed value.
8. For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such nonconforming building shall be permitted in order to restore it to the size and use in effect prior to the damage event, provided that the minimum federal code requirements below are met and all required permits have been granted prior to the start of construction.
a. Residential Structures
i. Shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation using fill, pilings, columns, posts or perimeter walls. Perimeter walls must meet the requirements of Section 94.7.11(5)(b).
ii. Shall be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy and shall be constructed with methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
iii. Shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.10: Nonconforming uses through Section 94.7.10: Nonconforming uses
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-12
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
iv. In A Zones, obtain, review and utilize any flood data available from a federal, state or other sources.
v. In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in Section 94.7.09(3)(a).
vi. AO Zones shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from the structure.
b. Nonresidential Structures
i. Shall meet the requirements of Sections 94.7.10(1)(b)8.a. i.- ii. and v.- vi.
ii. Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the regional flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall meet the standards in Sections 94.7.11(5)(a) or (b).
iii. In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the lowest floor including basement, meet the standard in Section 94.7.09(3)(a)
(c) A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will not preclude the structures continued designation as a historic structure, the alteration will comply with Section 94.7.07(3)(a)., flood resistant materials are used, and construction practices and floodproofing methods that comply with Section 94.7.11(5) are used. Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures shall be exempt from the development standards of Section 94.7.10(1)(b)8.a. if it is determined that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(2) Floodway District.
(a) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in a floodway district, unless such modification or addition:
1. Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all ordinance requirements;
2. Meets the requirements of Section 94.7.10(1);
3. Shall not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood height;
4. Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed, pursuant to Section 94.7.11(5), by means other than the use of fill, to the flood protection elevation;
5. If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is enclosed, the following standards shall apply:
a. The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of flood waters without human intervention. A minimum of two openings must be provided with a minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the opening can be no more than 12 inches above the adjacent grade;
b. The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials.
c. Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and
d. The use must be limited to parking or limited storage.
(b) No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on-site sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.11: Administration through Section 94.7.11: Administration
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-13
on-site sewage disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code SPS Chapter 383.
(c) No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable water shall be allowed in a floodway district. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code NR Chapters 811 and 812.
(3) Floodfringe district.
(a) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the municipality and meets the requirements of Section 94.7.08(3), except where Section 94.7.10(3)(b). is applicable.
(b) Where compliance with the provisions of par. (a) would result in unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential, the Board of Zoning Appeals, using the procedures established in Section 94.7.11(3), may grant a variance from those provisions of paragraph (a) above for modifications or additions, using the criteria listed below. Modifications or additions which are protected to elevations lower than the flood protection elevation may be permitted if:
1. No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential or commercial structures;
2. Human lives are not endangered;
3. Public facilities, such as water or sewer, shall not be installed;
4. Flood depths will not exceed two feet;
5. Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; and
6. The structure will not be used for storage of materials as described in Section 94.7.08(3)(e).
(c) All new private wastewater treatment systems, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a private wastewater treatment system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code SPS Chapter 383.
(d) All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a well shall meet the applicable provisions of this ordinance and Wis. Admin. Code NR Chapters 811 and 812.
Section 94.7.11: Administration
Where a zoning administrator, Plan Commission or a board of zoning appeals has already been appointed to administer a zoning ordinance adopted under Wis. Stats. §§ 59.69, 59.692 or 62.23(7) these officials shall also administer this article.
(1) Zoning Administrator.
(a) Duties and Powers. The zoning administrator is authorized to administer this ordinance and shall have the following duties and powers under this article:
1. Advise applicants of the ordinance provisions, assist in preparing permit applications and appeals, and assure that the regional flood elevation for the proposed development is shown on all permit applications.
2. Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with provisions of this ordinance, and issue certificates of compliance where appropriate.
3. Inspect and assess all damaged floodplain structures and perform a substantial damage assessment to determine if substantial damage to the structures has occurred.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.11: Administration through Section 94.7.11: Administration
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-14
4. Keep records of all official actions such as:
a. All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved;
b. Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood elevations;
c. Floodproofing Certificates.
d. Water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures including changes, appeals, variances and amendments.
e. All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain structures.
f. List of nonconforming structures and uses.
5. Submit copies of the following items to the Department Regional office:
a. Within 10 days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or text amendments;
b. Copies of any case-by-case analyses, and any other information required by the Department including an annual summary of the number and types of floodplain zoning actions taken.
c. Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all related correspondence concerning the assessments.
6. Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this ordinance to the municipal Plan Commission, Village Board and attorney for prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the Department Regional office.
7. Submit copies of text and map amendments and biennial reports to the FEMA Regional office.
(b) Land use permit. A land use permit shall be obtained before any new development; repair, modification or addition to an existing structure; or change in the use of a building or structure, including sewer and water facilities, may be initiated. Application to the zoning administrator shall include:
1. General information.
a. Name and address of the applicant, property owner and contractor;
b. Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new construction or a modification;
2. Site development plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be submitted with the permit application form and shall contain:
a. Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot:
b. Location of the ordinary highwater mark of any abutting navigable waterways;
c. Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and street center lines;
d. Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply systems;
e. Location and elevation of existing or future access roads;
f. Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from the official floodplain zoning map(s);
g. The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any fill using the vertical datum from the adopted study – either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD);
h. Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to determine whether or not the requirements of Sections 94.7.07 or 94.7.08 are met; and
i. Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or discharge according to Section 94.7.06(1). This may include any of the information noted in Section 94.7.07(3)(a).
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.11: Administration through Section 94.7.11: Administration
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-15
3. Hydraulic and Hydrologic studies to analyze development. All hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be completed under the direct supervision of a professional engineer registered in the State. The study contractor shall be responsible for the technical adequacy of the study. All studies shall be reviewed and approved by the Department.
a. Zone A floodplains
i. Hydrology. The appropriate method shall be based on the standards in Wis. Admin. Code NR § 116.07(3), Hydrological Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Discharge.
ii. Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall be based on the standards in Wis. Admin. Code NR § 116.07(4), Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Elevation and the following:
1. Determination of the required limits of the hydraulic model shall be based on the detailed study information for downstream structures (dam, bridge, and culvert) to determine adequate starting WSEL for the study.
2. Channel sections must be surveyed.
3. Minimum four-foot contour data in the overbanks shall be used for the development of cross section overbank and floodplain mapping.
4. A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross sections is allowed in developed areas with additional intermediate cross sections required at transitions in channel bottom slope including a survey of the channel at each location.
5. The most current version of HEC_RAS shall be used.
6. A survey bridge and culvert openings and the top of road is required at each structure.
7. Additional cross sections are required at the downstream and upstream limits of the proposed development and any necessary intermediate locations based on the length of the reach if greater than 500 feet.
8. Standard accepted engineering practices shall be used when assigning parameters for the base model such as flow, Manning’s N values, expansion and contraction coefficients or effective flow limits. The base model shall be calibrated to past flooding data such as high-water marks to determine the reasonableness of the model results. If no historical data is available, adequate justification shall provide for any parameters outside standard accepted engineering practices.
9. The model must extend past the upstream limit of the difference in the existing and proposed flood profiled in order to provide a tie-in to existing studies. The height difference between the proposed flood profile and the existing study profiles shall be no more than 0.00 feet.
iii. Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be provided, showing all cross-section locations, floodway/floodplain limits based on best available topographic data, geographic limits of the proposed development and whether the proposed development is located in the floodway.
1. If the proposed development is located outside of the floodway, then it is determined to have no impact on the regional flood elevation.
2. If any part of the proposed development is in the floodway, it must be added to the base model to show the difference between existing and proposed conditions. The study must ensure that all coefficients remain the same as in the existing model, unless adequate justification based on standard accepted engineering practices is provided.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.11: Administration through Section 94.7.11: Administration
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-16
b. Zone AE Floodplains
i. Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the existing study, the appropriate method to be used shall be based on Wis. Admin. Code NR § 116.07(3), Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Discharge.
ii. Hydraulic Model. The regional flood elevation shall be based on the standards in Wis. Admin. Code HR §116.07(4), Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Elevation and the following:
1. Duplicated Effective Model. The effective model shall be reproduced to ensure correct transference of the model data and to allow integration of the revised data to provide a continuous FIS model upstream and downstream of the revised reach. If data from the effective model is available, models shall be generated that duplicate the FIS profiles and the elevations shown in the Floodway Data Table in the FIS report to within 0.1 foot.
2. Corrected Effective Model. The Corrected Effective Model shall not include any man-made physical changes since the effective model date but shall import the model into the most current version of HEC-RAS for department review.
3. Existing (Pre-Project Conditions) Model. The existing model shall be required to support conclusions about the actual impacts of the project associated with the Revised (Post –Project) Model or to establish more up-to-date models on which to base the Revised (Post-Project) Model.
4. Revised (Post-Project Conditions) Model. The Revised (Post-Project Conditions) Model shall incorporate the Existing Model and any proposed changes to the topography caused by the proposed development. This model shall reflect proposed conditions.
5. All changes to the Duplicate Effective Model and subsequent models must be supported by certified topographic information, bridge plans, construction plans and survey notes.
6. Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited to the stream reach for which the revision is being requested. Cross sections upstream and downstream of the revised reach shall be identical to those in the effective model and result in water surface elevations and top widths upstream and downstream of the revised reach as required. The Effective Model shall not be truncated.
iii. Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall be submitted to the Department for review which meet the following conditions:
1. Consistency between the revised hydraulic models, the revised floodplain and floodway delineations, the revised flood profiles, topographic work map, annotated FIRMs and/or Flood Boundary Floodway Maps (FBFMs), construction plans and bridge plans.
2. Certified topographic map of suitable scale, contour interval, and a planimetric map showing the applicable items. If a digital version of the map is available, it may be submitted in order that the FIRM may be more easily revised.
3. Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised 1% and 0.2% annual chance floodplains and floodway boundaries.
4. If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital mapping (GIS or CADD) are used, then all supporting documentation or metadata must be included with the data submission along with the Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) projection and State Plan Coordinate System in accordance with FEMA mapping specifications.
5. The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into the effective floodplain boundaries.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.11: Administration through Section 94.7.11: Administration
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-17
6. All cross sections from the effective model shall be labeled in accordance with the effective map and a cross section lookup table shall be included to relate to the model input numbering scheme.
7. Both the current and proposed floodway shall be shown on the map.
8. The stream centerline, or profile baseline used to measure stream distance in the model shall be visible on the map.
4. Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this ordinance shall expire no more than 180 days after issuance. The permit may be extended for a maximum of 180 days for good and sufficient cause.
(c) Certificate of Compliance. No land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning administrator, except where no permit is required, subject to the following provisions:
1. The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the provisions of this ordinance;
2. Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a permit;
3. If all ordinance provisions are met, the certificate of compliance shall be issued within 10 days after written notification that the permitted work is completed;
4. The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor that the fill, lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are in compliance with the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also require certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the requirements of Section 94.7.11(5) are met.
(d) Other Permits. Prior to obtaining a floodplain development permit the applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state, and local agencies, including those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344.
(2) Plan Commission.
(a) Under this article, the Plan Commission shall:
1. Oversee the functions of the office of the zoning administrator; and
2. Review and advise the Village Board on all proposed amendments to this ordinance, maps and text.
(b) This Plan Commission shall not:
1. Grant variances to the terms of the ordinance in place of action by the Board of Zoning Appeals; or
2. Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the Village Board.
(3) Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA). The Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA), created under Wis. Stat. § 62.23(7)(e), for villages, is hereby authorized or shall be appointed to act for the purposes of this article. The ZBA shall exercise the powers conferred by Wisconsin Statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of business. The zoning administrator may not be the secretary of the ZBA.
(a) Powers and duties. Under this article, the ZBA shall:
1. Appeals - Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this article.
2. Boundary Disputes - Hear and decide disputes concerning the district boundaries shown on the
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.11: Administration through Section 94.7.11: Administration
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-18
official floodplain zoning map.
3. Variances - Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the ordinance standards.
(b) Appeals to the ZBA.
1. Appeals to the ZBA may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer or department of the municipality affected by any decision of the zoning administrator or other administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days unless otherwise provided by the rules of the ZBA, by filing with the official whose decision is in question, and with the ZBA, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the ZBA all records regarding the matter appealed.
2. Notice and hearing for appeals including variances.
a. Notice - The ZBA shall:
i. Fix a reasonable time for the hearing;
ii. Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes, specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing;
iii. Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the Department Regional office at least 10 days in advance of the hearing.
b. Hearing - Any party may appear in person or by agent. The ZBA shall:
i. Resolve boundary disputes according to Section 94.7.11(3)(c).
ii. Decide variance applications according to Section 94.7.11(3)(d).
iii. Decide appeals of permit denials according to Section 94.7.11(4)
3. Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance application shall:
a. Be made within a reasonable time;
b. Be sent to the Department Regional office within 10 days of the decision;
c. Be a written determination signed by the chairman or secretary of the ZBA;
d. State the specific facts which are the basis for the ZBA's decision;
e. Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or grant or deny the variance application;
f. Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the ZBA proceedings.
(c) Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the ZBA in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district boundaries:
1. If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other evidence may be examined.
2. The person contesting the boundary location shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence to the ZBA.
3. If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the ZBA should inform the Plan Commission or the person contesting the boundary location to petition the governing body for a map amendment according to Section 94.7.12.
(d) Variance.
1. The ZBA may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards of this article if an applicant convincingly demonstrates that:
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.11: Administration through Section 94.7.11: Administration
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-19
a. Literal enforcement of the ordinance provisions will cause unnecessary hardship;
b. The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain ordinance and unique property conditions, not common to adjacent lots or premises. In such case the ordinance or map must be amended;
c. The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
d. The variance is consistent with the purpose of this ordinance in Section 94.7.04(3).
2. In addition to the criteria in subparagraph 1., to qualify for a variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must be met:
a. The variance may not cause any increase in the regional flood elevation;
b. Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than one-half acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed below the RFE;
c. Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be contrary to the purpose of the ordinance.
3. A variance under this article shall not:
a. Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning district.
b. Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss.
c. Be granted for a hardship which is self-created.
d. Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area.
e. Allow actions without the amendments to this ordinance or map(s) required in Section 94.7.12(1).
f. Allow any alteration of a historic structure, including its use, which would preclude its continued designation as a historic structure.
4. When a floodplain variance is granted the ZBA shall notify the applicant in writing that it may increase risk to life and property and flood insurance premiums could increase up to $25.00 per $100.00 of coverage. A copy shall be maintained with the variance record.
(4) To review appeals of permit denials.
(a) The Plan Commission (Section 94.7.11(2)) or ZBA shall review all data related to the appeal. This may include:
1. Permit application data listed in Section 94.7.11(1)b.
2. Floodway/floodfringe determination data in Section 94.7.09(4).
3. Data listed in Section 94.7.07(3)(a)2. where the applicant has not submitted this information to the zoning administrator.
4. Other data submitted with the application or submitted to the ZBA with the appeal.
(b) For appeals of all denied permits the ZBA shall:
1. Follow the procedures of Section 94.7.11(3);
2. Consider zoning agency recommendations; and
3. Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal
(c) For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation the Board shall:
1. Uphold the denial where the ZBA agrees with the data showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be allowed after amending the flood profile and map and all appropriate legal arrangements are made with all adversely affected property
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.12: Amendments through Section 94.7.12: Amendments
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-20
owners as per the requirements of Section 94.7.12 amendments; and.
2. Grant the appeal where the Board agrees that the data properly demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase equal to or greater than 0.01 foot provided no other reasons for denial exist.
(5) Floodproofing standards for nonconforming structures or uses.
(a) No permit or variance shall be issued for a non-residential structure designed to be watertight below the regional flood elevation until the applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure or development to the flood protection elevation and submits a FEMA Floodproofing Certificate.
(b) For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no permit or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan either:
1. Certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or
2. Meets or exceeds the following standards:
a. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot on enclosed area subject to flooding;
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(c) Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate to:
1. Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact forces and other regional flood factors;
2. Protect structures to the flood protection elevation;
3. Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral movement; and
4. Minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters.
5. Minimize or eliminate discharge into flood waters.
(6) Public information.
(a) Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the regional flood.
(b) All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and widely distributed.
(c) All real estate transfers should show what floodplain zoning district any real property is in.
Section 94.7.12: Amendments
(1) Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments are made to this article, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with Section 94.7.12(2).
(a) In AE Zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases shall be permitted unless the applicant receives a Conditional Letter of Map Revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this ordinance, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with 94.7.12(2). Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR.
(b) In A Zones, increases equal to or greater than 1.0 foot may only be permitted if the applicant receives a Conditional Letter of Map Revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this article, the official floodplain maps, floodway lines, and water surface profiles, in accordance with 94.7.12(2).
(2) General. The Village Board shall change or supplement the floodplain zoning district boundaries and this ordinance in the manner outlined in 94.7.12(3) below. Actions which require an amendment to the
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.13: Enforcement and penalties through Section 94.7.14: Definitions
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-21
ordinance and/or submittal of a Letter of Map Change (LOMC) include, but are not limited to, the following:
(a) Any fill or floodway encroachment that obstructs flow causing any increase in the regional flood height;
(b) Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse alterations on the FIRM;
(c) Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain maps listed in Section 94.7.05(2)(b);
(d) Any fill in the floodplain which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain.
(e) Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and floodplain zoning maps.
(f) Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by Wis. Admin. Code NR § 116.05, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by the Village.
(g) All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the floodfringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA.
(3) Procedures. Amendments to this article may be made upon petition of any party according to the provisions of Wis. Stat. § 62.23, for cities and villages. Petitions shall include all necessary data required by Sections 94.7.09(4) and 94.7.11(1)(b). The Land Use Permit shall not be issued until a Letter of Map Revision is issued by FEMA for the proposed changes.
(a) The proposed amendment shall be referred to the zoning agency for a public hearing and recommendation to the governing body. The amendment and notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the Department Regional office for review prior to the hearing. The amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stat. § 62.23, for cities and villages.
(b) No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the Department.
(c) All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow causing any increase in the regional flood height, shall obtain flooding easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely affected property owners and notify local units of government before the amendment can be approved by the governing body.
Section 94.7.13: Enforcement and penalties
Any violation of the provisions of this article by any person shall be unlawful and shall be referred to the municipal attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, forfeit to the municipality a penalty of not more than $ 50, together with a taxable cost of such action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this article is a public nuisance and the creation may be enjoined and the maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the Village, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 87.30(2).
Section 94.7.14: Definitions
Unless specifically defined, words and phrases in this article shall have their common law meaning and shall be applied in accordance with their common usage. Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive, "shall" is mandatory and is not discretionary. The definitions below are limited to this article.
(1) "A ZONES" - Those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.14: Definitions through Section 94.7.14: Definitions
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-22
(2) “AH ZONE” – see “AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING”
(3) “AO ZONE” – see “AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING”
(4) "ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE" - A facility, structure, building or use which is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure or building.
(5) “ALTERATION” – An enhancement, upgrading or substantial change or modification other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilation, air conditioning and other systems within a structure.
(6) “AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING” – A designated AO, AH, AR/AH or VO zone on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where the velocity flood may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
(7) "BASE FLOOD" - Means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and depicted on a FIRM.
(8) "BASEMENT" - Any enclosed area of a building having its floor sub-grade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides.
(9) "BUILDING" - See STRUCTURE.
(10) "BULKHEAD LINE" - A geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the Department pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 30.11, and which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary highwater mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this ordinance.
(11) "CAMPGROUND" - Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by 4 or more camping units, or which is advertised or represented as a camping area.
(12) "CAMPING UNIT" - Any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in area, used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pick-up truck, tent or other mobile recreational vehicle that is fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway use.
(13) "CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE" - A certification that the construction and the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this ordinance.
(14) "CHANNEL" – A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct normal flow of water.
(15) "CRAWLWAYS" OR "CRAWL SPACE" - An enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to plumbing and electrical utilities.
(16) “DECK” – An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides but has a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation.
(17) "DEPARTMENT" - The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(18) "DEVELOPMENT" - Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure, regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.14: Definitions through Section 94.7.14: Definitions
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-23
placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private wastewater treatment systems or water supply facilities.
(19) "DRYLAND ACCESS" - A vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
(20) "ENCROACHMENT" - Any fill, structure, equipment, building, use or development in the floodway.
(21) "FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA)" - The federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
(22) "FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP" (FIRM) - A map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both special flood hazard areas (the floodplain) and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(23) "FLOOD" or "FLOODING" – A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the following conditions:
(a) The overflow or rise of inland waters,
(b) The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source,
(c) The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake Superior, or
(d) The sudden increase caused by an unusually high-water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event.
(24) “FLOOD FREQUENCY" - The probability of a flood occurrence which is determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average once in a specified number of years or as a percent (%) chance of occurring in any given year.
(25) "FLOODFRINGE" - That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway which is covered by flood waters during the regional flood and associated with standing water rather than flowing water.
(26) "FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP" - A map designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A-Zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
(27) "FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY" (FIS) - A technical engineering examination, evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and unnumbered A-Zones. Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), that accompany the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), form the basis for both the regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
(28) "FLOODPLAIN" - Land which has been or may be covered by flood water during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the floodfringe, and may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes.
(29) "FLOODPLAIN ISLAND" - A natural geologic land formation within the floodplain that is
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.14: Definitions through Section 94.7.14: Definitions
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-24
surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood.
(30) "FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT" - Policy and procedures to insure wise use of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education, and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations.
(31) "FLOOD PROFILE" - A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of land surface elevations along a stream or river.
(32) "FLOODPROOFING" - Any combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage.
(33) "FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION" - An elevation of two feet of freeboard above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood. (Also see: FREEBOARD.)
(34) "FLOOD STORAGE" - Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge.
(35) "FLOODWAY" - The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood discharge.
(36) "FREEBOARD" - A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas due to development and aggregation of the river or stream bed.
(37) "HABITABLE STRUCTURE" - Any structure or portion thereof used or designed for human habitation.
(38) "HEARING NOTICE" - Publication or posting meeting the requirements of Wis. Stat. Chapter 985. For appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at least one week (7 days) before the hearing, is required. For all zoning ordinances and amendments, a Class 2 notice, published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at least a week (7 days) before the hearing. Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice, exceeding these minimums.
(39) "HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL" - Damage that could result from flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant economic loss to a structure or building and its contents.
(40) “HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE” – The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed wall of a structure.
(41) "HISTORIC STRUCTURE" - Any structure that is either:
(a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register,
(b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district,
(c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior, or
(d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
(42) "INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT" - A calculated upward rise in the regional flood
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.14: Definitions through Section 94.7.14: Definitions
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-25
elevation, equal to or greater than 0.01 foot, based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions which is directly attributable to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge.
(43) "LAND USE" - Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate. (Also see DEVELOPMENT.)
(44) “LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE” – Elevation of the lowest ground surface that touches any of the exterior walls of a building.
(45) “LOWEST FLOOR” – The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking vehicles, building access provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
(46) “MAINTENANCE” – The act or process of restoring to original soundness, including redecorating, refinishing, non-structural repairs, or the replacement of existing fixtures, systems or equipment with equivalent fixtures, systems or structures.
(47) "MANUFACTURED HOME" - A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does not include a "mobile recreational vehicle.”
(48) “MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION” – A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
(49) “MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, EXISTING” – A parcel of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots is completed before the effective date of this ordinance. At a minimum, this would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
(50) “MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, EXPANSION TO EXISTING” – The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading, or the pouring if concrete pads.
(51) "MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE" - A vehicle which is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model homes, do not fall within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicles.”
(52) “MODEL, CORRECTED EFFECTIVE” – A hydraulic engineering model that corrects any errors that occur in the Duplicate Effective Model, adds any additional cross sections to the Duplicate Effective Model, or incorporates more detailed topographic information than that used in the current effective model.
(53) “MODEL, DUPLICATE EFFECTIVE” – A copy of the hydraulic analysis used in the effective FIS and referred to as the effective model.
(54) “MODEL, EFFECTIVE” – The hydraulic engineering model that was used to produce the current
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.14: Definitions through Section 94.7.14: Definitions
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-26
effective Flood Insurance Study.
(55) “MODEL, EXISTING (PRE-PROJECT)” – A modification of the Duplicate Effective Model or Corrected Effective Model to reflect any man-made modifications that have occurred within the floodplain since the date of the effective model, but prior to the construction of the project for which the revision is being requested. If no modification has occurred since the date of the effective model, then this model would be identical to the Corrected Effective Model or Duplicate Effective Model.
(56) “MODEL, REVISED (POST-PROJECT) – A modification of the Existing or Pre-Project Conditions Model, Duplicate Effective Model or Corrected Effective Model to reflect revised or post-projected conditions.
(57) "MUNICIPALITY" or "MUNICIPAL" - The county, city or village governmental units enacting, administering and enforcing this article.
(58) “NAVD” or “NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM” – Elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment.
(59) "NGVD" or "NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM" - Elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
(60) "NEW CONSTRUCTION" - For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it includes any structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
(61) "NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE" - An existing lawful structure or building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural requirements of this article for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (For example, an existing residential structure in the floodfringe district is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the flood protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.)
(62) "NONCONFORMING USE" - An existing lawful use or accessory use of a structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (Such as a residence in the floodway.)
(63) "OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW" - Any development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future development will cause an increase in regional flood height.
(64) "OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP" - That map, adopted and made part of this ordinance, as described in Section 94.7.05(2)(a), which has been approved by the Department and FEMA.
(65) "OPEN SPACE USE" - Those uses having a relatively low flood damage potential and not involving structures.
(66) "ORDINARY HIGHWATER MARK" - The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic.
(67) "PERSON" - An individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, municipality or state agency.
(68) "PRIVATE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM" - A sewage treatment and disposal system
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.14: Definitions through Section 94.7.14: Definitions
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-27
serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage system approved by the Department of Commerce, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system located on a different parcel than the structure.
(69) "PUBLIC UTILITIES" - Those utilities using underground or overhead transmission lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer.
(70) "REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING" - Means base flood waters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special flood hazard area and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings.
(71) "REGIONAL FLOOD" - A flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE.
(72) "START OF CONSTRUCTION" - The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
(73) "STRUCTURE" - Any manmade object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, stream bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts.
(74) "SUBDIVISION" - Has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. § 236.02(12).
(75) "SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE" - Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred.
(76) “SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT” – Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the work performed. The term does not, however, include either any project for the improvement regardless of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building inspector and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.
(77) "UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP" - Where special conditions affecting a particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of the article.
(78) "VARIANCE" - An authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) for the construction or
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.7.14: Definitions through Section 94.7.14: Definitions
Article 7: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 7-28
maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in the floodplain zoning ordinance.
(79) "VIOLATION" - The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the floodplain zoning ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
(80) "WATERSHED" - The entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a watercourse or body of water.
(81) "WATER SURFACE PROFILE" - A graphical representation showing the elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas.
(82) "WELL" - means an excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its intended use.
[Amended by Ord. No. 17-98-1, § 1(b), 11-16-1998, Ord. 4-21-2007; Ord. 4-22-2010; Ord. 6-4-2014; Amended via Ord. No. 18-021, 8/23/18]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Article 8: SHORELAND OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT 8-1
Article 8: SHORELAND OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.8.01: Statutory Authorization through Section 94.8.08: Interpretation
Article 8: SHORELAND OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT 8-2
Section 94.8.01: Statutory Authorization
This article is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stat. Sec. 61.35 and 61.353.
Section 94.8.02: Finding of Fact and Purpose
Uncontrolled use of shorelands and pollution of the navigable waters of the Village of Weston would adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare and impair the tax base. The Legislature of Wisconsin has delegated responsibility to all municipalities to:
(1) Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare;
(2) Limit certain land use activities detrimental to shorelands; and
(3) Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by controlling the location of structures in shoreland areas and restricting the removal of natural shoreland vegetation.
Section 94.8.03: Jurisdiction
The jurisdiction of this article shall include all lands and waters within the corporate limits of the Village of Weston.
Section 94.8.04: Compliance
The use of shorelands within the shoreland area of the Village of Weston shall be in full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable local, State or Federal regulations. All permitted development shall require the issuance of a zoning permit unless otherwise expressly excluded by a provision of this article.
Section 94.8.05: Municipalities and State Agencies Regulated
Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this article and obtain all required permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stat. § 13.48(13) applies. The construction/reconstruction, maintenance/repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation are exempt from compliance when Wis. Stat. § 30.12 applies.
Section 94.8.06: Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
This article supersedes all provisions of any other applicable municipal ordinance except that where another municipal ordinance is more restrictive than this article, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
(1) This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail.
Section 94.8.07: Terms of Article
The following are terms of Article: Village shall mean Village of Weston, Plan Commission shall mean the Village of Weston Plan Commission, Village Board shall mean the Village of Weston Village Board, Zoning Board of Appeals shall mean the Village of Weston Zoning Board of Appeals.
Section 94.8.08: Interpretation
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Village of Weston and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes or Wisconsin Constitution.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.8.09: Severability through Section 94.8.11: Administration and Enforcement of Code
Article 8: SHORELAND OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT 8-3
Section 94.8.09: Severability
Should any portion of this article be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be affected.
Section 94.8.10: Applicability of Shoreland District Regulations
The Shoreland Zoning District regulations apply only to the following shorelands:
(1) A shoreland that was annexed by the Village of Weston after May 7, 1982, and that prior to annexation was subject to a County Shoreland Zoning Ordinance under Wis. Stat. Sec. 59.692; and
(2) A shoreland that before incorporation by the Village of Weston was part of a town that was subject to a County Shoreland Zoning Ordinance under Wis. Stat. Sec. 59.692 if the date of incorporation was after April 30, 1994.
(a) District Boundaries. The Shoreland District areas regulated by this article shall include all the lands (referred to herein as shorelands) in the Village of Weston that are:
1. Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary highwater mark of navigable lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages shall be presumed to be navigable if they are listed in the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources Surface Water Data viewer, available on the DNR website, or are shown on United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps.
2. Within 300 feet of the ordinary highwater mark of navigable rivers or streams, or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as continuous waterways or intermittent waterways on United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps. Flood hazard boundary maps, flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary-floodway maps, county soil survey maps or other existing county floodplain zoning maps shall be used to delineate floodplain areas.
3. Determinations of navigability and ordinary highwater mark location shall initially be made by the Zoning Administrator. When questions arise, the Zoning Administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources for a final determination of navigability or ordinary highwater mark.
4. Pursuant to Wis. Stat. Sec. 61.353(7) or 62.233, the Shoreland Zoning District does not include lands adjacent to an artificially constructed drainage ditch, pond, or retention basin if the drainage ditch, pond or retention basin is not hydrologically connected to a natural navigable water body.
(b) Effect of existing land division, sanitary, zoning and other regulations. The lands within the Shoreland Zoning District are subject to all applicable provisions of the Village of Weston Municipal Code. Where the provisions of this article are more restrictive than other regulations in the Municipal Code, the provisions of this article shall apply.
Section 94.8.11: Administration and Enforcement of Code
The Zoning Administrator or their designee(s) are hereby designated as the administrative and enforcement officer(s) for the provisions of this article. The duty of the Zoning Administrator’s designees shall be to interpret and administer this article and to issue, after on-site inspection, all permits required by this article. They shall further:
(1) Maintain records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved, and other official actions.
(2) Record the lowest floor elevations of all structures erected, moved, altered, or improved in the floodland districts.
(3) Establish that all necessary permits that are required for floodland uses by State and Federal law have been secured.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.8.12: Building Permit Required through Section 94.8.12: Building Permit Required
Article 8: SHORELAND OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT 8-4
(4) Inspect all structures, lands, and waters as often as necessary to assure compliance with this Article.
(5) Investigate all complaints made relating to the location of structures and the use of structures, lands, and waters, give notice of all violations of this article to the owner, resident, agent, or occupant of the premises, and report uncorrected violations to the Village Attorney.
(6) Assist the Village Attorney in the prosecution of violations of this Article.
(7) Be permitted access to premises and structures during reasonable hours to make those inspections as deemed necessary by them to ensure compliance with this article. If, however, they are refused entry after presentation of their identification, they may procure a special inspection warrant in accordance with Wis. Stat. § 66.0119.
(8) Prohibit the use or erection of any structure, land or water until they have inspected and approved such use or erection.
(9) Request assistance and cooperation from the Everest Metro Police Department and Village Attorney as deemed necessary.
(10) Attend all meetings of the Plan Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Section 94.8.12: Building Permit Required
No structure shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, or structurally altered until after the owner or his agent has secured a building permit from the Building Inspector, unless otherwise exempted pursuant to this article. Applications for building permit shall be made in duplicate to the Village on forms furnished by the Village and shall include the following where applicable:
(1) Name and addresses of the applicant, owner of the site, architect, professional engineer, and contractor.
(2) Description of the subject site by lot, block and recorded subdivision, or metes and bounds; address of the subject site; type of structure; existing and proposed operation or use of the structure or site; number of employees; and the zoning district within which the subject site lies.
(3) Plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor showing the location, boundaries, dimensions, elevations to Marathon County datum, uses, and sizes of the following: subject site; existing and proposed structures; existing and proposed easements, streets, and other public ways; off-street parking, loading areas and drive-ways; existing highway access restrictions; and existing and proposed street, side, and rear yards. In addition, the plat of survey shall show the location, elevation, and use of any abutting lands and their structures within 40 feet of the subject site.
(a) When it is proposed to construct an addition to an existing structure, or construct an accessory structure, the Village Building Inspector may accept a location sketch drawn to scale in lieu of a plat of survey. The location sketch shall contain all information and dimensions required on the plat of survey.
(b) The Village Building Inspector may waive the requirement for elevations on either a plat of survey or a location sketch when the development is neither located within nor adjacent to a floodplain or wetland.
(4) Proposed sewage disposal plan if municipal sewerage service is not available. This plan shall include a copy of the permit issued by the Marathon County Health Department for the installation of a Private On-site Wastewater Treatment System (POWTS), or other appropriate means of waste disposal. The Village Engineer shall certify that satisfactory, adequate, and safe sewage disposal is possible on the site as shown in the private sewage disposal plan.
(5) Proposed water supply plan if municipal water service is not available. This plan shall be in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code NR Chapter 812 and shall be approved by the Village Engineer who shall certify in writing that an adequate and safe supply of water will be provided.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.8.13: Occupancy Permit Required through Section 94.8.17: Site Restrictions
Article 8: SHORELAND OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT 8-5
(6) Additional information as may be required by the Village Plan Commission, Zoning Administrator or their designees.
(7) A building permit shall be granted or denied in writing by the Village Building Inspector within 30 days. The permit shall expire within six (6) months unless substantial work has commenced. Any permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be null and void.
Section 94.8.13: Occupancy Permit Required
(1) No vacant land shall be occupied or used; and no building or premises shall be erected, altered, or moved, or create change in use; and no nonconforming use shall be maintained, renewed, changed, or extended until an occupancy permit shall have been issued by the Village Building Inspector. Such permit shall show that the building or premises or part thereof is in compliance with the provisions of this article. Such permit shall be applied for at the time of occupancy of any land and/or building.
(2) No land within the Floodland Districts shall be developed, occupied or used, and no structure hereafter erected, altered, or moved shall be occupied until the applicant submits to the Building Inspector a certification by a registered professional engineer or land surveyor that the floodplain regulations set forth in this Chapter have been fully complied with. Such certification shall include the elevations of the lowest opening and the lowest floor of any structure erected on the site.
(3) No building located in a business or industrial zone and used for business or industrial purposes shall be occupied by a new tenant or a new owner or shall have the use changed without the issuance of a new occupancy permit by the Building Inspector. Such permit shall show that the building or premises, or part thereof, is in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, Uniform Dwelling Code, Electrical Code, Fire Prevention Code and the Plumbing Code of the Village and State of Wisconsin. Such occupancy permit for the occupation of a previously existing building by a new tenant or use shall be applied for at the time of any remodeling of the building or prior to the occupancy for the new use or by the new owner. Application for an occupancy permit shall be made in the same manner as for a building permit.
Section 94.8.14: Conditional Use Permit Required
See Article 16 Procedures and Administration Section 94.16.06 Conditional Uses
Section 94.8.15: Sign Permit Required
See Article 13 Signs Section 94.13.02 Sign Permits
Section 94.8.16: Other Permits
It is the responsibility of the permit applicant to secure all other necessary permits required by any State, Federal, or local agency. This includes, but is not limited to, a water use permit pursuant to Wis. Stat. Chapter 30 or a wetland fill permit pursuant to Section 404 of the Clean Water Act.
Section 94.8.17: Site Restrictions
No land shall be used or structure erected where the land is unsuitable for such use or structure by reason of flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography, low percolation rate or bearing strength, erosion susceptibility, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, prosperity, aesthetics, and general welfare of this community. The Zoning Administrator or their designee, in applying the provisions of this section, shall in writing recite the particular facts upon which they base their conclusion that the land is not suitable for certain uses. The applicant shall have an opportunity to present evidence contesting such unsuitability if they so desire. Thereafter, the Plan Commission may affirm, modify, or withdraw the determination of unsuitability. In addition:
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.8.18: Use Restrictions through Section 94.8.18: Use Restrictions
Article 8: SHORELAND OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT 8-6
(1) All lots shall abut upon a public street, and each lot shall have a minimum frontage as defined by Figures 5.01(1) Rural, Open Space and Residential District Lot Dimensions and Intensity Standards and 5.02(1) Non-residential District Density and Intensity Standards in Article 5 Density, Intensity and Bulk Regulations.
(2) All principal structures shall be located on a lot; and only one principal structure shall be located, erected, or moved onto a lot in single-family and two-family residential districts. The Plan Commission may permit more than one structure per lot in other districts where more than one structure is needed for the orderly development of the parcel. Where additional structures are permitted, the Plan Commission may impose additional yard requirements, landscaping requirements, or parking requirements, or require a minimum separation distance between principal structures.
(3) No building permit shall be issued for a lot which abuts a public street dedicated to only a portion of its proposed width and located on that side thereof from which the required dedication has not been secured.
(4) Lots abutting more restrictive district boundaries shall provide side and rear yards not less than those required in the more restrictive abutting district. The street yards on the less restrictive district shall be modified for a distance of not more than 50 feet from the district boundary line so as to equal the average of the street yards required in both districts.
(5) Buffering. The Plan Commission may require the construction of a buffer between dissimilar zoning districts or dissimilar uses to screen the dissimilar activities from view. The buffer may consist of a landscaped buffer yard, a landscaped berm, a screening fence or wall, or a combination of buffering/screening elements. The specific design of which shall be approved by the Plan Commission in order to sufficiently provide attractive visual screening and in a maintained fashion during all seasons if landscaped or with attractive view and design from adjacent properties and right-of-way if screened by architectural wall or fence.
Section 94.8.18: Use Restrictions
The following use restrictions and regulations shall apply:
(1) Permitted Uses: Only those permitted uses specified for a district, their essential services, and the following uses shall be permitted in that district.
(2) Accessory uses and structures are permitted in accordance with Section 94.4.09 of this Chapter in any district but not until their principal structure is present or under construction. Residential accessory uses shall not involve the conduct of any business, trade, or industry except home occupations and professional home offices as defined in this Ordinance.
(3) Conditional Uses and their accessory uses are considered as special uses requiring review, public hearing, and approval by the Plan Commission in accordance with Section 94.16.06 of this Chapter.
(4) Legal Non-Conforming Uses are considered as special uses that at one time were legally approved and met the standards of the code, but now for various reasons no longer conform to the code. Some of these uses may be granted Legal Non-Conforming Conditional Use status to allow for the expansion and/or modification of said use.
(5) Temporary Uses are uses in accordance with Section 94.4.10 of this Chapter that an approved permitted or conditional use desires to add to their operations for a limited time and a limited scope, but would not necessarily be a permitted or conditional use of its own accord. The Plan Commission shall give great weight to the protection of public safety and welfare when considering the appropriateness of Temporary Uses.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.8.19: Shoreland Regulations through Section 94.8.19: Shoreland Regulations
Article 8: SHORELAND OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT 8-7
Section 94.8.19: Shoreland Regulations
In addition to any other applicable use, site, or sanitary restrictions and regulations, the following regulations shall apply to all shorelands, as defined in Section 94.8.10 of this article.
(1) Tree Cutting and Shrubbery Clearing. Tree cutting and shrubbery clearing within 100 feet of the ordinary high water mark of all navigable waters is prohibited except for home site development; park site develop-ment; access roads; path and trail construction; timber stand improvement; customary trimming; dead tree removal; and managed timber harvesting under a State District Forester's Plan. Such tree cutting and shrubbery clearing shall not involve the clear cutting of more than 30 feet in any 100 feet, as measured along the ordinary high water mark, and shall be so regulated as to prevent erosion and sedimentation, preserve and improve scenic qualities, and during foliation substantially screen any development from stream or lake users. Paths and trails shall not exceed ten (10) feet in width and shall be so designed and constructed as to result in the least removal and disruption of shoreland cover and the minimum impairment of natural beauty.
(2) A shoreland that was annexed by the Village after May 7, 1982, and prior to annexation, was subject to a County Shoreland Zoning Ordinance shall be subject to the following additional provisions:
(a) Any person who owns shoreland property that contains vegetation shall maintain that vegetation in a vegetative buffer zone along the entire shoreline of the property and extending 35 feet inland from the ordinary high-water mark of the navigable water, except as provided in (2).
(b) If the vegetation, in a vegetative buffer zone, contains invasive species or dead or diseased vegetation, the owner of the shoreland property may remove such vegetation, except that if the owner removes all of the vegetation, as described herein, within the vegetative buffer zone, the owner shall reestablish vegetation within the vegetative buffer zone.
(c) A person who is required to maintain or establish a vegetative buffer zone under (1) or (2) shall be allowed to remove all of the vegetation in a part of that zone in order to establish a viewing or access corridor that is no greater than 30 feet wide per every 100 feet of shoreline frontage and that extends no more than 35 feet inland from the ordinary high-water mark.
(d) For the purposes of this section, vegetative buffer zone is defined as land that extends from the ordinary high-water mark to 35 feet inland.
(3) Earth movements, such as construction, altering or enlargement of waterways, removal of stream or lake bed materials, channel clearing, dredging, lagooning, grading, topsoil removal, filling, road cutting, ditch-ing, and soil and water conservation structures are conditional uses in accordance with Section 94.16.06 of this Ordinance in addition to any permit required from the state agency having jurisdiction under Wis. Stat. §§ 30.11, 30.12, 30.19, 30.195, and 30.20.
(4) Shoreland Setback. Areas within shorelands as defined by this article shall be subject to the following:
(a) Within the shoreland area, no structure, except navigational aids, piers and boat launching facilities, shall be closer than 75 feet to the ordinary highwater mark of a navigable body of water and two feet above the experienced highwater mark unless a smaller setback is approved by the Plan Commission. A shoreland that was annexed by the Village after May 7, 1982, and prior to annexation was subject to a County Shoreland Zoning Ordinance shall be subject to the following additional provisions:
1. A shoreland setback area of at least 75 feet from the ordinary high-water mark, except as provided in (2).
2. Construction or placement of a structure within the shoreland setback area established under (1) shall be allowed if all of the following apply:
a. The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel of land that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel of land containing a principal building.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.8.20: Restriction or Joint Use through Section 94.8.20: Restriction or Joint Use
Article 8: SHORELAND OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT 8-8
b. The structure is constructed or placed within a distance equal to the average setback of the structure on the adjacent lots or 50 feet from the ordinary high-water mark, whichever distance is greater.
c. For purposes of this section, structures shall include: fences, ice fishing shanties, accessory structures other than boathouses, minor structures, and retaining walls not approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR).
d. For purposes of this section, principal building means the main building or structure on a single lot or parcel of land and includes any attached garage or attached porch.
(5) Tillage, grazing, livestock watering and feeding, and application of fertilizers shall be prohibited unless conducted in accordance with applicable County, State and Federal laws and regulations and unless conducted in such a manner as to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of individuals, animal and aquatic life, in the surrounding environment.
(6) Surface water withdrawal and diversion, or discharge for irrigation, processing, cooling or other purposes are conditional uses in accordance with Section 94.16.06 of this Ordinance. The Plan Commission shall then advise the state agency having jurisdiction under Wis. Stat. §§ 30.18 and Chapter 281 Subchapter II of its findings, prior to the issuance of the required state permits.
(7) Crop production on lands with an erosion factor of three or more is prohibited and such lands shall be planted to permanent vegetation.
(8) Shoreland regulations do not apply to lands adjacent to an artificially constructed drainage ditch, pond, or storm water retention basin if the drainage ditch, pond, or retention basin is not hydrologically connected to a natural navigable water body.
(9) “Shorelands” has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. § 59.692(1) and (2).
(10) “Shoreland setback” has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. § 59.692(1)(bn).
Section 94.8.20: Restriction or Joint Use
No lot, yard, parking area, building area, or other space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as not to meet the provisions of this Chapter. No part of any lot, yard, parking area, or other space required for a structure or use shall be used for any other structure or use.
[Amended by Ord. No. 17-98-1, § 1(e), 11-16-1998; Ord. of 8-21-2014]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Article 9: SHORELAND-WETLAND OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT 9-1
Article 9: SHORELAND-WETLAND OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.9.01: Statutory authorization through Section 94.9.03: General shoreland-wetland provisions
Article 9: SHORELAND-WETLAND OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT 9-2
Section 94.9.01: Statutory authorization
This article is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35, 61.351, 87.30 and 281.31.
Section 94.9.02: Finding of fact and purpose
Uncontrolled use of the shoreland-wetlands and pollution of the navigable waters of the village would adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare, and impair the tax base. The state legislature has delegated responsibility to all municipalities to:
(1) Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare;
(2) Maintain the stormwater and floodwater storage capacity of wetlands;
(3) Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which filter or store sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters;
(4) Protect fish, their spawning grounds, other aquatic life and wildlife by preserving wetlands and other aquatic habits;
(5) Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area; and
(6) Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal of natural shoreland cover and controlling shoreland-wetland excavation, filling and other earth-moving activities.
(Ord. No. 17-98-1, § 1(e), 11-16-1998; Ord. of 8-21-2014)
Section 94.9.03: General shoreland-wetland provisions
(1) Compliance. The use of wetlands and the alteration of wetlands within the shoreland area of the village shall be in full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable local, state or federal regulations. (However, see section 94.302(f) for the standards applicable to nonconforming uses.) All permitted development shall require the issuance of a zoning permit unless otherwise expressly excluded by a provision of this article.
(2) Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns and counties are required to comply with this article and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13) applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the state department of transportation are exempt when Wis. Stats. § 30.12(4) (a) applies.
(3) Abrogation and greater restrictions.
(a) This article supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance enacted under Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35 or 87.30 which relate to floodplains and shoreland-wetlands, except that where another municipal zoning ordinance is more restrictive than this article, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
(b) This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail.
(4) Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the village and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by the state statutes. Where a provision of this article is required by a standard in Wis. Admin. Code NR Chapter 117, and where the article provision is unclear, such provision shall be interpreted in light of the Wis. Admin. Code NR Chapter 117 standards in effect
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.9.04: Shoreland-wetland zoning district through Section 94.9.04: Shoreland-wetland zoning district
Article 9: SHORELAND-WETLAND OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT 9-3
on the date of the adoption of this article or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this article.
(5) Annexed areas. The county shoreland zoning provision in effect on the date of annexation remain in effect administered by the village for all areas annexed by the village after May 7, 1982. These annexed lands are described on the village's official zoning map. The county shoreland zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of the village zoning administrator.
[Amended by Ord. No. 17-98-1, § 1(e), 11-16-1998; Ord. of 8-21-2014]
Section 94.9.04: Shoreland-wetland zoning district
(1) Shoreland-wetland zoning maps. The following maps are hereby adopted and made part of this article and are on file in the office of the municipal clerk:
(a) State wetland inventory maps stamped "final" on August 25, 1989.
(b) Floodplain zoning maps based on the FIS, Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), panel numbers 55073C0411F, 55073C0412F, 55073C0413F, 55073C0416F, 55073C0417F, 55073C0418F, 55073C0419F, 55073C0438F, 55073C0652F, 55073C0660F, 55073C0700F of 1000, community panel number 550323, dated July 22, 2010; with corresponding profiles that are based on the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated July 22, 2010, Volume number 55073CV000A.
(c) Zoning map titled “Zoning District Map, Village of Weston, Marathon County, Wisconsin.”
(2) District boundaries.
(a) The shoreland-wetland zoning district includes all wetlands in the village which are five acres or more and are shown on the final wetland inventory map that has been adopted and made a part of this article and which are:
1. Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages in the village shall be presumed to be navigable if they are shown on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this article.
2. Within 300 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable rivers or streams, or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as either continuous or intermittent waterways on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this article. Floodplain zoning maps adopted in section 94.9.04(1)(b) shall be used to determine the extent of floodplain areas.
(b) Determinations of navigability and ordinary high-water mark location shall initially be made by the zoning administrator. When questions arise, the zoning administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR), hereafter called Department, for a final determination of navigability or ordinary high-water mark.
(c) When an apparent discrepancy exists between the shoreland-wetland district boundary shown on the official zoning maps and actual field conditions at the time the maps were adopted, the zoning administrator shall contact the appropriate Department to determine if the shoreland-wetland district boundary as mapped, is in error. If Department staff concur with the zoning administrator that a particular area was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the zoning administrator shall have the authority to immediately grant or deny a zoning permit in accordance with the regulations applicable to the correct zoning district. In order to correct wetland mapping errors or acknowledge exempted
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.9.04: Shoreland-wetland zoning district through Section 94.9.04: Shoreland-wetland zoning district
Article 9: SHORELAND-WETLAND OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT 9-4
wetlands designated in this section, the zoning administrator shall be responsible for initiating a map amendment within a reasonable period.
(3) Filled wetlands; wetlands landward of a bulkhead line. Wetlands which were filled prior to January 27, 1983, the date on which the village received final wetland inventory maps, in a manner which affects their wetland characteristics to the extent that the area can no longer be defined as wetland, are not subject to this article. Wetlands located between the original ordinary high-water mark and a bulkhead line established prior to May 7, 1982, under Wis. Stats. § 30.11, are not subject to this article.
(4) Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31 and the provisions of other local, state and federal laws, if applicable:
(a) Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit, provided that no wetland alteration occurs:
1. Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling and boating;
2. The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is no injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops;
3. The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and harvesting of timber;
4. The pasturing of livestock;
5. The cultivation of agriculture crops; and
6. The construction and maintenance of duck blinds.
(b) Uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit and which may involve wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided as follows:
1. The practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water level stabilization measures which are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected;
2. The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland alterations necessary for the purpose of growing and harvesting cranberries;
3. The maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems to restore preexisting levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling necessary to dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the filling is otherwise permissible and that dredged spoil is placed on existing spoil banks where possible;
4. The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance;
5. The construction and maintenance of piers, docks, walkways, observation decks and trail bridges built on pilings, including limited excavating and filling necessary such construction or maintenance;
6. The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of draining lands outside the shoreland-wetland zoning district, provided that such installation or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the shoreland-wetland listed in this section; and
7. The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of existing highways and bridges, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction.
(c) Uses which are allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit and which may include wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided as follows:
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.9.04: Shoreland-wetland zoning district through Section 94.9.04: Shoreland-wetland zoning district
Article 9: SHORELAND-WETLAND OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT 9-5
1. The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for the continuity of the municipal street system, the provision of essential utility and emergency services or to provide access to uses permitted under this section, provided that:
a. The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
b. The road is designed and constructed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in this section;
c. The road is designed and constructed with the minimum cross-sectional area practical to serve the intended use;
d. Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate area of the roadbed only; and
e. Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction or maintenance of the road.
2. The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings, provided that:
a. The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted in the shoreland-wetland district or for the raising of waterfowl, minnows or other wetland or aquatic animals;
b. The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
c. The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area; and
d. Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide structural support for the building is allowed.
3. The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural and scientific areas, game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms, wildlife preserves and public boat launching ramps, provided that:
a. Any private development allowed under this subsection (4)(c)3 of this section shall be used exclusively for the permitted purpose;
b. Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches or the construction of park shelters or similar structures is allowed;
c. The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the uses permitted under this subsection (4)(c)3 are allowed only where such construction and maintenance meets the criteria in this section; and
d. Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms and wildlife preserves shall be for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland values.
4. The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone transmission lines, water, and gas distribution lines and sewage collection lines and related facilities and the construction and maintenance of railroad liens, provided that:
a. The utility transmission and distribution facilities and railroad lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
b. Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such construction or maintenance is allowed; and
c. Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in this article.
(5) Prohibited uses.
(a) Any use not listed in subsection (4) of this section is prohibited, unless the wetland or a portion of the wetland has been rezoned by amendment of this article in accordance with subsection (7) of this section.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.9.04: Shoreland-wetland zoning district through Section 94.9.04: Shoreland-wetland zoning district
Article 9: SHORELAND-WETLAND OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT 9-6
(b) The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or placement of a boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable waters are prohibited.
(6) Nonconforming structures and uses. The lawful use of a building, structure or property which existed at the time the ordinance from which this article is derived, or an applicable amendment to this article, took effect and which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article, including the routine maintenance of such a building or structure, may be continued, subject to the following conditions
(a) The shoreland-wetland provisions of this article authorized by Wis. Stats. § 61.351 shall not limit the repair, reconstruction, renovation, remodeling or expansion of a nonconforming structure or of any environmental control facility related to such a structure in existence on the effective date of the shoreland-wetland provisions. All other modifications to nonconforming structures are subject to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h) which limits total lifetime structural repairs and alterations to 50 percent of current fair market value.
(b) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the building, structure or property shall conform to this article.
(c) Any legal nonconforming use of property which does not involve the use of a structure and which existed at the time of the adoption or subsequent amendment of this article adopted under Wis. Stats. §§ 61.351 or 62.231 may be continued although such use does not conform to the provisions of this article. However, such nonconforming use may not be extended.
(d) The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses which are located below the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable waters shall comply with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 30.121.
(e) Uses which are nuisances under common law shall not be permitted to continue as nonconforming uses.
(7) Amending shoreland-wetland zoning regulations.
(a) The board may alter, supplement or change the district boundaries and the regulations contained in this article in accordance with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2., Wis. Admin. Code NR Ch. 117 and the following:
(b) A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted to the appropriate regional office of the WDNR within five days of the submission of the proposed amendment to the municipal planning agency;
(c) All proposed text and map amendments to the shoreland-wetland zoning regulations shall be referred to the municipal planning agency, and a public hearing shall be held after class 2 notice as required by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2. The appropriate regional office of the Department shall be provided with written notice of the public hearing at least ten days prior to such hearing.
(d) In order to ensure that this article will remain consistent with the shoreland protection objectives of Wis. Stats. § 281.31, the board may not rezone a wetland in a shoreland-wetland zoning district, or any portion thereof, where the proposed rezoning may result in a significant adverse impact upon any of the following wetland functions:
1. Stormwater and floodwater storage capacity;
2. Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a wetland to another area or the flow of groundwater through a wetland;
3. Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters;
4. Shoreline protection against erosion;
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.9.04: Shoreland-wetland zoning district through Section 94.9.04: Shoreland-wetland zoning district
Article 9: SHORELAND-WETLAND OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT 9-7
5. Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds;
6. Wildlife habitat; or
7. Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including scarce wetland types and habitat of endangered species.
(e) Where the regional office of the Department determines that a proposed rezoning may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in subsection (7)(d) of this section, the regional office of the Department shall so notify the village of its determination either prior to or during the public hearing held on the proposed amendment.
(f) The appropriate district office of the department shall be provided with:
1. A copy of the recommendation and report, if any, of the municipal planning agency on a proposed text or map amendment, within ten days after the submission of those recommendations to the board.
2. Written notice of the action on the proposed text or map amendment within ten days after the action is taken.
(g) If the regional office of the Department notifies the municipal planning agency in writing that a proposed amendment may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in subsection (7)(d) of this section that proposed amendment, if approved by the board, shall not become effective until more than 30 days have elapsed since written notice of the municipal approval was mailed to the Department, as required by subsection (7)(e) of this section. If within the 30 day period, the Department notifies the village that the Department intends to adopt a superseding shoreland-wetland zoning article for the village as provided by Wis. Stats. §62.231(6) and 61.351(6), the proposed amendment shall not become effective until the article adoption procedure under Wis. Stats. § 62.231(6) or 61.351(6), is completed or otherwise terminated.
[Amended by Ord. No. 17-98-1, § 1(e), 11-16-1998; Ord. of 8-21-2014]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.9.04: Shoreland-wetland zoning district through Section 94.9.04: Shoreland-wetland zoning district
Article 9: SHORELAND-WETLAND OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT 9-8
Page intentionally left blank
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Article 10: BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 10-1
Article 10: BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.10.01: Purpose through Section 94.10.03: Design Standards for Multi-Family and
Non-Residential Buildings
Article 10: BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 10-2
Section 94.10.01: Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to establish regulations that address the exterior design and appearance of new buildings and their relationship to other structures, hard surfaced areas, landscaping areas, and other required site design elements on the same building site or adjoining building sites. Sites and buildings within a D Design overlay zoning district, as specified in Section 94.6.02, shall also be subject to the unique building and site design standards of that district.
Section 94.10.02: Single-Family and Two-Family Housing Standards
(1) General Design Requirements. All new single-family detached residence shall meet the design requirements of Section 94.4.02(1). Expansion or exterior remodel (exceeding 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure at the time of the proposed project) of existing single-family detached residence shall meet the design requirements of Section 94.4.02(1) to the extent determined practical by the applicable site plan approval authority. All new two-family residence shall meet the design requirements of Section 94.4.02(2). Expansion or exterior remodel (exceeding 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure at the time of the proposed project) of existing two-family residence shall meet the design requirements of Section 94.4.02(2) to the extent determined practical by the applicable site plan approval authority.
(2) Housing Variety in New Subdivisions. As part of each residential plat approved after March 18, 2015, the subdivider shall prepare, the Plan Commission shall approve, and the subdivider shall record private restrictions over the subdivision to increase variety and reduce monotony in the design, materials, and colors of Single-Family Detached and/or Two-Family Dwellings. Once recorded, such restrictions may be removed or amended only upon the subsequent approval of the Plan Commission.
[Amended via Ord. 17-037, 12/20/2017]
Section 94.10.03: Design Standards for Multi-Family and Non-Residential Buildings
(1) Applicability. All new multi-family (3+ unit) residential principal buildings and non-residential principal buildings shall meet the design requirements in this Section, with the exception of farm structures such as barns, silos, and grain elevators. Expansion and exterior remodeling (exceeding 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure at the time of the proposed project) of existing multi-family (3+ unit) residential principal buildings and non-residential principal buildings shall meet the design requirements in this Section to the extent determined practical by the applicable site plan approval authority. All Detached Accessory Structures serving multi-family residential principal buildings shall meet applicable design requirements in Section 94.4.09(2). All Detached Accessory Structures serving non-residential principal buildings shall meet applicable design requirements in Section 94.4.09(1).
(2) No Conversion of Residential Buildings for Commercial Use. No building designed and constructed for residential use shall be remodeled, converted, or used for a nonresidential use or activity, except for any of the permitted or conditional uses in the associated residential zoning district listed in Figure 3.04.
(3) When Licensed Architect Required. All proposed new construction and additions to multi-family residential and non-residential buildings shall require building elevations stamped by an architect licensed in the State of Wisconsin, except for buildings devoted to a storage or disposal land use listed in Section 94.4.06, a transportation land use in Section 94.4.07, an industrial land use in Section 94.4.08, or as otherwise approved by the Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee.
(4) Building Size and Mass. The size and mass of buildings and structures shall be designed with consideration of the buildings, public ways, and places to which they are visually related (see Figure 10.03(1) for examples). The relative proportion of a building to its neighboring existing buildings, to pedestrians, or to other existing buildings shall be maintained or enhanced when new buildings are built
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.10.03: Design Standards for Multi-Family and
Non-Residential Buildings
through Section 94.10.03: Design Standards for Multi-Family and
Non-Residential Buildings
Article 10: BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 10-3
or when existing buildings are altered.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.10.03: Design Standards for Multi-Family and
Non-Residential Buildings
through Section 94.10.03: Design Standards for Multi-Family and
Non-Residential Buildings
Article 10: BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 10-4
(5) Building Facade Continuity. Changes in building material, color, and texture shall occur at points related to the massing and overall design concept for the building. Each building shall be visually compatible with the buildings, public ways, and places to which it is visually related in its directional character, whether this is vertical character, horizontal character, or non-directional character. Building facades and appurtenances such as walls, fences, and landscape masses shall, when it is a characteristic of the area, form cohesive walls of enclosures along a street to ensure a favorable relationship with the buildings, public ways, and places to which such elements are visually related (see Figure 10.03(2) for examples in an urban setting).
Figure
Figure 10.0310.03((22): ): Urban Urban Example of Example of Adjacent Building Façade ContinuityAdjacent Building Façade Continuity
Figure
Figure 10.0310.03((11): Example): Exampless of of Building Size and Mass ContinuityBuilding Size and Mass Continuity
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.10.03: Design Standards for Multi-Family and
Non-Residential Buildings
through Section 94.10.03: Design Standards for Multi-Family and
Non-Residential Buildings
Article 10: BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 10-5
(6) Building Design Proportions.
(a) The relationship of the width to the height of the front elevation shall be visually compatible with buildings, public ways, and places to which it is visually related.
(b) The relationship of the width to height of windows shall be visually compatible with buildings, public ways, and places to which the building is visually related.
(c) The relationship of solids to voids in the front façade of a building shall be visually compatible with buildings, public ways, and places to which it is visually related.
(d) The relationship of the building to the open space between it and adjoining buildings shall be visually compatible with the buildings, public ways, and places to which it is visually related.
(e) The relationship of entrances and other projections to sidewalks shall be visually compatible with the buildings, public ways, and places to which it is visually related.
(7) Approved Materials. Material selection shall relate to the prevailing material already used on recently constructed buildings in the area, or to a different character if identified in the Village’s Comprehensive Plan, the examples in Figures 10.03(3) and (4), or unique requirements associated with any D Design overlay district applicable to the site. In addition:
(a) All new construction shall have a façade that consists of 60 percent of brick, native stone, tinted and/or textured concrete masonry units, glass, copper panels, stainless steel, brushed nickel, stained natural woods (as provided in subsection (c)) or other comparable material as approved by the site plan approval authority, except as provided below:
1. On all new commercial construction, for non-public facing façades, the requirement in subsection (a) shall remain, but at 40 percent.
2. On all new industrial construction, 60 percent of all non-expansion facades abutting a public right-of-way and the extension of 20 feet or 10 percent of the length of the side, whichever is greater, on either side shall meet the requirements of subsection (a).
3. On all new industrial construction, the site plan approval authority may reduce the requirement in subsection (a) to 40 percent so long as the property is not abutting Schofield Avenue, Camp Phillips Road, Weston Avenue, Ross Avenue and/or State Highway 29.
(b) Vinyl, Dryvit, Exterior Insulation Finishing Systems (EIFS), plaster products, and metal panels shall not be counted towards the 60 percent requirement in subsection (a), except for (i) architecturally finished and decorative versions of such materials if approved by the site plan approval authority and (ii) metal panels without exposed fasteners that are copper, brushed nickel, stainless steel, or other comparable material approved by the site approval authority.
(c) Natural wood, including treated wood, shall be painted or stained. The site plan approval authority may authorize the use of cedar, redwood, or other naturally weather resistant wood species to be untreated.
(d) Facades with an uninterrupted length of 200 feet or more shall include the use of two or more colors or employ the use of protruding or intruding exterior walls in a way that breaks and reduces the monotony.
(e) Multifamily dwellings are required to have architectural and trim details such as frieze board, vertical corner trim, drip caps, gable vents, shingles and shakes.
(f) Commercial buildings are required to be designed to provide human scale, interest, and variety, which shall be accomplished by incorporating at least two of the following techniques:
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.10.03: Design Standards for Multi-Family and
Non-Residential Buildings
through Section 94.10.03: Design Standards for Multi-Family and
Non-Residential Buildings
Article 10: BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 10-6
1. Variation in building form, such as recessed or projecting bays, shifts in massing or distinct roof shapes.
2. Emphasis on building entries through projecting or recessing forms (e.g., cover entries or columns), details or material differences.
3. Variation in materials, material modules, express joints and details, surface relief, and/or texture to break up building forms and walls.
(g) Where concrete block or masonry is used on industrial buildings, such material shall be painted with no less than two coats of paint, stain, or shall be a decorative pattern or treatment as approved by the site plan approval authority.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
(8) Materials—Use of Metal and Other Non-Decorative Materials. No exposed façade shall be faced with a material that presents an unfinished appearance to the public and surrounding properties. The following exterior construction materials shall not be exposed along front or street side yard facing building facades: non-decorative concrete block, cinder block, or concrete foundation walls (except for the first two feet above grade), non-decorative plywood, chipboard, T1-11, asphaltic siding, vinyl siding less than 0.044 inches of thickness, any material using non-concealed fastener systems, metal sheets not designed for commercial exterior walls, paneling, and other similarly inferior materials as determined by the site plan approval authority. No façade of any principal building intended for a residential, institutional, or commercial use as listed in Figure 3.04 shall be sided with metal sheets or panels. Any accessory non-residential building sided with metal sheets or panels shall be fully screened from the public rights-of-way. Pole buildings shall be prohibited in any residential, commercial, and industrial zoning district.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.10.03: Design Standards for Multi-Family and
Non-Residential Buildings
through Section 94.10.03: Design Standards for Multi-Family and
Non-Residential Buildings
Article 10: BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 10-7
Figure 10.03(3): Examples of Appropriate Multi-Family Residential Building Materials and Colors
Figure 10.03(4): Examples of Appropriate Commercial Building Materials and Colors
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.10.04: Large Retail and Commercial Service
Development Standards
through Section 94.10.04: Large Retail and Commercial Service
Development Standards
Article 10: BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 10-8
(9) Colors. Building colors shall be selected to enhance or maintain general harmony with the existing area or neighborhood buildings, without creating a monotonous street appearance. See examples of appropriate color combinations in Figures 10.03(3) and 10.03(4).
(10) Design. Building design features, materials and articulations shall be continued in all sides.
(11) Roofing. Exposed roofing materials shall be variegated in color and texture in a manner that is complimentary to the color and texture of the façade.
(12) Corner Lot Buildings. Buildings on corner lots shall continue the major front elevation design elements around the corner elevation.
(13) Vents and Mechanical Units. All chimney and fireplace vents shall be enclosed in a case constructed of materials similar to those materials used on the building elevations. Metal housings designed by the vent manufacturer to enclose the chimney vents are acceptable. All heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning equipment shall be designed to be integral with the building architecture and site design and screened from view from public rights-of-way.
(14) Building Orientation. All buildings shall be sited to present their most desirable façade(s) to adjacent public rights-of-way. Garages and loading docks shall be designed as integral elements to the building and site, and shall not be the dominant visual element from public rights-of-way unless pre-existing site or building conditions would not allow this. For multi-family residential buildings, achieving this standard may require techniques such as rear- or side-loaded garages, or front-loaded garages that are fully or partially recessed into the main body of the building. All new loading docks shall be screened from public view to the extent practical. No truck canopies with visible wall hangers are permitted.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
(15) Outdoor Waste/Recycling Containers. Solid waste/recycling containers (dumpsters) stored outdoors shall be subject to applicable standards in Section 94.12.06(2) and Chapter 66 of the Municipal Code.
(16) Waiver or Modification of Standards. The applicable site plan approval authority under Section 94.16.09 may waive or modify any of the standards in this Section if at least one of the following circumstances is present:
(a) Supplemental design elements or improvements that exceed normal standards are incorporated into the project.
(b) Restricted building materials are used as limited decorative elements on a building façade that contributes to its architectural design.
(c) Undesirable site or building conditions will not be visible from the public right-of-way and/or adjoining properties.
Section 94.10.04: Large Retail and Commercial Service Development Standards
A Large Retail and Commercial Service Development is any development comprised of one or more contiguous lots or building sites for a single retail or commercial service enterprise or multiple such enterprises within which the total combined gross floor area of all principal buildings exceeds 25,000 square feet. In addition to applicable zoning district and other standards of this Chapter, each Large Retail and Commercial Service Developments shall meet procedural, building design, and site design standards of this Section, except as may be waived or modified under subsection (4)(t).
(1) Large Retail and Commercial Service Development Questionnaire. The applicant for a conditional use permit shall complete and submit with such application a Large Retail and Commercial Service Development questionnaire. The Zoning Administrator shall prepare, maintain, and provide the Large Retail and Commercial Service Development questionnaire upon request.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.10.04: Large Retail and Commercial Service
Development Standards
through Section 94.10.04: Large Retail and Commercial Service
Development Standards
Article 10: BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 10-9
(2) Traffic Impact Analysis. A traffic impact analysis is required for each Large Retail and Commercial Service Development exceeding 75,000 square feet in total building gross floor area. The traffic impact analysis shall be completed by a consultant approved by the Village and holding appropriate experience and in accordance with the most current revision of the Traffic Impact Analysis Guidelines published by the State of Wisconsin DOT, except as otherwise approved by the Village Engineer. Where the Traffic Impact Analysis indicates that a project may cause off-site public roads, intersections, or interchanges to function below level of service (LOS) C, the Village may deny the application, may require a size reduction in the proposed development, and/or may require the developer to construct and/or pay for required off-site improvements to achieve LOS C for a planning horizon of a minimum of ten years assuming full build-out of the development.
(3) Neighborhood Plan. Applicants for Large Retail and Commercial Service Developments exceeding 75,000 square feet in total building gross floor area shall prepare a neighborhood plan including the subject site and an impact area beyond the boundary of the development site as determined by the Zoning Administrator. The neighborhood plan must be submitted prior to or with the application for conditional use permit. The Zoning Administrator may waive this requirement if a neighborhood plan that anticipated the development has already been adopted or if the impact area is already substantially developed. The neighborhood plan shall be of sufficient detail to establish the mix of land uses and their relationship to the Large Retail and Commercial Service Development with regard to provision of street, bicycle/pedestrian, and bus transit connectivity, utilities, stormwater management, and community character, and a general layout that support the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan. The neighborhood plan shall contain the following elements:
(a) General types of land use types with specific zoning districts and/or land uses.
(b) Transitional treatments such as berms and/or landscaping between areas with differing land uses or character.
(c) Complete public road network.
(d) Pedestrian and bicycle network.
(e) Transit routes and stops, where applicable.
(f) Conceptual stormwater management network.
(g) Public facility sites including parks, schools, conservation areas, public safety facilities and public utility facilities.
(h) Recommendations for community character themes including building materials, landscaping, streetscaping, and signage.
(4) Facilities and Associated Features. The following requirements are applicable to each Large Retail and Commercial Service Development, in addition to other applicable standards in this Chapter:
(a) Building Location. Where buildings are proposed to be distant from a public street, as determined by the Plan Commission, the overall development design shall include smaller buildings on pads or secondary lots closer to the street. Placement and orientation must facilitate appropriate land use transitions and appropriate traffic flow to adjoining roads, and neighboring commercial areas and neighborhoods, and must forward any community character objectives in the Comprehensive Plan.
(b) Building Materials. Exterior building materials shall be of comparable aesthetic quality on all sides. Building materials such as glass, brick, tinted and decorative concrete block, wood, stucco, and exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS) shall be used, as determined appropriate by the Plan Commission. Decorative architectural metal with concealed fasteners or decorative tilt-up concrete panels may be approved if incorporated into the overall design of the building. See Figure 10.04(1).
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.10.04: Large Retail and Commercial Service
Development Standards
through Section 94.10.04: Large Retail and Commercial Service
Development Standards
Article 10: BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 10-10
(c) Building Design. The building design shall complement other buildings in the vicinity, meet Section 94.10.03(6), and include the following (see also examples in Figure 10.04(1)):
1. The building shall employ varying setbacks, heights, roof treatments, doorways, window openings, and other structural or decorative elements to reduce apparent building size and scale.
2. A minimum of 20 percent of the structure’s facades that are visible from a public street shall employ actual protrusions or recesses with a depth of at least four feet. No uninterrupted facade shall extend more than 100 feet.
3. A minimum of 20 percent of all of the combined linear roof eave or parapet lines of the structure shall employ differences in height, with such differences being four feet or more as measured eave to eave or parapet to parapet.
4. Roofs with particular slopes may be required to complement existing buildings or otherwise establish a particular aesthetic objective.
5. Ground floor facades that face public streets shall have arcades (a series of outdoor spaces located under a roof or overhang and supported by columns or arches), display windows, entry areas, awnings, or other such features along no less than 50 percent of their horizontal length. The integration of windows into building design is required, and shall be transparent, clear glass (not tinted) or spandrel glass between three to eight feet above the walkway along any facades facing a public street. The use of blinds shall be acceptable where there is a desire for opacity.
6. Building facades shall include a repeating pattern that includes no less than three of the following elements: (i) color change, (ii) texture change, (iii) material modular change, (iv) expression of architectural or structural bay through a change in plane no less than 24 inches in width, such as an offset, reveal or projecting rib. At least one of these elements shall repeat horizontally. All elements shall repeat at intervals of no more than 30 feet, either horizontally or vertically.
7. All buildings on secondary lots or sites within the development shall be of architectural quality comparable to or exceeding that of the primary building.
(d) Building Entrances. Public building entryways shall be clearly defined and highly visible on the building's exterior design, and shall be emphasized by on-site traffic flow patterns. Two or more of the following design features shall be incorporated into all public building entryways: canopies or porticos, overhangs, projections, arcades, peaked roof forms, arches, outdoor patios, display windows, distinct architectural details.
(e) Building Colors. Building facade colors shall be non-reflective, subtle, neutral, or earth tone. The use of high intensity colors, metallic colors, fluorescent colors or black on facades shall be prohibited. Building trim and architectural accent elements may feature bright colors or black, but such colors shall be muted, not metallic, not fluorescent, and not specific to particular uses or tenants. Standard corporate and trademark colors shall be permitted only on signage. See Figure 10.04(1) for examples.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.10.04: Large Retail and Commercial Service
Development Standards
through Section 94.10.04: Large Retail and Commercial Service
Development Standards
Article 10: BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 10-11
(f) Screening.
1. All ground-mounted and wall-mounted mechanical equipment, refuse containers and any permitted outdoor storage shall be fully concealed from on-site and off-site ground level views, with materials complementing those used on the building exterior.
2. All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened by parapets, upper stories, or other areas of exterior walls or roofs so as to not be visible from public streets adjacent or within 1,000 feet of the subject property. Fences or similar rooftop screening devices may not be used to meet this requirement.
3. Loading docks shall be completely screened from surrounding roads and properties. Said screening may be accomplished through loading areas internal to buildings, screen walls, which match the building exterior in materials and design, fully opaque landscaping at time of planting, or combinations of the above.
4. Gates and fencing may be used for security and access, but not for screening, and they shall be of high aesthetic quality.
(g) Parking.
1. Parking lots in which the number of spaces exceeds the minimum number of parking spaces required for the specific use or uses in Article 4 by more than 50 percent shall be allowed only with specific justification based on actual parking demand for similar uses in other locations.
2. Parking lots shall be designed to create distinct parking areas of not more than 120 parking stalls each through use of landscaped and curbed medians or other approved techniques.
3. Each landscaped island or peninsula shall contain a minimum of 360 square feet in landscaped area. Landscaped islands or peninsulas shall be spaced at intervals no greater than one island per every 20 spaces in that aisle.
(h) Vehicular Access.
1. All such projects shall have direct access to an arterial or collector street.
2. Vehicle access shall be designed to accommodate peak on-site traffic volumes without disrupting traffic on public streets or impairing pedestrian safety. This shall be accomplished through
Figure 10.04(1): Examples of Appropriate Building Materials, Colors, and Architectural Design Variation
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.10.04: Large Retail and Commercial Service
Development Standards
through Section 94.10.04: Large Retail and Commercial Service
Development Standards
Article 10: BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 10-12
adequate parking lot design and capacity; access drive entry throat length, width, design, location, and number; traffic control devices; and sidewalks.
3. The site design shall provide direct vehicular connections to adjacent land uses if required by the Village.
(i) Bicycle and Pedestrian Facilities.
1. The development shall provide for safe pedestrian and bicycle access to all uses, and connections to existing and planned public pedestrian and bicycle facilities and adjacent properties.
2. Pedestrian walkways shall be provided from all building entrances to existing or planned public sidewalks or pedestrian/bike facilities. The minimum width for sidewalks adjacent to buildings shall be eight feet; and the minimum width for sidewalks elsewhere in the development shall be five feet.
3. Sidewalks other than street sidewalks or building aprons shall have adjoining landscaping along at least 50 percent of their length.
4. Crosswalks shall be distinguished from driving surfaces to enhance pedestrian safety by using different materials, or colors, or textures, and signage.
5. The development shall provide secure, integrated bicycle parking at a rate of one bicycle rack space for every 50 vehicle parking spaces.
6. The development shall provide exterior pedestrian furniture in appropriate locations at a minimum rate of one seat for every 20,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(j) Central Areas and Features. Each such development exceeding 75,000 square feet in total building gross floor area shall provide central area(s) or feature(s) such as a patio/seating area, pedestrian plaza with benches, outdoor playground area, water feature, and/or other such deliberately designated areas or focal points that adequately enhance the development or community. All such areas shall be openly accessible to the public, connected to the public and private sidewalk system, designed with materials compatible with the building and remainder of the site, and shall be maintained over the life of the building project.
(k) Cart Returns. A minimum of one 200-square foot cart return area shall be provided for every 100 parking spaces. Cart corrals shall be of durable, non-rusting, all season construction, and shall be designed and colored to be compatible with the building and parking lot light standards.
(l) Outdoor Display Areas. Exterior display areas shall be permitted only where clearly depicted on the approved site plan. All exterior display areas shall be separated from motor vehicle routes by a physical barrier visible to drivers and pedestrians, and by a minimum of ten feet.
(m) Outdoor Storage Uses and Areas. Exterior storage structures or uses, including the parking or storage of service vehicles, trailers, equipment, containers, crates, pallets, merchandise, materials, fork lifts, trash, recyclables, and all other items shall be permitted only where clearly depicted and labeled on the approved site plan. Such outdoor storage uses and areas shall be appropriately screened.
(n) Landscaping. On-site landscaping shall be provided at time of building occupancy and maintained per the requirements of Article 11.
(o) Lighting. On-site exterior lighting shall meet all the standards of Section 94.12.11. In addition, the color and design of pole lighting standards shall be compatible with the building and the public lighting in the area, and shall be uniform throughout the entire development site.
(p) Signage. In addition to meeting the applicable requirements of Article 13, a signage plan for all exterior signage shall be provided for coordinated and complimentary exterior sign locations, configurations, and colors throughout the development, including secondary lots within the development. Combined signs for multiple users may be required instead of multiple individual signs.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.10.04: Large Retail and Commercial Service
Development Standards
through Section 94.10.04: Large Retail and Commercial Service
Development Standards
Article 10: BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 10-13
(q) Natural Resources Protection. Natural resources shall be protected in accordance with this Chapter and State and Federal regulations. In general, existing natural features shall be integrated into the site design as a site and community amenity.
(r) Relationship to Existing Sites. Where such a building is proposed as a replacement location for a business already located within the Village, the Village prohibits any privately imposed limits on the type or reuse of the previously occupied building through conditions of sale or lease.
(s) Development Agreement. The developer may be required to enter into a development agreement with the Village, which may address fees, off-site improvements, and other matters to assure compliance with conditional use permit approval conditions.
(t) Exceptions. In the event the applicant desires a waiver or modification from the requirements of this Section, the applicant shall present justification for such deviation or exception, which may be approved or denied by the Plan Commission.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.10.04: Large Retail and Commercial Service
Development Standards
through Section 94.10.04: Large Retail and Commercial Service
Development Standards
Article 10: BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 10-14
Page intentionally left blank
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Article 11: LANDSCAPING AND PRESERVATION STANDARDS 11-1
Article 11: LANDSCAPING AND PRESERVATION STANDARDS
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.11.01 Purpose through Section 94.11.02: Landscaping Requirements
Article 11: LANDSCAPING AND PRESERVATION STANDARDS 11-2
Section 94.11.11.01 Purpose.01 Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to establish landscaping requirements to provide and maintain vegetation in a manner that promotes the Village’s natural resource protection, aesthetic, and public health goals.
Section 94.11.11.02: Landscaping Requirements .02: Landscaping Requirements
(1) Applicability. Except as exempted elsewhere in this Chapter, any use for which site plan approval is required under Section 94.3.03(10) shall provide landscaping in accordance with the requirements of this Section, including expansion, renovation, and redevelopment of existing buildings and sites. Where the predecessor zoning ordinance, or a Village zoning decision under that ordinance, required landscaping which has not been satisfactorily installed or maintained, the property owner shall be required to install or restore such landscaping. Where the appropriate site plan approval authority under Section 94.16.09 determines that full compliance with the requirements of this Section is impractical, the approval authority may require compliance to the extent it determines practical. Such a determination of “impracticality” may be based on one or more of the following conditions:
(a) Preexisting buildings or impervious services, and/or insufficient lot area, do not provide sufficient green space for full compliance.
(b) Village stormwater management or easement requirements do not provide sufficient area for full compliance.
(c) A redevelopment project would otherwise be infeasible, based on financial information provided by the applicant.
(d) Full compliance would result in a plan in which landscaping would, by maturity, interfere with or compete with one another for survival and may therefore require removal at a later date.
(e) Where a proposed expansion, plus any other expansions in the previous five years, does not exceed 50% of the building or hard surfaced area before such expansion(s).
[Amended via Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
(2) Required Landscape Plan and Preparer Qualifications. All proposed landscape plantings to be located on the subject property shall be depicted on a landscape plan as to their location, type, and size at time of planting and maturity. All landscape plans required under this Article shall be prepared in accordance with landscaping best practices and by a licensed landscape architect, certified landscape designer, or another professional or individual skilled in landscape design. The Zoning Administrator shall have the right to reject any landscape plan that does not follow best practices and/or is not prepared by a person with such credentials or skills.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
(3) Landscape Planting Requirements. Landscaping shall be provided based on the following requirements for street frontages, hard or gravel surfaced areas, building foundations, bufferyards (where applicable), and general yard areas. These requirements are additive to each other and any other landscaping or screening requirements in this Chapter. By approval of the applicable site plan approval authority, required landscaping points may be shifted between areas (e.g., hard surfaced areas to building foundations). The landscaping point system is described in greater detail in subsection (4), below.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.11.02: Landscaping Requirements through Section 94.11.02: Landscaping Requirements
Article 11: LANDSCAPING AND PRESERVATION STANDARDS 11-3
(a) Street Frontages. Street trees shall be planted in accordance with the following standards (see also example in Figure 11.02(1)):
1. The total number of street trees shall be equal to or exceed the ratio of one for each 50 feet of street frontage, minus widths of proposed or existing driveways.
2. Trees shall be planted in the right-of-way along all streets no closer than ten feet from driveways, street signs, fire hydrants, and other above-ground utilities, and 50 feet from the corner of an intersection, as measured from the right-of-way lines extended.
3. When conditions are such that the required spacing cannot be satisfied in the right-of-way or, if in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator the right-of-way is not wide enough to support tree growth, street trees under this subsection shall be planted within the first ten feet inside the sidewalk line.
4. The unpaved portion of a public right-of-way abutting a parcel shall be sodded with a salt tolerant grass equivalent to a mixture containing 30 percent alkali grass.
5. Tree or shrub planting in any public right-of-way or on any public land in the Village shall be governed by Chapter 90 of the Code.
Figure 11.02(1): Street Frontage Landscaping Example
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.11.02: Landscaping Requirements through Section 94.11.02: Landscaping Requirements
Article 11: LANDSCAPING AND PRESERVATION STANDARDS 11-4
(b) Hard and Gravel Surfaced Areas. Within industrial zoning districts, 100 points of landscaping shall be planted for each 2,500 square feet of hard and gravel surfaced area, not including rooftops. Within all other zoning districts, 100 points of landscaping shall be planted for each 1,500 square feet of hard or gravel surfaced area, not including rooftops. Plants required under this subsection shall be installed within landscaped islands within the hard or gravel surfaced area or within 15 feet of its edges, and shall include large deciduous trees unless otherwise approved by the appropriate site plan approval authority. See example in Figure 11.02(2).
Figure 11.02(2): Hard or Gravel Surfaced Area Landscaping Example Assuming Mature Planting Sizes
(c) Building Foundations. Within industrial zoning districts, 100 points of landscaping shall be planted for each 50 lineal feet of exterior building wall that is visible from a public right-of-way or residentially zoned property. Within all other zoning districts, 100 points of landscaping shall be planted for each 75 lineal feet of exterior building wall. Plants required under this subsection must be installed within 20 feet of the building foundation, and shall not include large deciduous shade trees. See example in Figure 11.02(3).
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.11.02: Landscaping Requirements through Section 94.11.02: Landscaping Requirements
Article 11: LANDSCAPING AND PRESERVATION STANDARDS 11-5
Figure 11.02(3): Building Foundation Landscaping Example Assuming Mature Planting Sizes
(d) Bufferyards. A bufferyard is a landscaped area, berm, fence, and/or wall that results in a reduction of visual and other interaction with an adjoining property. A bufferyard shall be provided if required for a particular land use listed in Article 4, and where otherwise required via site plan approval under Section 94.16.09. Where required, bufferyards shall comply with the following.
1. The minimum width of a bufferyard shall be 25 feet, unless reduced by the site plan approval authority if it determines that a lesser width is adequate to separate incompatible uses/activities or is necessary owing to site constraints beyond the control of the owner.
2. No building, parking lot, loading area, motor vehicle circulation area, trash storage area, or outdoor storage area shall be permitted in a required bufferyard.
3. Landscaping within bufferyards shall be selected, positioned, and planted in sufficient quantities to provide an all-season screen within five years of planting and have a minimum height of three feet at time of planting. See example in Figure 11.02(4). Such landscaping shall not count towards any other frontage, hard or gravel surfaced area, building foundation, or general yard area planting requirement of this Article.
4. The use of a decorative opaque fence or wall, and/or a berm, in lieu of or in addition to the landscaping may be approved by the site plan approval authority, provided the slope of any berm is less than 4:1; the berm, fence or wall does not interfere with access, utilities, or stormwater management.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.11.02: Landscaping Requirements through Section 94.11.02: Landscaping Requirements
Article 11: LANDSCAPING AND PRESERVATION STANDARDS 11-6
Figure 11.02(4): Bufferyard Landscaping Example Assuming Mature Planting Sizes
(e) General Yard Areas. Within industrial zoning districts, 100 points of landscaping shall be planted for each 4,000 square feet of total lot area, excluding those areas under a rooftop, hard or gravel surfaced area, required bufferyard, or being reserved for a future phase of development. Within all other zoning districts, 100 points of landscaping shall be planted for each 2,500 square feet of total lot area, excluding those areas under a rooftop, hard or gravel surfaced area, required bufferyard, or being reserved for a future phase of development. Landscaping required by this standard shall be placed where appropriate on the site to maximize visual impact of landscaping, such as in a front or street side yard or adjacent to other uses.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.11.02: Landscaping Requirements through Section 94.11.02: Landscaping Requirements
Article 11: LANDSCAPING AND PRESERVATION STANDARDS 11-7
Figure 11.02(5): General Yard Area Landscaping Example Assuming Mature Planting Sizes
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.11.02: Landscaping Requirements through Section 94.11.02: Landscaping Requirements
Article 11: LANDSCAPING AND PRESERVATION STANDARDS 11-8
Figure 11.02(6): “Complete Picture” Landscaping Example Assuming Mature Planting Sizes (bufferyard will not be required in most cases)
(f) Other Green Space Areas. Green space areas not used for landscape plantings, other than natural resource protection areas, shall be graded and sodded or seeded with a maintainable seed mix. Organic or natural mulch of plantings or planting beds is acceptable, but shall be installed so it does not erode, fall, be plowed, or otherwise transported into walks, drives, streets, or other hard-surfaced portions of the site.
(4) Landscaping Points and Minimum Installation Sizes. Most of the above landscaping requirements are expressed in terms of landscape points. Each plant type, below, is worth a certain number of landscape points that can be used to fulfill the landscaping requirements. Minimum permitted installation sizes for each plant category are provided to ensure that landscaping provides its aesthetic and screening functions at the time of installation and to improve survival rates. The schedule of landscaping points and minimum permitted installation sizes is as presented in Figure 11.02(7).
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.11.02: Landscaping Requirements through Section 94.11.02: Landscaping Requirements
Article 11: LANDSCAPING AND PRESERVATION STANDARDS 11-9
Figure 11.02(7): Landscaping Points, Minimum Installation Size, Examples of Appropriate Species Plant Category Expected Mature Height Minimum Permitted Installation Size Landscape Points per Plant Examples of Appropriate Species1 (see Notes)
Large Deciduous Tree
Greater than 25 feet
2 inch diameter (1½ inch for street trees)
125
Oak2, Honeylocust, Gingko (male)2, Yellowwood, Hackberry2, Basswood or Linden2, Larch, Disease resistant Elm, Kentucky Coffeetree, Freemand or Sugar Maple2, London Planetree,
Small Deciduous Tree
25 feet or less
1½ inch diameter or 8 feet tall minimum
60
Birch, Serviceberry, Hawthorn, MN Redbud3, Callery Pear, Flowering Crab, Ironwood, Japanese Tree Lilac, Hornbean/Hophornbeam3, Amur Corktree, Pagoda Dogwood3, Winter King Hawthorne3, Korean Mountain ash, Ornamental Crabapple (persistent or sterile)3, Newport Plum3, Scarlet Hawthorne2
Evergreen Tree
Usually
greater than 10 feet
4 feet tall
50
Spruce, Hemlock, Cedar, Fir, Pine
Large Shrub (Deciduous or Evergreen)
Usually between 4 and 10 feet
2 feet in height or 2 gallon pot
20
Serviceberry, Dogwood, Euonymus, Sumac, Lilac, Viburnum, Hedge Cotoneaster, Forsythia, Yew, Hazelnut, Ninebark, Arborvitae,
Small Shrub (Deciduous or evergreen)
Usually 4 feet or less
1 foot in height or 1 gallon pot
10
Gro-low Sumac, Weigela, Barberry, Hydrangea, Dwarf-Bush Honeysuckle, Potentilla, Rose, Juniper, Dwarf Ninebark, Azalea, Rhododendron, Spirea
Annual/Perennial Bed (including rain gardens and vegetative roofs)
Varies
Varies
1 point per square foot of bed, up to a maximum of 300 points per lot
Black-eyed Susan, Catmint, Coneflower, Lily, Daylily, Hosta, Ornamental grasses, Lady’s Mantle, Columbine, Aster, Astilbe, Indigo, Brunnera, Cimicifuga, Liatris, Peony, Pachysandra, Sedum, others that are native to the region
Landscaped berm
Minimum of 3 feet
Minimum of 3 feet
1 point per lineal foot of berm, up to a maximum of 150 points per lot
Must be deliberately designed and contoured to provide a screen or buffer to adjoining properties
Notes:
1 Species listed are examples only. Other species such as non-invasive (not aggressive spreaders) and native plant species are also encouraged, except for those prohibited species listed below. Consider salt and snow tolerance when making plant selections.
2 Appropriate trees in street terrace area, where no overhead power lines are present. Shall be balled and burlapped at time of installation.
3 Appropriate trees in street terrace area, where overhead power lines are present. Shall be balled and burlapped.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.11.02: Landscaping Requirements through Section 94.11.02: Landscaping Requirements
Article 11: LANDSCAPING AND PRESERVATION STANDARDS 11-10
(5) Prohibited and Discouraged Species.
(a) The following species are prohibited in the public right-of-way, within 10 feet of any lot line or parking lot perimeter, and in parking lot islands:
1. Ailanthus (Tree of Heaven).
2. American Elm, and any other species of elm not resistant to Dutch Elm Disease
3. Ash (all varieties, until threat of emerald ash borer is eliminated)
4. Buckthorn (common or glossy)
5. Black Locust
6. Box Elder
7. Catalpa
8. Cottonwood (except along water edges)
9. European White Birch
10. Fruit-bearing Trees (excluding crabapples)
11. Honeysuckle
12. Lombard Poplar
13. Mulberry
14. Red Maple
15. Russian Olive
16. Siberian Elm
17. Silver Maple
18. Walnut
19. Willow (except along water edges).
20. Other weak-wooded tree species or species that deposit a significant number of twigs, seed pods, fruits, nuts, and/or other debris, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(b) Evergreen trees are prohibited within the public right-of-way.
(6) Existing Plant Materials. A reasonable attempt shall be made to preserve as many existing trees as is practicable and to incorporate them into the landscape plan, including techniques for preservation. In instances where healthy plant materials of acceptable species, as determined by the Village, exist on a site prior to its development, the application of the standards in this section may be adjusted by the Village to allow credit for such material, provided that such adjustment is consistent with the intent of this Article.
(7) Installation. All landscaping required under this Section shall be installed consistent with Village standard specifications and industry accepted standards and shall be guaranteed by the applicant or the applicant’s contractor for three years. Street terrace trees shall be balled and burlapped. All landscape beds shall be edged in accordance with industry best practices Installation shall occur prior to occupancy or commencement of operations, unless doing so would result in unsatisfactory plant survival. In this case, landscaping shall be installed within six months of occupancy or commencement of operations, and the Village may require a performance guarantee, such as a bond, cash deposit or letter of credit, before a permit or certificate for building occupancy is granted and until such landscaping is installed according to plan.
(a) A single tree species may not exceed twenty percent (20%) of all the tree species proposed to be planted on a single site.
(8) Maintenance. Landscaping required by this Section is intended to be a permanent site improvement. As such, all landscaping shall be continually maintained in a live state. Maintenance shall include periodic and timely watering, irrigation where necessary, replenishment of mulch, weeding, fertilizing, pruning and any other such normally required horticulture activity necessary to keep all landscaping in a healthy, safe and aesthetically pleasing state. Recognizing that over time plants may mature and die or otherwise expire because of natural or unnatural causes; maintenance shall also include the removal and replacement of dead or dying plants. Such replacement shall occur within the same year in which a plant dies or in the
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.11.03 Lawn Care, Alternative Groundcover,
and the Preservation of Topography
through Section 94.11.03 Lawn Care, Alternative Groundcover,
and the Preservation of Topography
Article 11: LANDSCAPING AND PRESERVATION STANDARDS 11-11
spring planting season of the following year. Landscaping shall also be subject to applicable maintenance standards with Section 50.102 of the Code.
(9) Location in Utility Easements. Planting in utility easements is at the risk of the property owner. Any plants that must be removed because of utility work within such easements shall be replaced by the property owner at his or her cost.
[Amended via Ord. No 17-006, 4/19/2017]
Section 94.11.03 Lawn Care, Alternative Groundcover, and the Preservation of Topography
(1) Lawn Care and Alternative Groundcover. Care of lawns, gardens, and natural areas shall comply with the requirements of Section 50.102(h) of the Code
(2) Preservation of Topography.
(a) With development of any land, effort shall be maintained to preserve pre-existing topography to the extent practical and consistent with safe, efficient, and attractive land development.
(b) No structure shall be built that would alter the existing drainage or topography in any way as to adversely affect the adjoining property(ies).
(c) In no case shall any slope exceed the normal angle of slippage of the material involved.
(d) No change in existing topography shall be made that would result in increasing the slope of any land within a distance of 20 feet from a property line to a ratio greater than four horizontal to one vertical (maximum 4:1 slope).
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.11.03 Lawn Care, Alternative Groundcover,
and the Preservation of Topography
through Section 94.11.03 Lawn Care, Alternative Groundcover,
and the Preservation of Topography
Article 11: LANDSCAPING AND PRESERVATION STANDARDS 11-12
This page intentionally left blank
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-1
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.01: Purpose and Applicability through Section 94.12.03: Fences, Landscape Walls, and Hedges
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-2
Section 94.12.01: Purpose and Applicability
(1) Purpose.Purpose. The purpose of this The purpose of this Article is to indicate requirements for drainage structures, earis to indicate requirements for drainage structures, earth th filling/moving, fences, swimming pools, vehicle accessfilling/moving, fences, swimming pools, vehicle access and drivewaysand driveways, parking and circulation, off, parking and circulation, off--street street loading, exterior storage, exterior lighting,loading, exterior storage, exterior lighting, vibration, noise, air pollution, odors, , glare, heat, fire and vibration, noise, air pollution, odors, , glare, heat, fire and explosion, toxic and noxious materialexplosion, toxic and noxious materials, waste materials, exterior construction materials, and hazardous s, waste materials, exterior construction materials, and hazardous materials.materials.
(2) Non-applicability to Agricultural and Single- and Two-family Residential Land Uses. Except where a performance standard in this Article is specifically made applicable to agricultural uses and single- and two-family residential land uses in this Article, such uses and associated structures are exempt from these requirements (but subdivisions intended for future residential use are not exempt).
Section 94.12.02: Stormwater Management, Earth Filling, and Excavating
(1) Stormwater Management and Erosion Control. All stormwater management and erosion control improvements shall comply with all applicable Village, County, State, and Federal standards, including Chapter 86, Article 5 of the Code if within the Village. The Village encourages rain gardens, bioswales, and other similar natural forms of stormwater management and infiltration.
(2) Earth Filling and Excavating. Earth filling and excavating activities include any activity in an area over 4,000 square feet, or greater than 500 cubic yards of fill, involving the modification of the earth's surface above that in its undisturbed state. Earth filling and excavating activities:
(a) Shall comply with the Village’s Construction Site Erosion Control and Storm Water Management regulations if within the Village.
(b) Shall not increase drainage onto other properties or impede on-site drainage.
(c) Shall comply with provisions of the Village Subdivision Ordinance.
Section 94.12.12.0.033: Fences, Landscape Walls, and Hedges: Fences, Landscape Walls, and Hedges
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this The purpose of this SectionSection is to reis to regulate the materials, location, height, and maintenance of gulate the materials, location, height, and maintenance of fencing, landscaping walls, and decorative posts in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to fencing, landscaping walls, and decorative posts in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public.promote the general welfare of the public.
(2) Applicability. The requirements of this The requirements of this SectionSection applapply to all permanent fencing, landscape walls, and y to all permanent fencing, landscape walls, and decorative posts equal to or exceeding decorative posts equal to or exceeding fourfour feetfeet in height.in height.
(3) Standards
(a) Traffic Visibility. All fences, walls, and hedges must comply with the vision clearance requirements of Section 94.12.08(12).
(b) Access. No fence shall be considered a hardship to access a rear yard, for purposes of storage of vehicles or other purposes in this Chapter.
(c) Fences for All Residentially Zoned Land, in Any RR or PR District, and for Any Residential Use Regardless of District
1. Street Yard Fences. The maximum height of each fence, wall, or continuous hedge shall be four feet within the front yard and six feet within any side or rear yard where the associated lot line abuts a public street. In such instances, fences, walls, and hedges shall be set back a minimum of two feet from the property line abutting the public street.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.03: Fences, Landscape Walls, and Hedges through Section 94.12.03: Fences, Landscape Walls, and Hedges
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-3
2. Interior Side and Rear Yard Fences. The maximum height of each fence or wall in the interior side and interior rear yard shall be six, and any such fence or wall may be installed up to the property line.
(d) Fences within all Non-residential Zoning Districts, Except for RM and for Residential Fences Located in Such Districts.
1. Fences, walls, and continuous hedges not exceeding ten feet in height are permitted. Such fence, wall, or continuous hedge shall be set back a minimum of two feet from any front or street side property line abutting a public street, but may be installed up to the property line of interior side and rear yards.
2. Fences, walls, or continuous hedges may be required for screening particular land uses per Article 4 and Section 94.11.02(3)(d).
(e) Agricultural-related Fences. Garden fences, partition fences under Wis. Stat. Chapter 90, and all other fencing within agricultural and RM zoning districts, shall be exempt from the requirements of this Section, except that all front and street side yard fences shall adhere to the front yard fence requirements for residential districts where such regulation is not prohibited by Statute. Agricultural-related fences under this subsection shall not require a zoning permit or building permit, except for garden fences that are closer than two feet from any property line.
(f) Temporary Fences. Fences erected for the protection of plantings or to warn of construction hazards or for similar purposes shall be clearly visible or marked with colored streamers or other such warning devices at four-foot intervals. Such fences shall comply with any setback requirements set forth in this Section. The issuance of a permit shall not be necessary for temporary fences. Temporary fences may be installed and maintained for a period not exceeding the term of construction, or 180 days if not associated with a construction project.
(g) Permanent Fence Appearance. For each permanent fence with a more finished or a more decorative (non-structural) side, such side shall face toward the adjoining property or right-of-way. Residential fences in a front or street side yard shall be of semi-open designs, such as vertical picket, weaved lattice, or wrought iron bars. Each permanent fence shall be of consistent design and color, and color shall be compatible with the predominant color of the principal building on the same lot.
(h) Construction and Maintenance. All fences, landscape walls, or decorative posts shall be constructed and maintained in a structurally sound and attractive manner per manufacturer’s instructions. Living hedges must be trimmed so that all limbs remain entirely within the property. Each fence shall be built and maintained with a single material and a single color for its full length.
(i) Prohibited Fences
1. The use of a fence that delivers an electric shock is prohibited, except for electric fences used for the confinement of livestock or undomesticated animals in any agricultural zoning district.
2. Fences within and adjacent to any residential and RR zoning district, and for residential uses regardless of zoning district, may not be comprised of stranded wire, exposed/reflective metal, or corrugated metal.
3. The use of barbed wire, razor wire, or similar cutting wire is prohibited on any fence, except in any non-residential district on top of a security fence on which the wire is a minimum of eight feet above ground level and the wire section is directed inward, or for confinement of livestock or undomesticated animals in agricultural districts.
4. Snow fences or other fences designed for temporary use shall not be used for a period exceeding 30 days in any residential or non-residential or mixed use zoning district. Snow fences shall not exceed four feet in height, and are prohibited between May 1 and November 1 of each year. No privately owned snow fence shall extend beyond the highway right-of-way line.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.04: Swimming Pools through Section 94.12.04: Swimming Pools
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-4
[Amended via Ord. 16-046, 12/21/2016; Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
Section 94.12.12..0404: Swimming Pools: Swimming Pools
(1) Applicability. This section applies to all swimming pools as defined in Section 94.17.04, excluding structures exempted by that definition.
(2) Permit Required. Before work is commenced on the construction or erection of a swimming pool or on Before work is commenced on the construction or erection of a swimming pool or on any alterations, additions, remany alterations, additions, remodeling, or other improvements, an application for a swimming pool building odeling, or other improvements, an application for a swimming pool building permit to construct, erect, alter, remodel, or add thereto must be submitted in writing to the Building permit to construct, erect, alter, remodel, or add thereto must be submitted in writing to the Building Inspector. Plans and specifications and pertinent explanatory data Inspector. Plans and specifications and pertinent explanatory data shallshall be be submitted to the Building submitted to the Building Inspector at the time of application. No work or any part of the work shall be commenced until a written Inspector at the time of application. No work or any part of the work shall be commenced until a written permit for such work is obtained by the applicant. permit for such work is obtained by the applicant. The required The required fee shall accompany such application.fee shall accompany such application.
(3) Construction Requirements.
(a) Approved Materials. All materials and methods of construction in the construction, alteration, addition, remodeling, or other improvements and pool installation shall be in accord with all State regulations and with any and all applicable ordinances of the Village.
(b) Plumbing. All plumbing work shall be in accordance with all applicable local ordinances and all State codes and requirements. Every swimming pool shall be provided with a suitable draining method, meeting the requirements of subsection (8) below.
(c) Electrical Installations. All electrical installations, including lighting and heating, but not limited thereto, that are provided for, installed, and used in conjunction with a private swimming pool shall be in conformance with State laws and local ordinances regulating electrical installations.
(4) Placement and Setbacks.
(a) Swimming pools shall be erected or constructed in rear yard only and only on a lot occupied by a principal building.
(b) All swimming pools shall meet the side and rear setback requirements applicable to accessory structures in Figures 5.01(2) and 5.02(2).
(5) Enclosure.
(a) Each swimming ppool ool as defined in as defined in Section 94Section 94.17.17.04 .04 shall be completely enclosed by a fenceshall be completely enclosed by a fence, wall,, wall, cover, or other protective device cover, or other protective device of sufficient strength to prevent access to the poolof sufficient strength to prevent access to the pool by a person by a person weighing 250 pounds or lessweighing 250 pounds or less. .
(b) If a fence or wall is used for the required enclosure, sIf a fence or wall is used for the required enclosure, such fence or wall shall not be less than uch fence or wall shall not be less than fourfour feet in feet in heightheight. T. The he ZoninZoning Administratorg Administrator may require a minimum of six feet in height upon a determination may require a minimum of six feet in height upon a determination that the selected fence design will facilitate climbing. that the selected fence design will facilitate climbing. The pool wall of an above ground pool may serve The pool wall of an above ground pool may serve as all or part of the required fence height. Fences or walls shall nas all or part of the required fence height. Fences or walls shall notot have voids, holes, or openings larger have voids, holes, or openings larger than four inches in one dimension. Gates or doors shall be equipped with selfthan four inches in one dimension. Gates or doors shall be equipped with self--closing and selfclosing and self--latching latching devices located at the top of the gate or door on the pool side of the enclosure, except the door of any devices located at the top of the gate or door on the pool side of the enclosure, except the door of any buildingbuilding that forms a part of the enclosure. that forms a part of the enclosure.
(c) If a cover or other protective device is used for the required enclosure, such cover or other protective device shall have a strength, design, and material that meets the requirements of this Section and is securely fastened in place when the swimming pool is not in use.
(6) Compliance. All swimming pools existing All swimming pools existing as of as of March 18, 2015March 18, 2015 not satisfactorily fenced shall comply with not satisfactorily fenced shall comply with the fencing requirements of this the fencing requirements of this SSectionection when water is placed in the pool. when water is placed in the pool.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.05: Firewood Storage through Section 94.12.05: Firewood Storage
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-5
(7) Maximum Pool Size. No pool, together with its deck area, shall occupy more than 40 percent of the usable area of the rear yard excluding all garages or accessory structures located in the area.
(8) Draining and Approval Thereof. No swimming pool shall be constructed so as to allow water to drain No swimming pool shall be constructed so as to allow water to drain into any sanitary sewer nor to overflow upon or cause damage to any adjoining property. into any sanitary sewer nor to overflow upon or cause damage to any adjoining property. Draining a swimming pool into public streets, other public property, or the storm sewer system may occur only with the prior approval of the Village Director of Public Works.
(9) Filter System Required. All swimming pools must have, in connection therewith, some filtratiAll swimming pools must have, in connection therewith, some filtration system on system to ensure proper circulation of the water therein and maintenance of the proper bacterial quality thereof.to ensure proper circulation of the water therein and maintenance of the proper bacterial quality thereof.
(10) Dirt Bottoms Prohibited. All swimming pools shall have the sides and bottom of a smooth finish, and All swimming pools shall have the sides and bottom of a smooth finish, and no sand or dirt bottom shall be permittno sand or dirt bottom shall be permitted.ed.
Section 94.12.12..0505: Firewood: Firewood StorageStorage
(1) Applicability. This section is applicable in all residential zoning districts and for lots that are occupied by residences and located within non-residential and mixed-use zoning districts (except for the RM district), as those terms are defined in Section 94.17.04.
(2) Definitions Applicable to this Section. See also Figure 12.05.
(a) Cord of wood means a unit of wood cut for fuel equal to a stack eight-foot wide by four-foot high by four-foot deep or 128 cubic feet.
(b) Face cord of wood means a unit of wood cut for fuel equal to a stack eight-foot wide by four-foot high by 18 inches deep or 48 cubic feet.
(c) Outside storage of firewood means any firewood which is not enclosed by four walls and a roof.
(d) Processing of firewood means the cutting of logs/wood and or the splitting of wood for burning.
(e) Firewood means any wood or wood product used or intended to be used as heating fuel in a residence or for burning in recreational fires as defined and regulated in Section 34.209(b)(2) of the Weston Municipal Code. Painted or treated wood shall not be considered firewood.
(f) Neat, secure stack means a stack of firewood that is piled in regular, orderly arrangement that is stable and reasonably resistant to collapse.
Figure 12.05: Visual Examples of Different Firewood Storage Configurations
(3) Outside Storage of Firewood. Except for firewood and construction materials necessary for on-site use or work, no wood or wood product shall be kept or stored outdoors. Firewood may be stored solely for use on the premises and not for resale. No person shall permit the outside storage of firewood in the
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.06: Exterior Storage Standards through Section 94.12.06: Exterior Storage Standards
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-6
front yard and/or on any side yard abutting a street, except that firewood may be temporarily stored in the front yard and/or in any side yard abutting a street for a period not to exceed 15 days from the date of its delivery. Firewood shall be neatly stacked and stored no closer than three feet from any lot line and not higher than four feet from grade. No more than five full cords of wood shall be stored outside unscreened at any given time. Woodpiles that contain diseased wood that is capable of transmitting disease to healthy trees and woodpiles that harbor or are infested or inhabited by rats or other vermin are considered public nuisances and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of the Village Municipal Code.
(4) Processing of Firewood. No person shall process firewood between the hours of seven p.m. and seven a.m., and no property shall process firewood for more than six total hours during the permitted time. Processing must be completed within 45 days or less of delivery and may not begin again for sixty days. Processing may only be done two times in a calendar year. No persons shall process firewood on the property that is not for the owner/occupant’s personal use at the said property. All brush, bark, and refuse from processing of firewood shall be promptly and properly disposed of or processed as mulch and shall not be allowed to remain on said premises.
(5) Non-conforming Woodpiles to be Removed. Those individuals not in compliance with this Section as of March 18, 2015 shall have one year from such date to comply.
[Amended via Ord. 16-046, 12/21/2016]
Section 94.12.06: Exterior Storage Standards
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this The purpose of this SectionSection is to regulate the use ois to regulate the use of property for exterf property for exterior storage, ior storage, except except as as otherwise specifically regulated in this Article.otherwise specifically regulated in this Article. The Section is designed The Section is designed to promote the safety and general to promote the safety and general welfare of the public. welfare of the public. Additional standards for outdoor storage applicable to specific land uses as specified Additional standards for outdoor storage applicable to specific land uses as specified in in Article Article shall also apply.shall also apply.
(2) Exterior Storage Standards for Multi-Family Dwellings and Non-Residential Facilities and Properties.
(a) All exterior (outside) storage of recyclable and non-recyclable containers, within multi—family dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties (all land uses other than “Single-Family Detached Residence”, “Two-Family Residence”, and “Agricultural Use”), shall be placed and maintained within a three-sided enclosure and enclosed on the fourth side with a gate to contain garbage, refuse, waste, recycling, and other debris. The enclosure shall further meet all of the following requirements:
1. Subject to accessory structure setback requirements included in Figures 5.01(2) and 5.02(2).
2. Must be at least 10 feet from any combustible walls, openings, or combustible roof eave lines, as per NFPA 1 (most recent addition).
3. Not placed in any minimum required front or street side yard.
4. Must be placed to the interior side or rear of the principal structure, unless such a location is not possible in the determination of the Zoning Administrator.
5. Must be a minimum of 30-feet long by 10-feet wide.
6. Must be 8-feet tall.
7. Placed on a permanent hard surface.
8. The recyclable and non-recyclable containers shall be fully screened and not visible from public rights-of-way and adjacent properties from the ground level; the screening shall consist of a solid fence constructed of masonry, commercial grade wood fencing, or other commercial grade material approved by the Zoning Administrator.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.06: Exterior Storage Standards through Section 94.12.06: Exterior Storage Standards
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-7
9. This fence shall be constructed in such a manner so as to prevent paper, debris, and other refuse material from being blown through the fence.
10. The Village’s Refuse and Recycling Site Application must be submitted and approved by the Village prior to installation. The owner shall provide proof to the Zoning Administrator, from the owner’s contracted solid waste/recycling hauler, that the design provides safe and reasonable access to the hauler to provide the contracted service.
(b) The site plan approval authority, or Zoning Administrator in the case where the project does not require site plan approval under this chapter, may waive or modify one or more requirements in subsection (a). Such waiver or modification may be provided only if the authority or Administrator determines that the intent of the ordinance requirement(s) will be met in another way and that the reduction is not contrary to the public interest, the purpose of this chapter, and the purpose of the associated zoning district.
(c) The exterior storage of non-recyclable and recyclable material, and associated containers and enclosures, which are not in compliance with this subsection as of March 18, 2015, shall have one year from such date to comply.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
(3) Motor Vehicle Storage. Except in AR and RM zoning districts, storage of operable and licensed motor Except in AR and RM zoning districts, storage of operable and licensed motor vehicles shall be on a hard or gravel surface. No motor vehicle in any zoning district svehicles shall be on a hard or gravel surface. No motor vehicle in any zoning district shall be stored within hall be stored within the minimum hard or gravel surface setbacks of Article 5. All motor vehicle storage areas shall be the minimum hard or gravel surface setbacks of Article 5. All motor vehicle storage areas shall be landscaped in accordance with Article 11. Storage or parking of semilandscaped in accordance with Article 11. Storage or parking of semi--trailers, busses, and trailers, busses, and heavyheavy--dutyduty trucks trucks on property zoned or usedon property zoned or used for residential purposes is prohibited. for residential purposes is prohibited.
Figure 12.06: Example of Appropriate Dumpster Enclosure Design
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.07: Outdoor Recreational Vehicle Storage through Section 94.12.07: Outdoor Recreational Vehicle Storage
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-8
(4) Inoperable Vehicles and Junk. The outside storage of inoperable or unlicensed vehicles, appliances, and The outside storage of inoperable or unlicensed vehicles, appliances, and other junk or trash shall be prohibited, except as described within the “Junkyard or Salvage Yard” and other junk or trash shall be prohibited, except as described within the “Junkyard or Salvage Yard” and “Outdoo“Outdoor and Vehicle Repair and Maintenance” land use performance standards and for those uses r and Vehicle Repair and Maintenance” land use performance standards and for those uses approved in accordance with the requirements of this approved in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter. The storage of inoperable vehicles in . The storage of inoperable vehicles in association with said uses shall be on a hard or gravel surface meetassociation with said uses shall be on a hard or gravel surface meeting applicable hard or gravel surface ing applicable hard or gravel surface setback requirements; and is also subject to the regulations set forth in Section 50.105 of the Code.setback requirements; and is also subject to the regulations set forth in Section 50.105 of the Code.
(5) Construction Materials and Equipment Related to On-site Construction. Except within agricultural Except within agricultural zoning districts, all temporary storage of construction materials and equipment related to onzoning districts, all temporary storage of construction materials and equipment related to on--site site construction shall be set back a minimum of construction shall be set back a minimum of three three feet from any interior sfeet from any interior side or rear property line, and ide or rear property line, and outside of any front or soutside of any front or street side yardtreet side yard unless provided site plan approval under unless provided site plan approval under Section 94Section 94.16.16.09.09..
[Amended via Ord. 16-046, 12/21/16; Ord. 17-007, 4/19/17; Ord 17-016, 6/21/2017]
Section 94.12.07: Outdoor Recreational Vehicle Storage
(1) General Requirements for Recreational Vehicles.
(a) All recreational vehicles must be operable, have current registration, and be in good repair to be parked outdoors.
(b) All recreational vehicles that are also licensed, drivable motor vehicles shall be kept on a hard surface as defined in Section 94.17.04, or on gravel surface that was in existence as of March 18, 2015.
(c) Where a recreational vehicle is permitted to be stored on a vegetative surface such as grass, the grass must be maintained and free of weeds and tall grass per applicable requirements of Section 50.102(H) of the Municipal Code.
(d) Recreational vehicles shall not be stored on or extend into the public right-of-way or public access easement, including but not limited to on a public street or over a public sidewalk or path.
(e) Each recreational vehicle shall not be used as a dwelling unit for more than 7 days per calendar year, and shall not be considered or used as an accessory structure.
(f) No recreational vehicle shall be connected to municipal water, sanitary sewer, or a private on-site wastewater treatment system at any time, except for maintenance.
(g) An unlimited number of recreational vehicles may be stored in fully enclosed buildings as allowed under this Chapter.
(2) Within Residential, Rural and Open Space Zoning Districts, and for Residential Uses.
(a) A maximum of two recreational vehicles may be stored outdoors on each residentially zoned lot, and on each lot that is used for residential purposes, except within rural and open space zoning districts. Within rural and open space zoning districts, a maximum of four recreational vehicles may be stored outdoors. A trailer and other recreational vehicle(s) mounted on it shall count as one recreational vehicle for purposes of these quantitative limitations.
(b) Outdoor storage of recreational vehicles in such zoning districts shall be permitted in a side yard but set back from the side property line a distance equal to the parking setback in the associated zoning district under Figure 5.01(2).
(c) Outdoor storage of recreational vehicles in such zoning districts shall be permitted in the front yard if on hard surface, or if on a gravel surface that was in existence as of March 18, 2015. Such hard or gravel surface shall be a component to or attached to the driveway that connects to the public roadway.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.08 Access and Driveway Standards through Section 94.12.08 Access and Driveway Standards
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-9
(d) Outdoor storage of recreational vehicles shall not be permitted in the rear yard in residential zoning districts, except where such storage is accompanied by a bufferyard as provided in Section 94.11.02(3)(d). Outdoor storage of recreational vehicles shall be permitted in the rear yard in rural and open space zoning districts but set back from the rear and side property lines a distance equal to the parking setbacks in the associated zoning district under Figure 5.01(2).
(3) Permitted Locations, Non-Residential Zoning Districts.
(a) Residential uses within non-residential zoning districts shall be subject to the limitations in subsection (2).
(b) Outside storage of recreational vehicles associated with an allowed vehicle retail sale, service, or repair land use in a non-residential district, or commercial storage of recreational vehicles shall be regulated as an “Outdoor Display” land use and is subject to site plan approval for that use.
(c) Recreational vehicles shall not be stored on or extend into the public right-of-way, including but not limited to on a public street or over the public sidewalk.
Section 94.12.08 Access and Driveway Standards
(1) Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of this The purpose of this SectionSection is to alleviate or prevent congestion ois to alleviate or prevent congestion of public f public rightsrights--ofof--way, protect and enhance property values and community aesthetics, and way, protect and enhance property values and community aesthetics, and promote the safety and promote the safety and general welfare of the general welfare of the traveling traveling publicpublic.. This Section esThis Section establishestablishes minimum requirements for the provision of minimum requirements for the provision of access to public rightsaccess to public rights--ofof--way in accordance with the utilization of various sites.way in accordance with the utilization of various sites.
(2) Roadway Access Control. Access control to public roadways Access control to public roadways and driveway access design standards and driveway access design standards shall shall be per Chapter be per Chapter 71 71 of the Village of of the Village of Weston Weston Municipal Code Municipal Code
(3) Depiction on Required Site Plan. The configuration and location of all proposed access drives on a The configuration and location of all proposed access drives on a property shall be depicted on any required site plan.property shall be depicted on any required site plan.
(4) Distance from Property Line. The distance from an access drive The distance from an access drive or parking lot or parking lot to the property line shall to the property line shall not be less than not be less than the minimum associated setbackthe minimum associated setback for for hard and landscaped surfacehard and landscaped surface areas in areas in Figures 5.01(2) Figures 5.01(2) and 5.02(2)and 5.02(2), except , except in the case of approved shared drivewaysin the case of approved shared driveways, shared parkin, shared parking lots, and crossg lots, and cross--access waysaccess ways..
(5) Width of Driveways. All openings for access drives All openings for access drives onto public streets shall onto public streets shall adhere to theadhere to the widths as widths as specified in Chapter specified in Chapter 7171 of the Code.of the Code.
(6) Traffic Control. Traffic into and out of all offTraffic into and out of all off--street parking, loading, and traffic street parking, loading, and traffic circulation areas serving circulation areas serving six or more parking spaces shall be forward moving, with no backing into streets or pedestrian ways. six or more parking spaces shall be forward moving, with no backing into streets or pedestrian ways.
(7) Surfacing. Driveway surfacing shall be per Section 94.12.09(6)(a).
(8) All Garages to be Served by Driveways. All garages intended for vehicle parking shall be served by a driveway extending from the garage to the curb or street edge. Where such driveway(s) meets the garage, the width shall be, at minimum, the width of all garage door openings.
(9) Installation Timing. Except for apron sections within public rights-of-way, no residential driveway shall be constructed until the owner has been issued a building permit for the residence. Each residential driveway shall be constructed prior to occupancy of the associated dwelling, except in cases when construction of the dwelling is completed between December 1st and March 31st. In such cases, driveways must be installed no later than June 1st following occupancy.
(10) Provision for Sidewalk. Where there is existing curb and gutter street sidewalks shall be installed for all new construction and substantial remodels, which exceed 50% of the assessed value, of a structure, regardless if a sidewalk is present on either side of said project, in accordance with the Village’s Complete Streets Policy. Where the construction project or remodel does not exceed 50% of the assessed value then all driveways, new or existing, shall accommodate a 5-foot wide concrete sidewalk section within the
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.08 Access and Driveway Standards through Section 94.12.08 Access and Driveway Standards
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-10
public right-of-way, built to Village sidewalk standards, to maintain connection with existing sidewalks or to allow for the connection of future sidewalks on either side of the driveway. Plan Commission may waive the above stated provisions under the following circumstances:
(a) The Village Capital Improvement Plan and/or sidewalk and trail planning maps, or similar planning documents do not include sidewalks within the project neighborhood; or
(b) The Director of Public Works has determined that future sidewalk grades cannot be determined or;
(c) The Director of Public Works has determined that substantial grading of the area between the curb and the right-of-way line is required for both the subject parcel and both neighboring parcels.
(11) Maintenance.Maintenance. All driveways shall be maintained so as to prevent the transport All driveways shall be maintained so as to prevent the transport of gravel, dirt, or other of gravel, dirt, or other material from the property into the material from the property into the public public rightright--ofof--way.way.
(12) Vision Clearance Triangles. Within vision clearance triangles, no signs, structures, earthwork, vegetation,Within vision clearance triangles, no signs, structures, earthwork, vegetation, or other obstructions between 18 inches and tenor other obstructions between 18 inches and ten feet in height shall be permitted, except for tree trunksfeet in height shall be permitted, except for tree trunks, , mailboxesmailboxes and sign poles.and sign poles. The vision clearance triangle shall apply where public streets intersect, and where The vision clearance triangle shall apply where public streets intersect, and where private driveways and alleys intersectprivate driveways and alleys intersect with public streets, per the following with public streets, per the following standardsstandards (as also represented in (as also represented in Figure 12.08).Figure 12.08).
(a) Where public streets intersect with each other. To draw the first two lines of the triangle, measure 20 feet from the point of intersection of the two street rights-of-way along the two right-of-way lines. Next, draw a third straight line between the ends of the first two lines to form the vision clearance triangle.
(b) Where a private driveway or alley intersects with a public street. To draw the first two lines of the triangle, measure from the point of intersection between the public street right-of-way and the private driveway/alley surface edge a distance of 10 feet where the intersecting local street is a local street, 15 feet where a collector street, and 20 feet where an arterial street. Next, draw a third straight line between the ends of the first two lines to form the vision clearance triangle.
[Amended via Ord. 16-028, 5/18/2016, Ord. 17-008, 4/19/2017]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
through
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-11
Figure 12.08: Representation of Minimum Dimensional Requirements Affecting Vehicular Access
Minimum Distances/Widths
A: Generally 75 to 300 feet (see Chapter 71 of Code))
B: 12 feet for one-way/24 feet for two-way (for non-residential uses)
C: 20 feet (for non-residential uses)
D: 10 ft for local street, 15 ft for collector street, 20 ft for arterial street
E: 20 feet (on each non-hypotenuse side)
F: 10 feet (8 ½ feet for end spaces)
G: 18 feet
H: 6 feet (where vehicles parked against walkway)
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.09: Off-Street Parking and Traffic
Circulation Standards
through Section 94.12.09: Off-Street Parking and Traffic
Circulation Standards
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-12
Section 94.12.09: Off-Street Parking and Traffic Circulation Standards
(1) Purpose and Applicability.
(a) The purpose of this The purpose of this SectionSection is to alleviate or prevent congestion of public rightsis to alleviate or prevent congestion of public rights--ofof--way so as to way so as to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the provision of offprovision of off--street parking street parking and circulation. and circulation.
(b) The requirements of this The requirements of this SectionSection shashall apply to all uses other than agricultural uses.ll apply to all uses other than agricultural uses.
(c) The requirements of this SThe requirements of this Section shall not apply ection shall not apply to to the the ordinary maintenance and ordinary maintenance and repairrepairss of existing of existing parkingparking, driveway, and other circulation areas, driveway, and other circulation areas.. Ordinary maintenance and repairs are Ordinary maintenance and repairs are defined asdefined as activitactivities ies that are reasonably necessary to extend the life and/or prevent the deterioration of the surface, that are reasonably necessary to extend the life and/or prevent the deterioration of the surface, including sweeping, pot hole filling, chip and crack sealing, resealing (but not resurfacing), and including sweeping, pot hole filling, chip and crack sealing, resealing (but not resurfacing), and replenishment of gravel to an approved gravel surface wreplenishment of gravel to an approved gravel surface where hardhere hard--surfacing is not surfacing is not otherwise otherwise required required by this Section.by this Section.
(2) Depiction on Required Site Plan; Parking Lot Permit. Any and all Any and all proposed proposed parking and traffic parking and traffic circulation areas shall be depicted as to their location and configuration on the site plan, if circulation areas shall be depicted as to their location and configuration on the site plan, if a sa site plan is ite plan is required required under under Section 94Section 94.3.03(10).3.03(10). . ForFor any any construction, expansion, construction, expansion, or or reconstruction of a parking lot with reconstruction of a parking lot with six or more parkingsix or more parking spacesspaces,, where a site plan is not required under Section 94.3.03(10), where a site plan is not required under Section 94.3.03(10), a parking lot permit a parking lot permit shall shall instead instead be requiredbe required. Such permit shall be issued by the Z. Such permit shall be issued by the Zoning Administratoroning Administrator, following submittal of a , following submittal of a completed application form, all required material under such formcompleted application form, all required material under such form, p, payment of ayment of thethe associated fee per theassociated fee per the Village’s fee scheduleVillage’s fee schedule, and the Zoning Administrator’s determination of compliance with applicable , and the Zoning Administrator’s determination of compliance with applicable requirements of this Chapter.requirements of this Chapter.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
(3) Use of Off-Street Parking Areas; Snow Storage. Except as otherwise allowed below, the use of all offhe use of all off--street parking areas shall be limited to the parking of licensed street parking areas shall be limited to the parking of licensed and and operable vehicles not for lease, rent, or operable vehicles not for lease, rent, or sale. Within residensale. Within residentially zoned property, tially zoned property, only only licensed and licensed and operable cars and trucks with a rated operable cars and trucks with a rated gross gross vehicle weight vehicle weight of 26,000 pounds or lessof 26,000 pounds or less shall be parked or kept in parking areas or any other exterior shall be parked or kept in parking areas or any other exterior locationlocation.. The use of parking spaces The use of parking spaces and their circulation areas and their circulation areas for purposesfor purposes such as seasonal salessuch as seasonal sales and snow and snow storage storage shall be permitted only if sufficient parking spaces remain available to meet the parking shall be permitted only if sufficient parking spaces remain available to meet the parking requirements of this requirements of this chapter and chapter and normal trafficnormal traffic and pedestrianand pedestrian movement movement and safety and safety is not impeded.is not impeded.
(4) Traffic Circulation and Traffic Control. Site circulation sSite circulation shall be designed to provide for the safe and hall be designed to provide for the safe and efficient movement of all traffic entering, exiting, and on the site. Circulation shall be provided to meet the efficient movement of all traffic entering, exiting, and on the site. Circulation shall be provided to meet the individual needs of the site with specific mixing of access and through movements, and where requirindividual needs of the site with specific mixing of access and through movements, and where required, ed, shall be depicted on the required site plan. Circulation patterns shall be depicted on the required site plan. Circulation patterns and traffic control measures and traffic control measures shall conform shall conform to the general rules of the road to the general rules of the road and theand the requirements of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.requirements of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(5) Installation and Maintenance of Off-Street Parking and Traffic Circulation Areas. All offAll off--street street parking and traffic circulation areas shall be completed prior to building occupancy and shall be maintained parking and traffic circulation areas shall be completed prior to building occupancy and shall be maintained in a dustin a dust--free condition at all times.free condition at all times.
(6) Off-Street Parking and Traffic Circulation Design Standards.
(a) Surfacing. All off-street parking, driveway, and traffic circulation areas constructed or expanded after March 18, 2015, including residential driveways and former gravel surfaces proposed for refurbishment, shall be surfaced and continuously maintained with a hard surface as defined in Section 94.17.04, except that gravel, crushed stone, or a similar material is permitted for:
1. Agricultural uses.
2. Driveways in rural and open space zoning districts, where the intersecting road is gravel, or the driveway is greater than 50 feet in length.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.09: Off-Street Parking and Traffic
Circulation Standards
through Section 94.12.09: Off-Street Parking and Traffic
Circulation Standards
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-13
3. Emergency access driveways where required or approved by the Zoning Administrator.
4. Lightly traveled service drives for non-residential uses where included as part of an approved site plan under Section 94.16.09, and where in the Village at least the first 50 feet connecting to a public street is hard surfaced.
In cases where gravel or crushed stone is permitted under one of the above exceptions, the portion of the driveway within the public street rightright--ofof--way shall be way shall be hard surfacedhard surfaced, except where serving , except where serving agricultural usesagricultural uses, , where the where the intersecting intersecting public road is gravel surfacedpublic road is gravel surfaced, or for uses, or for uses outside of nonoutside of non--residential and residential and mixedmixed--useuse zoning districts in the ETZ areazoning districts in the ETZ area.. Where any gravel or crushed stone driveway Where any gravel or crushed stone driveway exists, the Village Public Works Director may require a exists, the Village Public Works Director may require a hard surfacehard surface tracking pad adjacent to the public tracking pad adjacent to the public street rightstreet right--ofof--way, or other reway, or other remedial action, if he or she determines that gravel or stone is being medial action, if he or she determines that gravel or stone is being tracked into the public street.tracked into the public street.
(b) Marking. All hard-surfaced areas intended for six or more parking stalls shall be striped in a manner that clearly indicates the boundaries of required parking spaces.
(c) Curbing. For developments that require site plan approval under this Chapter, construction of concrete curb and gutter shall be required around all parking lots, driveways, other vehicular access areas, and landscaped islands and peninsulas within such areas. The site plan approval authority may modify this standard in one or more of the following circumstances:
1. To facilitate a unique stormwater management approach or condition.
2. For lightly traveled service or emergency access drives.
3. At the edges of a phase of development of a parking area.
4. Around paved areas primarily used for the storage of waste, snow, or other materials, as opposed to vehicle parking or circulation.
5. For approved gravel surfaced areas.
6. Within industrial zoning districts, where the public street providing access to the site does not have curb and gutter or where the parking lot, driveway, other vehicular access area, and landscaped islands and peninsulas will not be visible or accessible to the public.
7. For reconstruction or resurfacing of existing parking lots, or expansion of existing parking lots where the size of the expansion plus any other expansions in the previous five years does not exceed 50% of the parking lot area before such expansion(s).
(d) Lighting. All off-street parking and traffic circulation areas serving six or more cars shall be lit so as to ensure the safe and efficient use of said areas during the hours of use, with said illumination level shall not exceeding the standards of Section 94.12.11.
(e) Access. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway that is wide enough and designed to provide a safe and efficient means of vehicular access to the parking space without directly backing or maneuvering a vehicle into a public right-of-way. All off-street parking and traffic circulation facilities shall be designed with an appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley, in a manner that least interferes with traffic movements. Off-street parking spaces for residential uses may be stacked or in front of one-another for the same dwelling unit. Parking spaces located behind an enclosed garage and located directly off a through aisle shall be a minimum of 30 feet deep.
(f) Signage. All signage located within, or related to, required off-street parking or traffic circulation areas shall comply with the requirements of Article 13.
(g) Handicapped Parking Spaces. Parking for the handicapped shall be provided at a size, number, location, design, and with signage as specified by State and Federal regulations.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.09: Off-Street Parking and Traffic
Circulation Standards
through Section 94.12.09: Off-Street Parking and Traffic
Circulation Standards
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-14
(h) Dimensional Standards. Other than parking required to serve the handicapped, the minimum required length of parking spaces shall be 18 feet and the minimum required width is 10 feet (8½ feet for end spaces). All parking spaces shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 8 feet. Horizontal widths for driveways serving parking spaces shall be no less than 24 feet for two-way driveways and 12 feet for one-way driveways, except that wider driveways may be required for loading and service routes.
(i) Landscaping Standards. Parking lot landscaping shall comply with the hard and gravel surface area landscaping requirements in Section 94.11.02(3)(b), as may be modified under Section 94.11.02(1)(e). Provided that the project does not involve an area expansion, such landscaping requirements shall not apply to the reconstructionreconstruction;; resurfacingresurfacing;; reconfigurationreconfiguration;; restripingrestriping;; or conversion from a gravel, crushed stone, grass, or similar surface to a hard surface as defined in Section 94.17.04 of a parking of a parking lotlot, driveway,, driveway, or vehicle circulation areaor vehicle circulation area legally constructedlegally constructed before March 18, 2015before March 18, 2015.
(j) Setback Requirements. See Figures 5.01(2) and 5.02(2) for hard and gravel surface setback requirements that apply to off-street parking, driveway, and traffic circulation areas, except for the reconstruction, resurfacing, reconfiguration, or restriping of a parking lotreconstruction, resurfacing, reconfiguration, or restriping of a parking lot, driveway,, driveway, or vehicle or vehicle ccirculation area existing before March 18, 2015 and not meeting such setback requirementsirculation area existing before March 18, 2015 and not meeting such setback requirements, provided that the project does not involve an area expansion or conversion from a gravel, crushed stone, grass, or similar surface to a hard surface as defined in Section 94.17.04. In the instance of such expansion or conversion, parking lot setbacks shall comply with Figures 5.01(2) and 5.02(2).
[Amended via Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
(7) Calculation of Minimum Required Parking Spaces. The minimum The minimum number of required number of required parkiparking ng spaspaces ces isis stated for each land use stated for each land use in Article 4in Article 4. . A garage stall shall be considered a parking space.A garage stall shall be considered a parking space.
(8) Potential Reduction in Automobile Parking Spaces. The The site plan approval authoritysite plan approval authority may approve a may approve a decrease in the required number of offdecrease in the required number of off--street automobilstreet automobile parking spaces e parking spaces for each land use in Article 4 for each land use in Article 4 by up by up to 25 peto 25 percent of the normal requirement.rcent of the normal requirement. Such a reduction must be supported by Such a reduction must be supported by technical documentation technical documentation furnished by the applicant that indicates that actual offfurnished by the applicant that indicates that actual off--street parking demand for that particularstreet parking demand for that particular use is less use is less than the than the normally normally required required minimumminimum..
(9) Partial Development of Required Parking Spaces. The applicant for any development may seek ny development may seek permission to not install a portion of its required parking at time of site plan permission to not install a portion of its required parking at time of site plan approvalapproval; however, said site ; however, said site plan shall depict the minimum number of required parking spaces to be available for future construction.plan shall depict the minimum number of required parking spaces to be available for future construction.
(10) Limit on the Maximum Number of Required Parking Spaces. No No ssite ite pplan may be approved for a lan may be approved for a multimulti--family family residential residential or nonor non--residentiaresidential use that contains more than 150l use that contains more than 150 percent of the percent of the useuse’s minimum ’s minimum number of required parking spacesnumber of required parking spaces under Article 4under Article 4, except , except by cby conditional onditional uuse se ppermit.ermit.
(11) Joint and Off-Site Parking Facilities
(a) Parking facilities providing required parking for one or more uses shall provide a total number of parking spaces that shall not be less than the sum total of the separate parking needs for each use during any peak hour parking period when said joint parking facility is utilized at the same time by said uses, unless reduced by the site plan approval authority per subsection (8).
(b) To obtain a greater reduction in required parking spaces that is enabled under subsection (8), the applicant(s) for approval of a joint parking facility shall demonstrate that there is no substantial conflict in the demand for parking during the principal operating hours of the two or more uses the joint parking facility is proposed to serve.
(c) A legally binding instrument, addressing the particulars of the parking arrangement and potentially limiting future change of uses, shall be executed by any and all parties to be served by said joint parking facility, where there is a reduction in required parking spaces that is greater than that enabled
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.10: Off-Street Loading Standards through Section 94.12.10: Off-Street Loading Standards
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-15
under subsection (8). This instrument shall be approved by the Village Attorney, recorded with the Register of Deeds Office prior to the issuance of any zoning permit or building permit associated with the facility, and filed with the Zoning Administrator once recorded.
(12) Locational Prohibitions for Off-Street Parking Areas. Off-street parking shall not be located between the principal structure on a residential lot and a street right-of-way, except within residential driveways and parking lots designated on any approved site plan. No private parking shall occur on street terraces, driveways, or any other areas located within a public right-of-way, except by conditional use permit. See also Section 94.12.07(9) and Figures 5.01(2) and 5.02(2).
(13) Minimum Permitted Throat Length. All uses requiring site plan approval shall have a minimum All uses requiring site plan approval shall have a minimum permitted throat length of access drives serving parking lotspermitted throat length of access drives serving parking lots of 20of 20 feetfeet from the nearest sfrom the nearest street treet rightright--ofof--wayway, , except as modified by the except as modified by the site plan approval authoritysite plan approval authority based on unique based on unique or preor pre--existing existing site conditions site conditions andand suitable assurance that traffic will not back up into public rightssuitable assurance that traffic will not back up into public rights--ofof--way.way.
(14) Bicycle Parking. Except for reconstruction, resurfacing, reconfiguration, or restriping of a parking lot, driveway, or vehicle circulation area legally constructed before March 18, 2015, a number of off-street bicycle parking spaces shall be provided equal to five percent of the automobile parking space requirement, with no fewer than two bicycle parking spaces provided for all uses requiring 20 or more vehicular parking spaces. Each “Inverted-U” or similar type rack counts as two bicycle parking spaces. All bicycle parking shall be on a hard-surfaced area in a location accessible to building entrances.
(15) Pedestrian Facilities.
(a) The site shall provide for safe pedestrian and bicycle access to all uses, and connections to existing and planned public pedestrian and bicycle facilities and adjacent properties.
(b) Pedestrian walkways shall be provided from all building entrances to existing or planned public sidewalks and/or pedestrian/bike facilities. The minimum width for sidewalks adjacent to buildings shall be five feet.
(c) Sidewalks other than street sidewalks or building aprons shall have adjoining landscaping along at least 50 percent of their length if said sidewalk is over 50 feet in length.
(d) Crosswalks shall be distinguished from driving surfaces to enhance pedestrian safety by using different materials, or colors, or textures, and signage.
(e) Projects involving the reconstruction, resurfacing, reconfiguration, or restriping of a parking lot, driveway, or vehicle circulation area legally constructed before March 18, 2015 shall meet subsection (15) to the extent the Zoning Administrator determines practical.
[Amended via Ord. 16-028, 5/18/2016; Ord. 17-009, 4/19/2017]
Section 94.12.10: Off-Street Loading Standards
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this The purpose of this SectionSection is to prevent congestion of public rightsis to prevent congestion of public rights--ofof--way and private lots so way and private lots so as to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the as to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the provision of loading facilities on various sites. provision of loading facilities on various sites.
(2) Applicability. Any new buildingAny new building that has a gross floor area of 10that has a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more and that requires ,000 square feet or more and that requires regular deliveries, or makes regular shipments from semiregular deliveries, or makes regular shipments from semi--trucks and trailers, shall provide offtrucks and trailers, shall provide off--street loading street loading facilities in accordance with the regulations of this facilities in accordance with the regulations of this SectionSection, excep, except for agricultural uses.t for agricultural uses.
(3) Location
(a) All loading berths shall be at least 25 feet from the intersection of two street right-of-way lines.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.10: Off-Street Loading Standards through Section 94.12.10: Off-Street Loading Standards
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-16
(b) In commercial and institutional zoning districts, loading berths shall not be located along any front façade or street side façade of any building. In all other districts, loading berths shall not be located within any minimum required front yard or street side yard.
(c) All loading and vehicle maneuvering areas shall be located on the private lot and shall not be located within, or so as to interfere with, any public right-of-way or minimum required hard and gravel surface setback in Figures 5.01(2) and 5.02(2).
(4) Size of Loading Area. The first required loading berth shall be designed in accordance with Figure The first required loading berth shall be designed in accordance with Figure 12.1012.10. . All remaining required loading berths shall be a minimum of 50 feet in length and 10 feet in width. All All remaining required loading berths shall be a minimum of 50 feet in length and 10 feet in width. All required loading berths shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 1required loading berths shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet. 4 feet.
(5) Access to Loading Area. Each loading area shall be located so as to facilitate access to a public street or Each loading area shall be located so as to facilitate access to a public street or alley, shall not interfere with other vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and shall not interfere with the function of alley, shall not interfere with other vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and shall not interfere with the function of parkiparking areas. Lng areas. Loading oading areas areas shall not shall not rely on backing movements into public rightsrely on backing movements into public rights--ofof--wayway, except , except where where building or site conditions established before building or site conditions established before March 18, 2015March 18, 2015 require such movementsrequire such movements..
(6) Surfacing and Marking. All required loading areas shall be All required loading areas shall be hard surfaced as defined in Shard surfaced as defined in Section 94.17.04ection 94.17.04. . Said surface shall be marked in a manner that clearly indicates required loading areas.Said surface shall be marked in a manner that clearly indicates required loading areas.
(7) Use of Required Loading Areas. The use of all required loading areas shall be limited to the loading and The use of all required loading areas shall be limited to the loading and unloading of vehicles. Said area shall not be unloading of vehicles. Said area shall not be used to provide minimum required parking spaces.used to provide minimum required parking spaces.
(8) Depiction on Required Site Plan. Any and all proposed or required loading areas and trailer and Any and all proposed or required loading areas and trailer and container storage areas shall be depicted as to their location and configuration on any container storage areas shall be depicted as to their location and configuration on any required required site plan. site plan.
(9) Calculation of Required Loading Spaces.
(a) Indoor Institutional and Recreational Land Uses. One loading berth shall be required for each building with a gross floor area of 10,000 to 29,999 square feet. For such uses located in buildings having a gross floor area of 30,000 square feet or greater, two loading berths shall be required.
(b) Commercial (except Offices), Storage/Disposal, Transportation, and Industrial Land Uses. One loading berth shall be required for each building having a gross floor area of 10,000 to 29,999 square feet. For such uses located in buildings having a gross floor area of 30,000 square feet or greater, an additional loading berth shall be required for any portion of each 50,000 square feet of gross floor area in addition to the original 29,999 square feet.
(c) Office Land Uses. One loading berth shall be required for each building having a gross floor area of 10,000 to 99,999 square feet. For such uses located in buildings having a gross floor area of 100,000 square feet or greater, an additional loading berth shall be required for any portion of each 100,000 square feet of gross floor area in addition to the original 99,999 square feet.
Figure 12.10: Loading Standards Design Vehicle Length in Feet Dock Angle (a) Clearance in Feet (D) Berth Width in Feet (W) Apron Space in Feet (A) Total Offset in Feet (F)
Semitrailer (Model WB-40)
50
90?
50
10
63
113
12
56
106
14
52
102
60?
44
10
46
90
12
40
84
14
35
79
36
10
37
73
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.11: Exterior Lighting Standards through Section 94.12.11: Exterior Lighting Standards
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-17
45?
12
32
68
14
29
65
Semitrailer Combination
(Model WB-50)
55
90?
55
10
77
132
12
72
127
14
67
122
60?
48
10
55
103
12
51
99
14
46
94
45?
39
10
45
84
12
40
79
14
37
76
Section 94.12.11: Exterior Lighting Standards
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this The purpose of this SectionSection is to regulate the spillis to regulate the spill--over of light and glare on operators of motor over of light and glare on operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and land uses in the vicinity of a light source in order to promote traffic safety and to vehicles, pedestrians, and land uses in the vicinity of a light source in order to promote traffic safety and to prevent the creation of nprevent the creation of nuisances.uisances.
(2) Applicability. The requirements of this The requirements of this SectionSection apply to all exterior lighting and all interior light visible apply to all exterior lighting and all interior light visible from the exterior on private property within the jurisdiction of this from the exterior on private property within the jurisdiction of this Chapter, except for lighting within , except for lighting within public rightspublic rights--ofof--wayway;; on commuon communications towers or airportsnications towers or airports, heliports, helipads, or other similar facilities , heliports, helipads, or other similar facilities wherewhere required to meet federal and state safety regulationsrequired to meet federal and state safety regulations; and as excepted in subsection (10); and as excepted in subsection (10)..
(3) Depiction on Required Site Plan. Any and all exterior lighting shall be Any and all exterior lighting shall be depicted as to its location, depicted as to its location, orientation, and configuration on any site planorientation, and configuration on any site plan, if, if required required under under Section 94Section 94.3.03(10)..3.03(10).
(4) Orientation of Fixture. In no instance shall an exterior lighting fixture be oriented so that the lighting In no instance shall an exterior lighting fixture be oriented so that the lighting element (or a clear shield) is velement (or a clear shield) is visible from a residentially zoned property or allowed to direct light skyward. isible from a residentially zoned property or allowed to direct light skyward. Shielded luminaries and careful fixture placement shall be used to ensure that exterior lighting prShielded luminaries and careful fixture placement shall be used to ensure that exterior lighting prevents events direct lighting above adirect lighting above a horizontalhorizontal planeplane, except that architectural lig, except that architectural lighting that focuses all light below the hting that focuses all light below the roof line may exceed the horizontalroof line may exceed the horizontal planeplane. Search lights are prohibited except for any search light deemed . Search lights are prohibited except for any search light deemed necessary by the FAA.necessary by the FAA.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.11: Exterior Lighting Standards through Section 94.12.11: Exterior Lighting Standards
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-18
Figure 12.11: Illustration of Required Pole Lighting Orientation and Height
(5) Intensity of Illumination. The amount of illumination attributable to exterior lighting, as measured at the property line, shall not exceed 1.0 footcandle above ambient lighting conditions on a cloudless night. The maximum average lighting within any lit area shall not exceed 5.0 footcandles, except where the Zoning Administrator determines that greater illumination is necessary for public safety.
(6) Fixture Heights. The maximum The maximum height height from the base of the pole or its support to the fixture from the base of the pole or its support to the fixture shall be 20shall be 20 feetfeet inin resiresidentialdential, rural, and open space, rural, and open space zoning districts, and 35zoning districts, and 35 feet in all other disfeet in all other districtstricts. .
(7) Location. Light fixtures shall not be located within Light fixtures shall not be located within any any required bufferyardrequired bufferyard under this under this CChapterhapter, or closer , or closer than three feet from a property line.than three feet from a property line.
(8) Flashing, Flickering and other Distracting Lighting. Flashing, flickering, moving (such as search spot Flashing, flickering, moving (such as search spot or search lights), and/or other lighting that may distract motorists is prohibited. or search lights), and/or other lighting that may distract motorists is prohibited.
(9) Qualitative Requirements. Design and color of light fixtures and poles shall be compatible with building design and color on the same lot. Street intersections, driveway intersections, and pedestrian access routes shall be illuminated with lights of appropriate scale to the function, without providing an obviously uneven illumination pattern across the site.
(10) Exceptions. The appropriate site plan approval authority may grant exceptions to the requirements of this The appropriate site plan approval authority may grant exceptions to the requirements of this Section in the following circumstances:Section in the following circumstances:
(a) Outdoor recreation use and assembly areas such as athletic fields.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.12: Vibration Standards through Section 94.12.12: Vibration Standards
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-19
(b) Gas station pump islands and other uses in which motor vehicles and pedestrians routinely operate in close proximity with one another. Use of recessed canopy lighting to minimize off-site impacts may be required.
(c) Lighting for special events, per an approved special event permit under Chapter 67 of the Municipal Code.
(11) Nonconforming Lighting. All lighting fixtures existing prior to the effective date of this All lighting fixtures existing prior to the effective date of this Chapter shall be shall be considered considered legal conforming structures legal conforming structures and may be continued and may be continued (see (see Article 1155).). However, as part of a site However, as part of a site plan approval for a new, expanded, or remodeled project or use on the same site, the site plan approval plan approval for a new, expanded, or remodeled project or use on the same site, the site plan approval authority may require that such lighting be reoriented to achieve greater or full compliance with this Section.authority may require that such lighting be reoriented to achieve greater or full compliance with this Section.
Section 94.12.12: Vibration Standards
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this The purpose of this SectionSection is to regulate the creation of vibration that adversely affects is to regulate the creation of vibration that adversely affects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public.public.
(2) Applicability. The requirements of this The requirements of this SectionSection apply to all uses and activities that create detectable apply to all uses and activities that create detectable vibrations, except that these standards shall not apply to vibrations created during the construction of the vibrations, except that these standards shall not apply to vibrations created during the construction of the principal use on a property.principal use on a property.
(3) Depiction on Required Site Plan. Any activity or equipment that creates detectable vibrations outside Any activity or equipment that creates detectable vibrations outside the confines of a building shall be depicted as to its location on the site planthe confines of a building shall be depicted as to its location on the site plan, if, if required for the required for the development of a property.development of a property.
(4) Requirements. No activity or operation shall cause oNo activity or operation shall cause or create earthborn vibrations in excess of the r create earthborn vibrations in excess of the displacement values given below.displacement values given below. The Zoning Administrator may require the owner or operator of any use, facility, or operation suspected of being in violation of this Section to verify compliance by a licensed engineer at his, her, or its own expense.
(5) Method of Measurement. Measurements shall be made at or beyond the adjacent lot line or the nearest Measurements shall be made at or beyond the adjacent lot line or the nearest residential district boundary line, as described below. Vibration displacements shall be measured with an residential district boundary line, as described below. Vibration displacements shall be measured with an instrument capable of simultaneously measuring in three mutually perpendicular directions. The maximum instrument capable of simultaneously measuring in three mutually perpendicular directions. The maximum permitted displacements shall be determined in each zoning district by the following formulapermitted displacements shall be determined in each zoning district by the following formula::
D = K/f, where D = displacement in inches
D = K/f, where D = displacement in inches
K = a
K = a constant to be determined by reference to the tables belowconstant to be determined by reference to the tables below
f = the frequency of vibration transmitted through the ground, cycles per second
f = the frequency of vibration transmitted through the ground, cycles per second
(6) Standards in the GI General Industrial District. In the GI General Industrial District, the maximum In the GI General Industrial District, the maximum earth displacemeearth displacement permitted at the points described below shall be determined by use of the formula nt permitted at the points described below shall be determined by use of the formula above and the appropriate K constant shown in the above and the appropriate K constant shown in the Figure Figure 1212.12(1).12(1) below.below.
Figure 12.12(1): Maximum Vibration Levels, GI District Location K
On or beyond any adjacent lot line
Continuous
0.015
Impulsive
0.030
Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour period
0.075
On or beyond any residence district boundary line
Continuous
0.003
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.13: Noise Standards through Section 94.12.13: Noise Standards
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-20
Impulsive
0.006
Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour period
0.015
(7) Standards in other Zoning Districts. In all other zoIn all other zoning districtsning districts, the maximum earth displacement , the maximum earth displacement permitted at the points described below shall be determined by use of the formula above and the permitted at the points described below shall be determined by use of the formula above and the appropriate K constant shown in appropriate K constant shown in FigureFigure 1212.12(2).12(2)..
Figure 12.12(2): Maximum Vibration Levels, All Zoning Districts except for GI District Location K
On or beyond any residence district boundary line
Continuous
0.003
Impulsive
0.006
Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour period
0.015
Section 94.12.13: Noise Standards
(1) Applicability. The requirements of this Section apply to all uses and activities on real property that create detectable noise, except these standards shall not apply to incidental traffic, parking, loading, maintenance, or agricultural operations or where the activity is otherwise exempt or the standard is modified under state or federal law. The requirements in this Section shall be in addition to those in Section 50.103 of the Weston Municipal Code.
(2) Standards. In no event shall the sound-pressure level of noise radiated continuously from a facility exceed at the lot line of a property the values given in Figure 12.13(1) as measured by a Type 2 sound meter that is in compliance with ANSI standard S1.4-1983, at both the surface level and five feet above the surface level, and for a duration of four consecutive hours. Noise levels shall also meet the standards in Section 50.103 of the Weston Municipal Code.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.14: Air Pollution Standards through Section 94.12.14: Air Pollution Standards
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-21
Figure 12.13.13(1): Maximum Permitted Noise Level at Lot Line for Noise Radiated Continuously* Zoning District Increase in Noise Level over Ambient Level
All Residential Districts, RR-2, RR-5, PR, N
plus 3 dBA
FP, AR, INT, B-1, B-2, B-3, BP, RM
plus 5 dBA
GI, LI
plus 8 dBA
* If the noise is not smooth and continuous or is present only during daytime hours, one or more of the corrections, in Figure 12.13(2) below shall be added to or subtracted from each of the decibel levels given in this figure.
[Amended via Ord. 16-046, 12/21/2016]
Figure 12.13(2): Adjustment Factors for Maximum Noise Levels Type of Operation in Character of Noise Correction in Decibels
Daytime operation only
plus 5
Noise source operates less than 20% of any one-hour period
plus 5*
Noise source operates less than 5% of any one-hour period
plus 10*
Noise source operates less than 1% of any one-hour period
plus 15*
Noise of impulsive character (hammering, etc.)
minus 5
Noise of periodic character (hum, speech, etc.)
minus 5
* Apply only one of these corrections.
(3) Legal Nonconforming Noises. Noises that were in effect as of March 18, 2015 shall be considered legal nonconforming noises under this Chapter but may not be exempt from Chapter 50.103. The burden of proof to demonstrate that said noises were in effect prior to the effective date of this Chapter shall be the responsibility of the noise producer.
(4) Compliance and Enforcement. The Zoning Administrator may require the owner or operator of any use, facility, or operation that the Zoning Administrator reasonably suspects is in violation of this Section to verify compliance, by a licensed acoustic engineer, at the owner’s or operator’s expense. Enforcement actions may be per Section 94.16.19, and per Section 50.103(h) and (k) of the Weston Municipal Code.
Section 94.12.14: Air Pollution Standards
(1) The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities, except that these standards shall not apply to air pollution created during the construction of the principal use on a property, or by incidental traffic, parking, loading, maintenance, or agricultural operations.
(2) The emission, from all sources within any lot, of particulate matter containing a section diameter larger than 44 microns is prohibited.
(3) Emission of smoke or particulate matter of density equal to or greater than Number 2 on the Ringelmann Chart (US Bureau of Mines) is prohibited at all times.
(4) Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such sources as storage areas, yards, and roads within the boundaries of any lot shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, surfacing,
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.15: Odor Standards through Section 94.12.18: Toxic or Noxious Material Standards
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-22
watering, or other acceptable means. This standard shall not apply to allowable agricultural uses within an agricultural zoning district.
(5) All uses shall comply with all applicable State and Federal standards.
(6) The Zoning Administrator may require the owner or operator of any use, facility, or operation suspected of being in violation of this Section to verify compliance by a certified air quality specialist at his, her, or its own expense.
Section 94.12.12.15.15: Odor Standards: Odor Standards
No land use shall cause any odor that is offensive to a person of reasonable sensibilities detectable at any lot line of any lot in a residential district for periods exceeding a total of 15 minutes of any day.
Section 94.12.12.1.166: Glare and Heat Standards: Glare and Heat Standards
(1) The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities, except that these standards shall not apply to glare created during the construction of a principal use, or by incidental traffic, parking, loading, maintenance, or agricultural operations.
(2) No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from temperature processes such as combustion or welding or otherwise, so as to be visible at any lot line of a property shall be permitted. Furthermore, there shall be no transmission of heat or heated air so as to be discernible (by a healthy observer such as the Zoning Administrator or a designee) at the lot line. Solar Energy Systems regulated by Wis. Stat. § 66.0401 shall be entitled to the protection of its provisions.
Section 94.12.12..1717: Fire and Explosion Standards: Fire and Explosion Standards
(1) Any use involving materials that could detonate shall locate such materials not less than 400 feet from any residentially zoned property, except that this standard shall not apply to the storage or usage of liquefied petroleum, diesel, or natural gas for normal on-site purposes. All activities and storage of flammable and explosive materials at any point shall be provided with adequate safety and firefighting devices in accordance with all fire prevention codes of the State of Wisconsin.
(2) All materials that have capabilities ranging from “active” to “intense” burning shall be manufactured, utilized, processed, and stored only in completely enclosed buildings that have incombustible exterior walls and an automatic fire extinguishing system. The aboveground storage capacity of materials that produce flammable or explosive vapors shall not exceed that in Figure 12.17.
Figure 12.17: Maximum Aboveground Storage of Materials with Flammable or Explosive Vapors Closed Cup Flash Point (degrees Fahrenheit) Gallons
Over 187
40,000
105—187
20,000
Below 105
10,000
Section 94.12.12..1818: Toxic or Noxious Material Standards: Toxic or Noxious Material Standards
(1) No use shall discharge across the boundaries of any property, or through percolation into the subsoil, toxic or noxious material in such concentration as to be detrimental to, or endanger, the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or damage to the property or business.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.19: Waste Material Standards through Section 94.12.21: Electromagnetic Emission Standards
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-23
(2) No use shall discharge at any point into any public or private wastewater treatment system or stream, or into the ground, any liquid or solid materials except in accordance with the regulations of the Wisconsin Department of Public Health.
Section 94.12.19: Waste Material Standards
(1) No use shall discharge across the boundaries of any property, or through percolation into the subsoil, toxic or noxious material in such concentration as to be detrimental to, or endanger, the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or damage to the property or business.
(2) No use shall discharge at any point into any public or private wastewater treatment system or stream, or into the ground, any liquid or solid materials except in accordance with the regulations of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services.
Section 94.12.12..2020: Hazardous Materials Standards: Hazardous Materials Standards
(1) Compliance with Statutes. All hazardous materials shall be regulated in accordance with the relevant Wisconsin Statutes or their successors:
(a) Micro-Organism Cultures subject to Wis. Stat § 94.65;
(b) Pesticides subject to Wis. Stat. § 94.67(25);
(c) Biological Products subject to Wis. Stat. § 95.39;
(d) Hazardous Substances subject to Wis. Stat. § 100.37(1)(c);
(e) Toxic Substances subject to Wis. Stat. § 101.58(2)(j);
(f) Infectious Agents subject to Wis. Stat. § 101.58(2)(f);
(g) Any material for which the State of Wisconsin requires notification of a local fire department; or
(h) Any other uses, activities, or materials which are subject to County, State, or Federal hazardous, or related, materials regulations.
(2) Notification of Use of Hazardous Materials. All land uses involving hazardous materials listed in this Section, except for agricultural uses, shall submit a written description of such materials and the operations involving such materials conducted on their property as part of any required site plan submittal.
(3) Risk Management and Emergency Response Program. As part of any permit review process under this Chapter, the Village may require such operator to prepare and submit a process safety management, risk management, containment, and emergency response program for approval by the Fire Chief. In the event of any spill or other accident involving toxic, hazardous, or radioactive materials, the responsible party shall immediately notify the Fire Department and HazMat team, and shall follow procedures specified in any approved process safety management, risk management, containment, and emergency response program.
Section 94.12.12.21:.21: Electromagnetic Emission StandardsElectromagnetic Emission Standards
No activity shall emit electrical, radioactive or other electromagnetic disturbances outside its premises that are dangerous to plant or animal life as determined by applicable federal or state regulation or which adversely affect the use of neighboring premises such as by interfering with the use or enjoyment of common household and business equipment such as radio, television, telephone, computer or facsimile operations, except where such activity is exempt or the standard is modified under state or federal law.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.12.21: Electromagnetic Emission Standards through Section 94.12.21: Electromagnetic Emission Standards
Article 12: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 12-24
Page intentionally left blank
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Article 13: SIGNS 13-1
Article 13: SIGNS
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.13.01: Purpose through Section 94.13.02: Sign Permitting and Approval
Procedures
Article 13: SIGNS 13-2
Section 94.13.01: Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to establish standards for signage that protect public health and safety, advance aesthetic and community character objectives; promote compatible business development and activity; and ensure the effective and flexible use of signage for commercial, community, and individual expression.
Section 94.13.02: Sign Permitting and Approval Procedures
(1) General Requirements. Except as otherwise provided in Section 94.13.02(8), no sign shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, or structurally altered without a sign permit.
(a) A sign permit shall be required for a change of copy on any sign, but not for repainting or exact replacement of a sign face with the same sign copy, cleaning, repair, or other normal maintenance.
(b) No new sign permit is required for signs that are in place as of March 18, 2015, and such signs may remain as legal nonconforming structures if legally established under applicable sign regulations at time of installation and are subject to Section 94.13.11.
(c) Any sign permit granted hereunder may not be assigned or transferred to any other sign.
(d) The applicant may include all signs at one premise under one permit, if applied for at the same time.
(2) Application Procedure. Each application for a sign permit shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on a form provided by that office prior to sign installation or modification. Each complete application shall include the following:
(a) The name and address of the permit applicant.
(b) A site plan for the property showing, at a minimum, the location of the proposed sign; the location of all existing signs on the property; all property lines and buildings on the property; and parking areas, driveways, public roads, and buildings within 50 feet of the proposed sign.
(c) A diagram of the proposed sign, drawn to a recognized scale, and listing and depicting the type, height, width, total sign square footage, square footage of each sign component, method of attachment, structural support, method of illumination, and sign materials.
(d) For wall mounted signs, the lineal footage and square footage of the wall on which the sign is proposed.
(e) The property’s zoning district designation.
(f) A summary of existing signage on the property, including quantity, location, type, and area of all signs on the property both before and after the installation of the proposed sign.
(g) Evidence that the structural design requirements of Section 94.13.09 will be met. The footing and related supporting structure of each freestanding sign including bolts, flanges, and brackets shall be concealed by the sign exterior or shall be surrounded by landscaping, included on a landscape plan submitted with the application.
(h) Proof of payment of the appropriate sign permit fee, per the Village’s fee schedule.
(i) A line marking a distance equal to 660 feet from the nearest right-of-way from any U.S. Highway, State Highway, or Interstate. Any sign on property within a U.S. or State Highway right-of-way or setback jurisdiction may also require approval from the Wisconsin Department of Transportation.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.13.02: Sign Permitting and Approval
Procedures
through Section 94.13.02: Sign Permitting and Approval
Procedures
Article 13: SIGNS 13-3
(3) Granting and Issuance.
(a) Upon the receipt of a complete application, in cases where the requested sign does not require an approval or recommendation from another body under this Chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall review said application and shall, in writing, approve or deny a sign permit within 10 working days of acceptance of the complete application.
(b) Upon the receipt of a complete application, and in cases where the requested sign requires an approval or recommendation from another body under this Chapter, such as a special exception permit, the Zoning Administrator shall within 10 working days of the acceptance of the complete application notify the applicant of such additional action and schedule the item on the appropriate meeting agenda(s). Following all necessary approvals, the Zoning Administrator shall then, in writing, approve or deny a sign permit based on the submitted application and such additional body’s action within 10 working days of action by the body with final approval authority.
(c) Denial of a sign permit shall not result in total or partial reimbursement of permit fees paid.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
(4) Basis for Granting. In deciding whether or not to grant a sign permit, the Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the proposed sign is in compliance with the provisions of this Article; whether the sign is in compliance with all provisions of this Chapter, including those related to traffic safety, traffic visibility, sign setbacks, and structural integrity; and whether a special exception permit or other required Village approval has or has not been granted for the sign.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
(5) Enforcement and Revocation.
(a) Any sign permit may be revoked by the Zoning Administrator in the event that the applicant has failed to comply with the provisions of this Chapter, the submitted sign permit application, or any conditions that may have accompanied the permit at the time of granting.
(b) Any sign permit granted by the Zoning Administrator shall be null and void and automatically revoked in the event that construction, installation, or manufacture of the sign has not been commenced within 180 days from the date of the issuance of such permit. If work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 90 days any time after the work is commenced, the original permit shall become null and void. A new permit shall first be obtained to complete the work, and a new permit fee shall be required.
(c) The sign(s) subject to any revoked permits shall be removed by the licensee, sign owner, or property owner within 10 working days of such revocation, or shall be subject to enforcement under Section 94.16.19.
(d) Revocation shall not result in total or partial reimbursement of permit fees paid.
(6) Appeals. Any person affected by a decision of the Zoning Administrator may petition for a hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals under the provisions of Section 94.16.14. The filing of such petition automatically stays removal of any sign involved and already legally erected until the Zoning Board of Appeals decides whether to sustain, modify, or withdraw the notice.
(7) Removal of Defective, Dangerous, or Abandoned Signs.
(a) If the Zoning Administrator determines that any sign is defective, dangerous, abandoned, in poor repair, or other exists in violation of this Article, then the Zoning Administrator shall notify the sign permit holder or the owner of the property on which the sign is located that such violation must be corrected within 10 working days of receipt of such notice on penalty of automatic revocation of any sign permit previously granted.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.13.02: Sign Permitting and Approval
Procedures
through Section 94.13.02: Sign Permitting and Approval
Procedures
Article 13: SIGNS 13-4
(b) If the Zoning Administrator causes such notice to be sent and the violation is not corrected within 10 working days, the Zoning Administrator shall revoke any sign permit for the defective or dangerous sign. Any failure to remove such sign shall be a violation of this Chapter and shall be subject to enforcement under Section 94.16.19.
(c) Any sign illegally placed in a public right-of-way shall be subject to immediate removal and confiscation without notice by the Zoning Administrator, and without any payment or return of the sign to its installer or owner.
(8) Signs Allowed without Permit. The following signs are permitted without the need for a sign permit, in cases where they are beneath any size limitations provided herein. Such signs shall not count as part of the maximum permitted sign area in the zoning district in which they are located per Section 94.13.05 or 94.13.07 below, unless they are above any size limitations provided herein and therefore requiring a sign permit.
(a) Addresses. Address numerals and other sign information required to identify a location by law or governmental order, rule, or regulation, provided that such sign does not exceed one square foot in area per address; or the size required by any law, order, rule or regulation; whichever is greater.
(b) Architectural Elements. Integral decorative or architectural elements of buildings or works of art, so long as there is no commercial message, trademark, moving parts, or moving lights.
(c) Auxiliary Signs. Auxiliary signs less than one square foot placed in store windows regarding hours of operation, accepted charge cards, warnings, or similar information.
(d) Bulletin Boards. Bulletin boards, not exceeding 12 square feet in sign area and 8 feet in height, for public, philanthropic, or religious institutions located on the premises of said institutions.
(e) Business Nameplates. A single non-illuminated nameplate, not exceeding two square feet mounted on the building face, denoting the name of a business legally conducted on the premises.
(f) Commemorative Signs. Plaques, tablets, cornerstones, or lettering inlaid into the architectural materials of a building or structure denoting the name of that structure or its date of erection.
(g) Construction or Project Identification Signs. Per one-time event sign requirements of Section 94.13.08.
(h) Farm Field Signs. Freestanding signs located in a farm field that identify the crop or product used in the field, provided that no such sign exceeds 12 square feet in area and 8 feet in height.
(i) Flags. Flags, standards, emblems, and insignia of governmental, civic, philanthropic, religious, or educational organizations, when not displayed in connection with a commercial promotion or as an advertising device.
(j) Garage, Yard, Estate, and In-Home Sale Signs. Per the one-time event sign requirements of Section 94.13.08.
(k) Historical Markers. Commemorative plaques, memorial tablets, or emblems of historical bodies, not exceeding two square feet, placed flat against a building, monument, or other permanent surface.
(l) Holiday Decorations. Temporary displays of a primarily decorative nature, in connection with traditionally accepted civic, patriotic, or religious holidays.
(m) Interior Signs. Signs that are located on the interior of a premise and that are primarily oriented to persons within that premises.
(n) Management Signs. Signs not exceeding four square feet that designate the real estate management agent for the premises on which they are located.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.13.02: Sign Permitting and Approval
Procedures
through Section 94.13.02: Sign Permitting and Approval
Procedures
Article 13: SIGNS 13-5
(o) Menu Board Signs. One menu board sign for a drive-in or drive-through restaurant exclusive of any two-way microphone/speaker devices, provided that the sign does not exceed 40 square feet in area or 8 feet in height.
(p) Model Home Signs. Per the one-time event sign requirements of Section 94.13.08.
(q) “Open” Signs. Signs that advertise a premise as open for business or inspection, with no more than one sign per street on which the property has frontage and no more than 4 square feet per sign.
(r) Political/Election Signs. Per the one-time event sign requirements of Section 94.13.08.
(s) Real Estate Signs. Per the one-time event sign requirements of Section 94.13.08.
(t) Regulatory and Government Information Signs. Signs erected by or on behalf of a duly constituted governmental body and for regulatory and other basic government informational purposes, including but not limited to legal notices; handicap parking signs; and traffic signs or other regulatory, directional, or warning signs. Any other sign for broader governmental purposes shall require a permit.
(u) Residential Signs. Signs customarily associated with residential use and not of a commercial nature that do not exceed a total of 4 square feet in residential and N zoning districts and 12 square feet in all other zoning districts. Such signs include property identification names and numbers, names of occupants, signs relating to private parking, signs warning the public against trespass or danger of animals, signs indicating a particular farm, and Neighborhood Crime Watch signs.
(v) Required Signs. Signs required by State or Federal statute or regulation that do not exceed 110 percent of the minimum legal size requirements.
(w) Site Information Signs. Signs of no more than 4 square feet that, without including advertising of any kind, provide direction or instruction to facilities intended to serve the public, such as rest rooms, public telephones, walkways, parking, and similar facilities.
(x) Certain One-time Event Signs. Per the one-time event sign requirements of Section 94.13.08.
(y) Window Signs. Per the associated requirements in Section 94.13.05(5).
(9) Special Exceptions.
(a) Applicability and Procedure. Following submittal of a complete special exception application, the Plan Commission (or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee if in the ETZ Area) may grant a special exception to one or more requirements in Sections 94.13.04(2)-(6), 94.13.05, 94.13.06, and 94.13.07. The application requirements and procedure for, and other requirements associated with, a special exception shall be the same as those for a conditional use permit under Section 94.16.06, except as follows:
1. The application for special exception shall also include materials required to obtain a sign permit under Section 94.13.02(2).
2. The criteria for consideration of a special exception shall be those in subsection (b) below.
(b) Criteria. No special exception shall be granted unless the Commission or Committee finds that the sign(s) authorized thereby, as limited by any enforceable conditions, will meet all of the following criteria:
1. Consistent with the purpose and intent of this Chapter and this Section.
2. Consistent with the Comprehensive Plan including any applicable aesthetic signage guidelines therein.
3. Not negatively affecting the reasonable use and development of nearby properties or the community.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.13.03: General Signage Standards through Section 94.13.03: General Signage Standards
Article 13: SIGNS 13-6
4. Compatible with existing signage on and visible from the subject site and not significantly exceeding the height, area, or quantity of such existing signage.
5. Proportional with the scale of the subject site and the building(s) and use(s) on the subject site to which the sign relates or advertises.
6. Not hazardous, harmful, or otherwise adverse to the natural environment and aesthetic value of the site, nearby properties, and the community.
7. Not negatively affecting the safe and efficient installation, use, and maintenance of public facilities serving the area, including but not limited to roadways, sidewalks and paths, and utilities.
8. Supported by evidence that normally applicable requirements do not provide for sufficient visibility for the proposed signage or use(s) it advertises, such as a highway visibility study for freestanding signage that exceeds normally applicable height or area requirements.
[Amended via Ord. 15-021, 10/21/2015; Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
Section 94.13.03: General Signage Standards
(1) Sign Purposes. The following are definitions of the different purposes that signs regulated under this Article may have:
(a) Advertising sign, off-premise. A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered on a premise other than the premise where the sign is displayed. Off-premise advertising signs include off-premise “billboards,” but do not include community information signs described below.
(b) Auxiliary sign. A sign that provides special information such as price, hours of operation, parking rules, or warnings, and that does not include brand names or information regarding product lines. Examples of such signs include directories of tenants in buildings, “no trespassing” signs, menu boards, drive-through ordering stations, and signs that list prices of gasoline, up to one price listing sign per type of fuel, which must all be displayed on a single structure.
(c) Business sign, on-premise. A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, offered, or manufactured on the premises where the sign is located.
(d) Community information sign. A sign that displays information of interest to the general community regarding scheduled public events, public activities, and public facilities and is located either on-premise or off-premise; serves as an identification, entrance, or wayfinding sign for the community; or is located on public lands and advertises sponsors of public events, activities, or facilities thereon.
(e) Directional sign, on-premise. A sign that indicates only the name (or logo or symbol) of a specific business/department/use area/destination within a development or premises, and a directional arrow or symbol to that destination. For purposes of an on-premise directional sign, the premises shall include all lots that are contiguous, either under unified single ownership and intended to remain so, or within a unified business park or group development.
(f) Group development sign. An on-premise sign displaying the collective name of a group of uses (such as an industrial park or multitenant retail center) and/or the names and/or logos of the individual occupants of a group of uses. For purposes of a group development sign, the premises shall include all lots that are contiguous, either under unified single ownership and intended to remain so, or within a unified business park or group development.
(g) Identification sign. A sign indicating the name and/or address of the tenant of the unit or manager of the property located upon the residential premises where the sign is displayed.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.13.03: General Signage Standards through Section 94.13.03: General Signage Standards
Article 13: SIGNS 13-7
(h) Parking area sign, on-premise. A sign used to state parking restrictions and/or conditions, not including handicap parking signs.
(i) One-time Event sign. A sign or advertising display (including festoons, pennants, banners, flags, and similar devices) intended to be displayed for a certain limited period of time. Included in the definition of “one-time event signs” are retailers’ signs temporarily displayed for the purpose of informing the public of a “sale” or special offer, and personal greeting or congratulatory signs. If a sign display area is permanent but the message displayed is subject to periodic changes, that sign shall not be considered temporary, but instead shall be considered permanent.
(2) Sign Configurations. The following are definitions of the different configurations
(methods of placement or mounting) that signs regulated under this Article may have:
(a) Advertising vehicle sign. A vehicle or truck trailer parked so as to be seen from a public right-of-way, which attached to or located on is any sign or advertising device for the basic purpose of providing advertisement of products or directing people to a business activity or event. Not considered advertising vehicle signs are mobile signs or business vehicles that contain typical business signage; are actively used for business purposes; and
are parked in an approved parking space that either serves the advertised business or
another property where actively receiving or providing goods or services.
(b) Arm/post sign. A type of small-scale freestanding sign mounted on a post or posts, either with a bracket arm extending outward to support a hanging sign, with the sign attached directly to the side of the post, or with the sign mounted between two posts.
(c) Awning sign. A sign that is directly affixed via sewing, painting, or similar method to a non-rigid removable awning or canopy that is legally mounted to the facade of a building. Text and/or logos shall not project below or above the canopy surface and shall not exceed 50 percent of the awning/canopy area.
Example of arm/post sign
Example of awning sign
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.13.03: General Signage Standards through Section 94.13.03: General Signage Standards
Article 13: SIGNS 13-8
(d) Freestanding sign. A self-supporting sign resting on or supported by means of poles, standards, or any other type of base on the ground. This type of sign includes arm/post signs, monument signs,
and pylon signs.
(e) Marquee sign. A sign mounted to a permanent roof-like structure that projects out from the exterior wall of a structure and shelters the entrance and/or entrance approaches to a building, such as traditional movie theater signs. Marquee signs shall be mounted parallel to the vertical surface of the marquee and not project more than 18 inches beyond the vertical surface of the marquee. No part of a marquee sign shall extend beyond the top, bottom, or side edges of the vertical
face of the marquee surface.
(f) Mobile sign. A sign mounted on a frame
or chassis designed to be easily relocated, including vehicles and/or trailers whose principal commercial use is for signage, including portable message board signs. Does not include any advertising vehicle signs.
(g) Monument sign. A type of freestanding sign with a bottom edge located within one foot of a ground-mounted pedestal or the ground surface.
(h) On-building sign. A type of sign permanently affixed to an outside wall of a building. This type of sign includes,
awning signs, marquee signs, projecting signs, and wall signs, but not window signs.
(i) Projecting sign. A type of on-building sign that is mounted at any angle other than parallel to the wall on which it is mounted and/or extends beyond 18 inches from the wall. No projecting sign shall project more than 5 feet from the wall on which it is mounted. No portion of a projecting sign shall have less than 8 feet of ground clearance or extend higher than 20 feet above the ground, measured from the grade immediately below the sign.
Example of monument sign
Examples of projecting signs
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.13.03: General Signage Standards through Section 94.13.03: General Signage Standards
Article 13: SIGNS 13-9
(j) Pylon sign. A type of freestanding sign erected upon one or more pylons, poles, or posts, generally of a scale that is larger than an arm/post sign.
(k) Sandwich board/pedestal sign. A movable, on-premise sign placed by hand outside the building while the business is open; removed at the time the business closes each day; self-supporting and stable even on windy days because of its design; and meeting all applicable size, placement, and other requirements of Section 94.13.04(6). Does not include “mobile signs” as described above.
(l) Wall sign. A type of on-building sign mounted parallel to and directly on a
building facade or other vertical building surface. Wall signs shall not project more than 18 inches beyond the edge of any wall or other surface to which they are mounted. The top of the sign shall not extend above the top edge of the vertical wall or above the lowest edge of a roof line of the
portion of the building to which it is mounted.
(m) Window sign. A type of sign mounted on or within an exterior window with a primary intent to advertise a business or product within the premises.
(n) Variable message sign (VMS). An on-building or freestanding sign that displays words, lines, logos, graphic images, or symbols that can automatically or by computer program change to provide different information, including computer signs, electronic reader boards with
changeable letters, LCD and other video display signs, and time and temperature signs.
(3) Sign Measurement.
(a) Sign height. The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured from the average ground level adjacent to the sign to the top of the sign. The average ground level is defined as the average elevation of the ground upon which the sign supports are placed, except when the sign supports rest upon a berm or other area elevated above the surrounding ground. In such cases, the average elevation of the base of such berm or other area shall be considered as the ground level.
(b) Sign area. Sign area shall be measured in the following manner:
1. In the case of an on-building sign placed within a frame, a marquee sign, or other structure, sign area consists of the entire surface area of the sign on which sign copy, could feasibly be placed.
Example of sandwich board sign
Examples of wall and window signs
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.13.04: General Signage Regulations Applicable
to All Zoning Districts
through Section 94.13.04: General Signage Regulations Applicable
to All Zoning Districts
Article 13: SIGNS 13-10
2. In the case of an on-building sign on which the message is fabricated together with the background that borders or frames that message, sign area shall be the total area of the entire background.
3. In the case of an on-building sign on which a message is applied to a background that provides no border or frame (such as individual letters applied to a building face or awning), sign area shall be the combined areas of the smallest rectangle that can encompass the complete message (e.g. business name, business logo, etc.) of the subject sign.
4. In the case of a freestanding sign, sign area shall consist of the total area of the smallest rectangle that can enclose all structural elements of the sign, including the area in which copy can be placed, and all surrounding borders, decorative frames, etc. Where a freestanding sign has two or more display faces, the total area of all of the display faces that can be viewed from any single vantage point shall be considered the sign area. Freestanding sign area shall exclude any elements of the sign structure designed solely for support of the sign structure and located below or to the side of the sign elements listed above. Examples of supporting structures excluded from freestanding sign area calculations include the masonry base of a monument sign, the supporting post(s) to the side of or below an arm/post sign, or supporting pole(s) or pylons of a pylon sign.
[Amended via Ord. 15-021, 10/21/2015]
Section 94.13.04: General Signage Regulations Applicable to All Zoning Districts
(1) Sign Prohibitions and Limitations.
(a) No sign shall be erected at any location where it may, by reason of its position, shape, color, or design, interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device, nor shall such sign make use of words such as “stop,” “look,” “drive-in,” “danger,” or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse users of streets or highways.
(b) No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window, fire lane, or fire escape, and no sign shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
(c) No sign shall be erected that violates the visibility and clearance requirements of Section 94.12.08(12).
(d) No private sign shall be attached to or painted on any public utility pole, public light pole, or traffic regulatory structure.
(e) No fluttering, undulating, swinging, rotating, or otherwise moving signs, pennants, feather flags, feather banners, or other moving decorations shall be permitted.
(f) No illuminated flashing or animated signs shall be permitted. Variable message signs meeting the definition and requirements of this Article shall not be considered illuminated flashing or animated signs.
(g) No illuminated sign/bulb shall be permitted unless the illumination of the sign is so designed that the lighting element (except for neon signs) is not visible from any property within any residential or RR zoning district.
(h) No sign other than a regulatory or government information sign shall be permitted within or extend into a public right-of-way, except where otherwise specifically allowed in this Article.
(i) No sign shall be mounted or displayed on, or extend above the top edge of a roof or extend above the top-most edge of an exterior wall or parapet.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.13.04: General Signage Regulations Applicable
to All Zoning Districts
through Section 94.13.04: General Signage Regulations Applicable
to All Zoning Districts
Article 13: SIGNS 13-11
(j) Mobile or portable signs shall be permitted only as a type of one-time event signage for events of public interest or as a type of one-time event business sign or banner, both as described under Section 94.13.08, but shall be prohibited for any other purpose. Sandwich board/pedestal signs as defined and regulated in this Article shall not be considered mobile or portable signs.
(k) No inflatable signs shall be permitted.
(l) No advertising vehicle signs as defined in Section 94.13.03(2)(a) shall be permitted.
(m) No off-premise advertising signs or structure supporting such sign(s) shall be permitted to be installed or expanded in area or number of signs after March 18, 2015. This provision does not prohibit the use of community information signs under Section 94.13.04(3) or on-premise business signs allowed in Section 94.13.07 that are accessory to established on-premise principal uses for constitutionally protected free speech, provided all messages are in accordance with the time, place, and manner requirements of this Article and other provisions of this Chapter, other chapters of the Village Municipal Code, and other applicable laws. Off-premise advertising signs legally installed before March 18, 2015 but made nonconforming by this Article shall be permitted to continue as legal, nonconforming structures, subject to the requirements of Section 94.15.04, except that:
1. Billboards legally installed before March 18, 2015 that are directed to and on parcels adjacent to State Highway 29 may be upgraded and/or replaced as new technologies become available, provided that the sign area, number, and height at each installation are not increased and other applicable provisions of this Chapter are satisfied.
2. Billboards adjacent to State Highway 29, Business Highway 51, Schofield Avenue, or other locations in the Village that fail to meet the maintenance requirements in Section 94.13.10 may be subject to removal under Section 94.13.02(7). Said sign cannot be replaced once removed.
[Amended via Ord. 15-021, 10/21/2015]
(2) Sign Location Requirements.
(a) Relationship to Regulatory and Government Information Signs. No sign shall be erected or maintained at any location where by reason of its position, wording, illumination, size, shape, or color it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic control sign, signal, or device. Freestanding signs may not locate within required vision clearance areas under Section 94.12.08(12), nor otherwise impede traffic or pedestrian visibility.
(b) Setbacks. The permitted locations and setbacks of all freestanding signs shall be as stated in this Article. Sign setback shall be the shortest distance between the vertical plane extending from the property line (or other specified basis for the setback point) to the nearest structural element of the sign, whether said sign element is attached to the ground or suspended above ground.
(c) Minimum Ground Clearance. All pylon signs, projecting, marquee, and awning signs shall have a minimum clearance from grade of 8 feet to the bottom of the sign and shall not project into any vehicle circulation area, beyond a public street curb line, or beyond any public street surface edge if no curb is present.
(d) Spacing Between Freestanding Signs. No permanent freestanding signs shall be placed any closer than 100 feet from another permanent freestanding sign, except where lot sizes, lot frontages, or other condition beyond the reasonable control of the applicant prevent such spacing in the determination of the Zoning Administrator.
(3) Community Information Signs. On-premise and off-premise community information signs shall be allowed subject to the following regulations:
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.13.04: General Signage Regulations Applicable
to All Zoning Districts
through Section 94.13.04: General Signage Regulations Applicable
to All Zoning Districts
Article 13: SIGNS 13-12
(a) Is a permanent or seasonal sign that shall only display information in accordance with Section 94.13.03(1)(d). One-time event signs serving similar functions are listed and regulated under Section 94.13.08.
(b) May be located on public property or rights-of-way if approved by the Zoning Administrator.
(c) May have changeable copy.
(d) Shall conform to the visibility requirements of this Article and of Section 94.12.08(12).
(e) Shall not be counted as adding to the area of signage on the property on which it is placed for the purposes of regulating sign area.
(f) Shall not exceed 16 square feet in sign area per business or other destination, up to a maximum of 32 square feet if two or more businesses or other destinations are included on the same sign or if the sign is placed in public parkland (such as on an outfield fence).
(g) Shall not exceed 10 feet in height, except where the sign is installed by a unit of government such as the Village or WisDOT.
(h) If off-premise, may total not more than one per business, except where the sign is installed by a unit of government such as the Village or WisDOT.
(i) If advertising or providing directions to a product or business, shall not be located within any residential or RR zoning district, except where such copy is associated with public event, public facility, or public activity sponsors or where such copy is integral to a community entrance or wayfinding sign.
(j) May be subject to restrictions on lighting, color, duration of placement (e.g., seasonal limitations) as part of sign permit approval, provided that such restrictions are consistent with the purposes of this Article and Chapter.
[Amended via Ord. 15-021, 10/21/2015]
(4) Variable Message Signs (VMS).
(a) Allowable Districts and Land Uses. No VMS shall be allowed within any agricultural, rural, open space, residential, RM or N district, or for any residential use regardless of district.
(b) Length of Cycle. Messages and non-text images shall not change appearance more than once every six (6) seconds and transitions between messages shall be via instantaneous change. Use of variable message signs for images, text, or lighting that change appearance in a manner not permitted above shall be considered prohibited flashing or animated signs. No scrolling messages are permitted.
(c) Brightness Adjustment. All VMS shall be equipped with photosensitive equipment that automatically adjusts the brightness and contrast of the sign in direct relation to the ambient outdoor illumination. Light output shall not exceed that allowed under Section 94.12.11.
(d) Dimensions. The illuminated or message display area of the VMS is subject to the same height and area requirements as other on-premise business signs in the zoning district. All variable message signs shall be included in the calculation of total permitted sign area for the type of on-premise business sign (wall or freestanding) and the zoning district in which the sign is located.
(e) Maintenance. Each VMS shall be maintained so as to be able to display messages in a complete and legible manner.
(f) Location. In addition to standard setback requirements for the applicable sign type, no VMS shall be positioned to be visible from any permitted residential use unless the sign is located at least 100 feet from said use.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.13.05: Regulations for Residential and RR
Zoning Districts
through Section 94.13.05: Regulations for Residential and RR
Zoning Districts
Article 13: SIGNS 13-13
[Amended via Ord. 16-046, 12/21/2016; Ord. 18-011, 4/18/2018]
(5) Window Signs.
(a) Installation. Window signs shall be confined within the transparent area of the window and shall not encroach upon the frame, mullions, or other supporting features of the glass. All permanent window signs that have their lettering or graphic elements directly on the surface of the glass shall be painted, metal leafed, vinyl transferred, or in some other manner permanently applied to the building window or door.
(b) Area and Quantity. Window signage that advertise commercial situations relating to goods or services sold on premises shall be allowed without restriction on quantity or coverage, provided that they do not interfere with other State and Federal code requirements or public, health, safety, or welfare.
(c) Structural Design and Maintenance. All window signs shall be designed and maintained so as to be able to display messages in a complete and legible manner, and otherwise in accordance with Sections 94.13.09 and 94.13.10.
(6) Sandwich Board/Pedestal Signs.
(a) There shall be a maximum of one sandwich board/pedestal sign per business.
(b) Height shall not exceed 6 feet (as measured when such sign is properly placed directly on the ground or sidewalk surface), width shall not exceed 3 feet, and sign area shall not exceed 6 square feet per side.
(c) All sandwich board/pedestal signs shall be designed to be self-supporting and in such a manner to withstand the elements, including the ability to remain upright on windy days.
(d) No sandwich board/pedestal sign shall be illuminated in any manner (except via cordless power for not more than 30 days in any calendar year), have more than two sides, be placed off-premise (except where allowed on a sidewalk immediately adjacent to the business lot to which it relates), or be designed to resemble a public regulatory sign (such as a stop sign).
(e) All sandwich board/pedestal signs shall be placed directly on a hard-surfaced walkway.
(f) No sandwich board/pedestal sign shall be placed on a public sidewalk or shall otherwise extend onto or into a public right-of-way.
(g) Placement of all sandwich board/pedestal signs shall meet all vision clearance requirements in Section 94.12.08(12), and shall otherwise not impede traffic visibility in the determination of the Zoning Administrator.
(h) All sandwich board/pedestal signs must be kept in good condition, as determined by the Zoning Administrator and per the maintenance requirements of Section 94.13.10.
(i) Sandwich board/pedestal signs shall not count against the maximum area or number of business signs allowed per Section 94.13.07.
Section 94.13.05: Regulations for Residential and RR Zoning Districts
In all residential and RR zoning districts, signage shall be permitted per the following and all other applicable requirements of this Article:
(1) Identification Sign.
(a) For each single-family and two-family residential principal use:
1. Permitted Sign Types: Wall Signs, Arm/post signs.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.13.05: Regulations for Residential and RR
Zoning Districts
through Section 94.13.05: Regulations for Residential and RR
Zoning Districts
Article 13: SIGNS 13-14
2. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One sign
3. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Two square feet.
4. Minimum Setback from All Property Lines: Three feet.
(b) For a multi-family residential structure containing three or more dwelling units:
1. Permitted Sign Types: Wall Signs, Monument Signs, Arm/post signs.
2. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One Wall Sign or one Monument Sign.
3. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: 12 square feet.
4. Minimum Setback from All Property Lines: Three feet.
(c) For each multi-structure residential group development, residential subdivision, institutional use, or “Community Garden” land use:
1. Permitted Sign Type: Wall Sign, Monument Sign, or Arm/post Sign.
2. Maximum Permitted Number: One per public street or driveway entrance, up to a maximum of three per lot.
3. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: 32 square feet.
4. Minimum Setback from All Property Lines: Three feet.
(2) Auxiliary Sign. (such as “Beware of Dog” or “No Trespassing”):
(a) Permitted Sign Types: Wall Signs, Freestanding Signs.
(b) Maximum Permitted Number of Freestanding Signs per Lot: Two, or more if allowed by site plan approval.
(c) Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Two square feet.
(d) Minimum Setback from All Property Lines: Three feet.
(3) On-Premise Parking Area and Directional Sign. (for multi-family residential use, multi-building development, or institutional use):
(a) Permitted Sign Types: Wall Signs, Monument Signs, and Arm/post Signs.
(b) Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One directional sign for each vehicular entrance and each vehicular exit, and one parking restrictions/conditions sign for each parking area.
(c) Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Nine square feet.
(d) Minimum Setback from All Property Lines: Three feet.
(4) One-time Event Sign. One-time event signs are allowed per the requirements of Section 94.13.08.
(5) On-Premise Home Occupation, Residential Business, Intermediate Day Care Home, or Bed and Breakfast Sign. These shall be in lieu of the allowances in subsection (1)(a) above.
(a) Permitted Sign Types: Wall Signs and Arm/Post Signs.
(b) Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One Wall Sign or one Arm/Post Sign.
(c) Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Six square feet.
(d) Minimum Setback from All Property Lines: Three feet.
(6) On-Premise Business Sign. For legal, non-conforming businesses only, signs shall comply with the provisions for signs applicable to the B-3 Neighborhood Commercial district.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.13.06: Signage for Residential Uses in Non-
Residential Districts
through Section 94.13.07: Regulations for Non-Residential,
Agricultural, PR, and N Zoning Districts
Article 13: SIGNS 13-15
(7) Community Information Sign. Shall comply with the provisions of Section 94.13.04(3), except that no Community Information Sign advertising or providing directions to a business shall be located within a residential or RR zoning district.
[Amended via Ord. 15-021, 10/21/2015]
Section 94.13.06: Signage for Residential Uses in Non-Residential Districts
Regardless of zoning district, signage for all principal residential land uses within non-residential zoning districts shall comply with provisions of Section 94.13.05 and all other applicable provisions of this Article.
Section 94.13.07: Regulations for Non-Residential, Agricultural, PR, and N Zoning Districts
Except for residential uses within non-residential zoning districts (instead see Section 94.13.06), signage within non-residential, agricultural, and PR zoning districts shall be permitted per the following and all other applicable provisions of this Article. Signage standards for the N district are exclusively encompassed in subsection (8).
(1) Auxiliary Sign. (such as “open”, business hours, "no trespassing", and required gas pump price signs):
(a) Permitted Sign Types: Wall Signs, Freestanding Signs.
(b) Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: Per approved sign plan.
(c) Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Combined area of all auxiliary signs on any lot shall not exceed 50 percent of the permitted freestanding or on-building sign area for the lot, whichever is greater.
(d) Minimum Setback from All Property Lines: For freestanding auxiliary sign, same as for all other freestanding signs in district.
(2) On-Premise Parking Area and On-Premise Directional Signs.
(a) Permitted Sign Types: Wall Signs, Monument Signs, and Arm/post Signs.
(b) Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One directional sign for each vehicular entrance/exit, and one parking restrictions/conditions sign for each parking area.
(c) Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Nine square feet
(d) Minimum Setbacks from All Property Lines: Three feet or the height of the sign, whichever is greater.
(3) On-Premise Group Directional Signs. Within non-residential developments in which two or more separate establishments, agencies, and/or use areas occupy different buildings or occupy the same building but are accessed from different driveways, parking areas, and/or sides of a building, on-premise directional signage may be combined on a monument sign in accordance with subsections (a) through (e) below. Examples of eligible uses include multi-agency institutional buildings with separate building entrances and parking areas; hospitals with separate entrances or vehicle accommodation areas for distinctive functions (emergency rooms, visitor parking, clinics) or campuses with multiple buildings; sites or business parks with multiple, individual businesses; and large business or industrial principal structures with separate use area entrances (e.g. customer, employees, and/or shipping). Content of such signs shall be limited to destination name/logo and directional arrows or words.
(a) Permitted Sign Types: Wall Signs, Monument Signs, and Arm/Post Signs.
(b) Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One, or as otherwise specified on an approved site plan.
(c) Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: Five square feet per establishment, agency, or entrance. Area allowance shall not be combined and allotted in a manner that allows the directional sign for a
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.13.07: Regulations for Non-Residential,
Agricultural, PR, and N Zoning Districts
through Section 94.13.07: Regulations for Non-Residential,
Agricultural, PR, and N Zoning Districts
Article 13: SIGNS 13-16
specific destination to exceed five square feet in area. Maximum total area per freestanding Group Directional Sign shall be 50 square feet.
(d) Maximum Height: Eight feet.
(e) Minimum Setback from All Property Lines: Three feet or the height of the sign, whichever is greater.
(4) Sandwich Board/Pedestal Signs. Per the requirements of Section 94.13.04(6).
(5) One-time Event Signs. Per the requirements of Section 94.13.08.
(6) Community Information Signs. Per the provisions of Section 94.13.04(3).
(7) On-Premise Business Signs. (also see summary in Figure 13.07)
(a) For the FP Farmland Preservation, AR Agricultural Residential, PR Parks and Recreation, and RM Rural Mix Zoning Districts.
1. Permitted Sign Type: Wall Sign
a. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One sign.
b. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: 48 square feet.
2. Permitted Sign Type: Freestanding Sign (Monument Sign or Arm/Post Sign only)
a. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One sign.
b. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: 32 square feet for all combined sign faces seen from a single vantage point.
c. Maximum Permitted Sign Height: Eight feet.
d. Minimum Permitted Sign Setback from All Property Lines: The greater of actual sign height or three feet.
(b) For the INT Institutional and B-1 Neighborhood Business Districts.
1. Permitted Sign Type: On-Building Sign (Wall, Awning, Marquee, or Projecting sign)
a. Maximum Permitted Area: 1 square foot of on-building sign area per 1 linear foot of exterior length of each signable wall. For buildings with multiple tenants, the building owner(s) shall be responsible for assignment of allowable sign area to individual businesses within the building.
b. Maximum Permitted Number. 1 on-building sign per signable wall per business.
c. Permitted Location: On any signable wall visible from a public street, except signable walls which are adjacent to a residentially zoned property. On-building signs shall not be located on any portion of upper stories. Sign placement shall be integrated with, and not cover, architectural elements and details.
2. Permitted Sign Type: Freestanding Sign (Monument, Pylon, or Arm/Post)
a. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: 1 per lot.
b. Maximum Permitted Area Per Sign: 48 square feet for all combined sign faces seen at one time, or up to 64 square feet by conditional use permit.
c. Maximum Permitted Sign Height: 8 feet, or up to 20 feet by conditional use permit.
d. Minimum Permitted Sign Setback from All Property Lines: The greater of actual sign height or 3 feet.
(c) For the B-2 Highway Business, B-3 General Business, BP Business Park, and I Industrial Districts.
1. Permitted Sign Type: On-Building Sign (Wall, Marquee, or Awning sign).
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.13.07: Regulations for Non-Residential,
Agricultural, PR, and N Zoning Districts
through Section 94.13.07: Regulations for Non-Residential,
Agricultural, PR, and N Zoning Districts
Article 13: SIGNS 13-17
a. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: One square foot of on-building sign area for every one linear foot of signable wall length (for the subject wall). For buildings with multiple tenants, the owner(s) shall be responsible for assignment of allowable sign area to individual businesses within the building.
b. Maximum Permitted Number: Two on-building sign per signable wall per individual business or establishment on the lot.
c. Permitted Location: On any signable wall that is visible from a public street, except signable walls that are adjacent to a residentially zoned property.
2. Permitted Sign Types Freestanding Sign (Monument or Pylon Sign).
a. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: 200 square feet for each sign located within 660 feet of the Interstate or State Highway 29 right-of-way, 64 square feet in other locations. Sign area shall be for all combined sign faces seen at one time.
b. Maximum Permitted Number per Lot: One per public street frontage per lot.
c. Maximum Permitted Sign Height: 40 feet for each sign located within 660 feet of the Interstate or State Highway 29 right-of-way, 20 feet in other locations.
d. Minimum Permitted Sign Setback from All Property Lines: A distance equal to sign height. The Zoning Administrator may approve a lesser setback in the following instances: sign at least 10 feet from any vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian travel way; safe relationship to pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement and safety; sign designed and installed to prevent or make extremely unlikely its collapse; lesser setback does not conflict with Village’s adopted aesthetic standards for the area (including any design overlay district); and lesser setback does not conflict with Village and utility use and operations.
3. Permitted Sign Type: Freestanding Group Development Sign
a. Except within 660 feet of any Interstate or Highway 29, freestanding Group Development Signs shall be allowed only in lieu of and not in addition to freestanding signs for individual establishments allowed under subsection 2. above, and any existing or subsequent freestanding sign shall count against the maximum number of freestanding Group Development Signs allowed for the property or site.
b. Maximum Permitted Area per Sign: 50 square feet per individual business or establishment on the Group Development site, to a maximum area of 200 square feet per freestanding Group Development Sign regardless of the number of business establishments located within the development (400 square feet if located within 660 feet of the Interstate or State Highway 29 right-of-way). The property owner(s) shall be responsible for apportionment of allowable freestanding business sign area to individual businesses or establishments within the Group Development.
c. Maximum Permitted Number per Group Development: One per group development of 5 acres or less; two per each larger group development.
d. Maximum Permitted Sign Height: 50 feet for each sign located within 660 feet of the Interstate or State Highway 29 right-of-way, 25 feet in other locations.
e. Minimum Permitted Sign Setback from All Property Lines: A distance equal to sign height. The Zoning Administrator may approve a lesser setback in the following instances: sign at least 10 feet from any vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian travel way; safe relationship to pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement and safety; sign designed and installed to prevent or make extremely unlikely its collapse; lesser setback does not conflict with Village’s adopted aesthetic standards for the area (including any design overlay district); and lesser setback does not conflict with Village and utility use and operations.
[Amended via Ord. 16-046, 12/21/2016]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.13.07: Regulations for Non-Residential,
Agricultural, PR, and N Zoning Districts
through Section 94.13.07: Regulations for Non-Residential,
Agricultural, PR, and N Zoning Districts
Article 13: SIGNS 13-18
(8) For the N Zoning District. Permitted sign types, number, area, location, and other characteristics shall be per an approved Specific Implementation Plan per Article 14. Unless otherwise addressed in the Specific Implementation Plan, the types, number, area, location, and other characteristics of allowable signs on individual lots approved exclusively for residential use shall be those for the corresponding type of residential uses in other districts in Section 94.13.05. For non-residential uses, no signage not shown on an approved Specific Implementation Plan or otherwise specifically addressed in the Specific Implementation Plan approval documents, or an amendment thereto, shall be located on any site or lot in an N district. Any sign erected after the approval that was not specifically reviewed and approved as part of the Specific Implementation Plan, but instead allowed under the development agreement with the Village per Article 14, shall be subject to the permit requirements of Section 94.13.02.
[Amended via Ord. 15-021, 10/21/2015; Ord. 16-027, 5/18/2016]
Figure 13.07: SUMMARY of Maximum Dimensions and Number of On-Premise Business Signs (For Non-Residential, Agricultural, and PR Districts—See Section 94.13.05 for Residential and RR District Standards) Zoning District Maximum Sign Area and Height Maximum Number of Signs On-Building Freestanding
FP
AR
PR
RM
Wall only:
48 SF
Monument or Arm-post only:
Maximum Area: 48 SF
Maximum Height: 8 ft
1 on-building sign and freestanding sign per lot
INT
B-1
Wall, Awning, or Projecting:
1 SF of sign area per linear foot of wall length on that wall
Monument, Pylon, or Arm/post:
Maximum Area:
48 SF (64 SF by CUP)
Maximum Height: 8 ft (20 ft by CUP)
1 on-building wall sign per signable wall per business
1 monument or arm/post sign per lot
B-2
B-3
BP
LI
GI
Wall, Awning, or Projecting:
1 SF of sign area per linear foot of exterior wall length on that wall
Monument or Pylon:
Maximum Area: 64 SF (200 SF if within 660 feet of Interstate or Highway 29)
Maximum Height:
20 ft (40 ft if within 660 feet of Interstate or Highway 29)
2 on-building signs per signable wall per business
1 pylon or monument sign per lot; 2 for lots with more than one street frontage where each frontage is at least 200 ft
NOTE: This table is only a summary of the sign regulations applicable to nonresidential uses. Section 94.13.07 contains more specific requirements, including allowances for other signs in these districts such as group development signs and sign setbacks. In the event of any conflict, the text in Section 94.13.07 controls.
[Amended via Ord. 16-027, 5/18/2016; Ord. 16-046, 12/21/2016]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.13.08: One-time Event Signs through Section 94.13.08: One-time Event Signs
Article 13: SIGNS 13-19
Section 94.13.08: One-time Event Signs
The following are allowable one-time event sign types and unique requirements for each type. A sign permit shall not be required except where indicated.
(1) Real Estate Signs. Within each residential and rural and open space zoning district, only one on-premise real estate sign is permitted. Such sign shall be removed within 30 days of the sale or lease of the single space it is advertising or of the sale or lease of 90 percent of the total land or space available for sale or lease on the property. Such signs shall not be located in the public right-of-way, shall not exceed 12 square feet in area and 6 feet in height in residential, rural and open space zoning districts, and 64 square feet in area and 12 feet in height in all other districts. No off-premise real estate signs, such as “open house” signs, are permitted.
(2) Construction or Project Identification Signs. Such signs shall be erected no sooner than the beginning of work for which a valid building or demolition permit has been issued, and shall be removed within 30 days of completion of such work. Construction or project identification signs shall not exceed 64 square feet in area and 12 feet in height, except that each fence surrounding a construction site may be partially or fully covered with a banner including signage.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
(3) Temporary Commercial Signs and Banners. For sales, limited time offers, grand openings, or other special events only, such signs shall not exceed 64 square feet in area and 12 feet in height if ground mounted, nor extending above the roof line if building mounted. Except as may be allowed below or by site plan approval under Section 94.16.09, no single use is permitted to display more than one temporary commercial sign or banner at a single time and no single lot is permitted to display more than two temporary commercial signs and banners at a single time. No temporary commercial sign or banner shall be placed on a lot for greater than 30 consecutive days. An advertising vehicle sign is not a permitted temporary commercial sign, but a mobile sign is permitted. A sign permit shall be required for a temporary sign serving this purpose. Does not include price or temporary item signs, as described below. If a portable Variable message sign (VMS) is used as a temporary commercial sign, then the regulations in Section 94.13.04(4) shall also apply.
(4) Price or Temporary Item Signs. Signs that advertise the price of products or services offered on the premises or of special temporary goods or services being sold or offered, up to 6 square feet in area per sign face for each double-sided sign, not illuminated, no more than two signs per street frontage, and no closer than five feet to any property lines. Each price or temporary sign must be removed within 24 hours of the special being sold or offered, and within 30 days of its placement on the property in any case. Any temporary sign not meeting these limitations but serving a similar purpose shall instead be classified as a temporary commercial sign or banner.
(5) Temporary Individual Residential Signs. Not larger than 12 square feet each, to advertise garage sales, yard sales, or similar merchandise sales during the time the sale is taking place. Such signs shall not be erected more than 1 day before the event and shall be removed within 1 day after the event.
(6) Temporary Signs for Events of Public Interest. For a temporary event of public interest hosted by and/or held at a governmental entity, community organization, or institutional facility (e.g., farmers market, fair operated by a nonprofit organization), two signs of up to 32 square feet each may be located upon the site of the event. Additional off-premise signs shall be allowed, up to one per premise, and up to 12 square feet per sign. Temporary Signs for Events of Public Interest shall not be erected more than 30 days before the event and shall be removed within 7 days after the event. If a portable Variable message sign (VMS) is used as a temporary commercial sign, then the regulations in Section 94.13.04(4) shall also apply.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.13.09: Structural Requirements through Section 94.13.09: Structural Requirements
Article 13: SIGNS 13-20
(7) Political/Election Signs. Temporary political signs are permitted without restriction so long as they locate per the requirements of this Article, including not being allowed within the public right-of-way. Signs promoting a candidate or position on an issue for an upcoming election may not be placed in a manner that would impede vehicular or pedestrian safety, must be outside of required vision triangles, and must meet the requirements of Wis. Stat. Chapter 12.
(8) Personal Greeting or Congratulatory Signs. Permitted for up to 30 days, with such signs not greater than 6 feet in height in residential districts and 12 feet in height in all other districts if ground-mounted, nor extending above the roof line if building mounted.
(9) Temporary Window Signs. Signs temporarily affixed to the inside of a window that advertise commercial situations relating to goods or services sold on premises shall be allowed without restriction on quantity or coverage, provided that they do not interfere with other State and Federal code requirements or public, health, safety, or welfare. If a portable variable message sign (VMS) is used as a temporary commercial sign, then the regulations in Section 94.13.04(4) shall also apply.
(10) Commercial Sign Pro Tempore. A freestanding sign that advertises a new business, that is installed on an initial and temporary, non-permanent basis, longer than a 30-day period. Sign dimensions shall not exceed those set forth in Section 94.13.07(7) listed under the associated zoning district. This sign type is only valid from November 1st to May 1st. No single use is permitted to display more than one commercial sign pro tempore. An advertising vehicle sign is not a permitted temporary commercial sign, but a mobile sign is permitted. If a portable variable message sign (VMS) is used as a commercial sign, then the regulations in Section 94.13.04(4) shall also apply. This sign type does not include price or temporary item signs or temporary commercial signs and banners as described above. A sign permit shall be required for both a commercial sign pro tempore serving this purpose and a permanent freestanding sign. This sign type may only be applicable in the following additional circumstances:
(a) The sign is a part of an approved site plan for the purpose of new construction;
(b) A freestanding sign is currently not installed on the premise; or
(c) A non-conforming permanent, freestanding sign is being removed and replaced with a new permanent, freestanding sign in conformance with this Chapter.
[Amended via Ord. 15-021, 10/21/2015; Ord. 16-006, 4/20/2016]
Section 94.13.09: Structural Requirements
(1) All signs shall be constructed and mounted so as to comply with State Building Codes.
(2) No sign or any part thereof, anchor, brace, or guide rod shall be attached, fastened, or anchored to any fire escape, fire ladder, or standpipe.
(3) All temporary/one-time event signs shall be anchored and supported in a manner that reasonably prevents the possibility of the signs becoming hazards to public health and safety.
(4) No sign or any part thereof, anchor, brace, or guide rod shall be attached, erected, or maintained that may cover or obstruct any door, doorway, or window of any building that may hinder or prevent ingress or egress through such door, doorway, or window, or that may hinder or prevent the raising or placing of ladders against such building in the event of fire.
(5) No signs shall, in any instance, create a traffic visibility or other safety hazard. No sign shall be erected so that it impedes visibility for safe pedestrian and/or vehicular circulation.
(6) No sign not designed and constructed to withstand winds during typical Wisconsin storm events shall be erected at any location.
(7) All freestanding signs erected in any location shall be designed and constructed with footings for support of such sign that extend not less than 42 inches below the existing ground level. The base or support(s)
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.13.10: Maintenance Requirements through Section 94.13.10: Maintenance Requirements
Article 13: SIGNS 13-21
shall be securely anchored to a concrete base or footing, except for signs legally installed in public rights-of-way. The footing and related supporting structure of each freestanding sign including bolts, flanges, and brackets shall be concealed by the sign exterior or shall be surrounded by landscaping.
(8) All signs attached to buildings and that are permitted to project away from the building wall shall be designed and constructed such that the attachment to such wall does not extend above a point of bearing with the roof rafters.
(9) All illuminated signs erected at any location shall be designed and constructed to meet the following requirements:
(a) All signs shall be constructed and maintained to conform with State Electrical Codes and shall bear UL labels. All sign permit applications in which electrical wiring and connections are proposed shall be submitted to the Electrical Inspector. The Electrical Inspector shall examine the plans and specifications submitted for the proposed sign and may require additional information relating to the proposed electrical installation from the applicant. If the Electrical Inspector determines that the proposed installation complies with local ordinances relating to the electrical wiring and construction, then the Electrical Inspector shall approve the application and submit the approved application to the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may not approve a sign permit application for an illuminated sign unless and until approval is received from the Electrical Inspector.
(b) Unless an illuminated sign bears the label of approval of a recognized testing laboratory, all illuminated signs shall be inspected and approved by the Electrical Inspector on the site prior to the erection of the sign. No illuminated sign, despite issuance of a sign permit, shall be erected until the site inspection has been made or waived by the Electrical Inspector and the sign permit initialed or stamped to show the Electrical Inspector's approval.
(c) All illuminated signs shall be equipped with a watertight safety switch, located where electric current enters the sign. All parts covering service openings to the electrical supply shall be securely fastened.
(d) No illuminated sign shall be connected to an electric power source except by an electrical contractor, unless the only connection to the electric power source is through a grounded three-prong heavy duty plug.
(e) All freestanding illuminated signs shall be supplied power only by underground wiring or internal batteries.
[Amended via Ord. 15-021, 10/21/2015]
Section 94.13.10: Maintenance Requirements
(1) All signs and structures appurtenant thereto shall be maintained in a neat and proper state of appearance.
(2) Proper maintenance shall be the absence of loose materials (including peeling paint, paper, or other material); the lack of excessive rust; the lack of excessive vibration or shaking; and the presence of the original structural integrity of the sign, its frame and other supports, its mounting, and all components thereof.
(3) The repainting, changing of parts, and preventive maintenance of signs that completely conform to the requirements of this Article, and result in absolutely no change in the appearance of the sign from that originally approved, shall not be deemed alterations requiring a sign permit.
(4) The owner, lessee, or manager of a sign, and the owner of the land on which the same is located, shall keep grass or weeds and other growth cut and debris and rubbish cleaned up and removed from the lot on which the sign is located.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.13.11: Nonconforming Signs through Section 94.13.11: Nonconforming Signs
Article 13: SIGNS 13-22
(5) The base of signs shall be landscaped so as to conceal footings, mountings, brackets, and related structural elements, if not shielded by a decorative portion of the sign.
(6) A sign that is improperly maintained, is abandoned, is unsafe, or otherwise exists in violation of this Chapter, shall be removed by the sign permit holder or the owner of the property on which the sign is located within three months from the date of disrepair, abandonment, or unsafe condition or by the notice from the Zoning Administrator of the problem. Any failure to remove such sign shall be a violation of this Chapter and shall be subject to enforcement under Section 94.16.19.
(7) Business signs that advertise an activity, business product or service no longer conducted or available on the premises on which the sign is located shall be prohibited. In such instance, the property owner shall be responsible for removing the sign or sign face related to such activity, business product, or service within 30 days of the cessation of such activity, product or service, or sooner if the Zoning Administrator determines that the signs do not meet the maintenance requirements of Section 94.13.10. Any failure to remove such sign shall be a violation of this Chapter and shall be subject to enforcement under Section 94.16.19.
(8) Signs shall also be maintained in accordance with Section 50.102. The Village may utilize abatement procedures in Chapter 50 to achieve compliance with this Section.
Section 94.13.11: Nonconforming Signs
(1) Generally. Any signs lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this Article may be continued although the use, size, or location does not conform to the provisions of this Article. However, such sign shall be deemed a nonconforming structure, and the provisions of Section 94.15.04 shall apply, except where otherwise limited by other provisions of this Chapter.
(2) Maintenance and Alteration of Nonconforming Signs. Nonconforming signs may be maintained. No nonconforming on-premise sign shall be altered, extended, enlarged, converted, or moved to a new location without being brought into compliance with the requirements of this Article, except that sign face copy or materials may be repaired or replaced, and a marquee or other permanent sign with a manually changeable message may be converted to a variable message sign, provided that sign area is not increased or reconfigured. Alteration of a nonconforming on-premise sign is considered to be any other change to the exterior appearance of any part of the sign, frame, supporting structure, lighting, material, height, location, or any other alterations as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
(3) Removal of Nonconforming Signs. All nonconforming signs found not to be in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter shall be removed within 10 days of receiving written notice of noncompliance and removal from the Zoning Administrator, except as otherwise provided for in Section 94.13.02(6).
(4) Change of User of Nonconforming Signs. Whenever there is a change in the user of a nonconforming sign (excluding off-premise signs), sign owner, or owner of the property on which the sign is located, the new sign user, sign owner, or new property owner shall forthwith notify the Zoning Administrator of the change. No new sign permit is required unless there is modification of the sign face or sign structure. The sign will continue to be considered a legal, nonconforming structure.
(5) Signs Related to Nonconforming Uses. Business signs on the premises of a nonconforming use or structure may be continued, but new signs for such uses shall not be allowed, nor shall expand in number, area, height, or illumination.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Article 14: N NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT 14-1
Article 14: N NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.14.01: Purpose through Section 94.14.03: Allowable and Required Uses in a N
District
Article 14: N NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT 14-2
Section 94.14.01: Purpose
The N Neighborhood district is intended to facilitate cohesive planned neighborhood developments that include desirable and innovative variations in the mix and relationship of uses, structures, and open spaces, consistent with proven principles of high-quality neighborhood design including traditional neighborhood design and conservation neighborhood design. Further, this zoning district:
(1) Creates an environment that promotes human interaction, walkability, and a sense of place;
(2) Provides a mix of uses where possible, including residential, commercial, civic, and open space uses in close proximity to one another;
(3) Provides a mix of housing styles, types, and sizes where possible;
(4) Incorporates a system of interconnected streets with sidewalks or paths; and
(5) Incorporates significant environmental features into the design.
Section 94.14.02: Minimum N District Size
Each mapped N zoning district shall be a minimum of 10 acres in area, except that an individual N projects may be smaller than 10 acres if it is anticipated in the Comprehensive Plan to be part of a contiguous N-zoned area of 10 acres or greater.
Section 94.14.03: Allowable and Required Uses in a N District
Any land use that is permitted by right use, conditional use, or temporary use in any of the other zoning districts in this Chapter, or mix of uses, may be permitted within a particular N district subject to the criteria listed below. Subject to the following specifications, all Specific Implementation Plans associated with an N district shall list the range of approved land uses in that particular N district, which when approved shall be enforced as part of this Chapter.
(1) Residential use area(s). Each N district shall include at least one area intended for predominately residential use. Such residential use area(s) shall include Single-Family Detached Residences.
(2) At least one mixed-use area. Mixed-use areas are intended to serve as pedestrian-friendly gathering places and focal points for the project. The highest development density within the N district shall occur in and adjacent to the mixed-use area(s). Figure 14.03(1) shows examples of a mixed-use areas. Each N district shall include at least one mixed-use area, unless the Comprehensive Plan identifies the location of a mixed-use area on a nearby site. The mixed-use area shall include sites to accommodate the appropriate mix of at least two of the following:
(a) Neighborhood commercial uses, such as services, retail, restaurants, and accommodations. The total area in each N district that is devoted to commercial uses shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of that entire N district.
(b) Attached residential dwellings, such as duplexes, townhouses, or multi-family residences.
(c) Civic or institutional uses, such as a place of worship or educational facility.
(3) At least one common green space area. At least 15 percent of the area of each N district must remain as permanently protected common green space. Permanently protected common green space areas include public parks, environmental corridors, trails, protected natural areas, and private parks that are permanently restricted from non-recreational development, but do not include private yards, stormwater management basins, or stormwater conveyance channels. Where the Village’s adopted Comprehensive Plan or comprehensive outdoor recreation plan recommends a park, trail, or other recreational facility for the proposed N district area, the developer shall make reasonable accommodation for the recommended facility.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
through Section 94.14.04: N District Density, Intensity, and Bulk
Requirements
Article 14: N NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT 14-3
Figure 14.03(1): Example of Mixed-Use Area Design
Section 94.14.04: N District Density, Intensity, and Bulk Requirements
The following represent minimum and maximum standards for lot area, lot width, building setbacks, and building separation in the N district. Each individual N district shall either utilize these standards or establish other lot area, lot width, building setbacks, and/or building separation standards via its approved Specific Implementation Plan that are consistent with the purpose statement in Section 94.14.01.
(1) Minimum Lot Area and Width. A variety of lot sizes shall be provided to facilitate housing choice and meet the requirements of people with different housing needs. Minimum lot areas and widths shall be as follows:
(a) For Single-Family Detached Residences:
1. Minimum lot area shall be 5,000 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width shall be 50 feet.
3. Total building coverage shall not exceed 80 percent of the lot.
(b) For Two-Family Residences:
1. Minimum lot area shall be 7,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
2. Minimum lot width shall be 70 feet per dwelling unit.
(c) Multiple Family Residences:
1. Minimum lot area shall be 2,500 square feet per dwelling unit.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.14.05: N District Circulation and Parking
Requirements
through Section 94.14.05: N District Circulation and Parking
Requirements
Article 14: N NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT 14-4
2. Minimum lot width shall be 25 feet per dwelling unit, not greater than 100 feet.
(d) Minimum lot areas and widths for all other uses shall be as specified in the approved Specific Implementation Plan for the particular project.
(2) Building Setbacks and Separation. The N district shall include buildings placed relatively close to the street to promote interaction, enclose space along the street, and direct less attractive site features to less visible yards.
(a) The minimum front and street side yard shall be five feet.
(b) The maximum front and street side yard shall be 25 feet where a sidewalk is proposed or required along the adjacent street frontage.
(c) The minimum interior side yard shall be five feet, except for approved zero-lot line buildings.
(d) The minimum rear yard and building separation shall be ten feet.
Section 94.14.05: N District Circulation and Parking Requirements
(1) Circulation System. The circulation system shall allow for different modes of transportation; provide functional and visual links among the residential area(s), mixed-use areas, and open space areas; connect to existing and proposed developments outside the N while controlling through traffic; provide adequate traffic capacity; provide connected pedestrian and bicycle routes; limit direct lot access on streets with higher expected traffic volumes; and promote safe and efficient mobility. More specific design standards are as follows:
(a) Block size. Street layouts shall provide for perimeter blocks that are a maximum of 800 feet long, unless expressly permitted through Specific Implementation Plan approval.
(b) Pedestrian circulation. Convenient and continuous pedestrian circulation systems to minimize conflicts between pedestrians and motor vehicles shall be provided. All streets, except for alleys, shall be bordered by sidewalk or shared-use path in accordance with Village, unless expressly permitted through Specific Implementation Plan approval. Clear and well-lit walkways shall connect non-residential and multi-family residential building entrances to the adjacent public sidewalk/path and to associated parking areas. Between-lot walkways or paths may be required where necessary to maintain the continuity of the pedestrian circulation system.
(c) Bicycle circulation. Facilities for bicycle travel shall be included in the project and installed at the developer’s expense, unless otherwise approved by the Village. Such facilities may include off-street bicycle and multi-use paths, striped bicycle lanes on streets, signed bicycle routes, or some combination. Any existing bicycle routes through the site shall be preserved, enhanced, or relocated if necessary. Bicycle routes and facilities shall implement the recommendations in the Village Comprehensive Plan or comprehensive outdoor recreation plan. All businesses, civic uses, and multi-family dwelling units shall provide adequate bicycle parking areas and facilities per Section 94.12.09(14).
(d) Motor vehicle circulation. Motor vehicle circulation shall be designed to efficiently move motor vehicle traffic via multiple routes and to minimize conflicts with pedestrians and bicycles. Traffic calming features such as curb extensions, traffic circles, medians, and on-street parking along local streets are encouraged to slow traffic speeds. Any arterial and collector streets shall be identified in the approved Specific Implementation Plan and shall be subject to access controls as part of said approved Plan. Minimum street design standards within the N district shall be in accordance with Figures 14.05(1) through (3).
(e) Street layout. The project shall maintain the existing street grid, where present, and restore any disrupted street grid where feasible. The orientation of streets shall be consistent with the Village
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.14.05: N District Circulation and Parking
Requirements
through Section 94.14.05: N District Circulation and Parking
Requirements
Article 14: N NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT 14-5
Comprehensive Plan, enhance the visual impact of common open spaces and prominent buildings, create lots that facilitate passive solar design, minimize street gradients, and minimize the use of double frontage lots. All streets shall extend through the project or terminate at other streets, except streets may temporarily “dead end” when such streets will connect to future phases or other sites outside the N district, and local streets may permanently terminate in a cul-de-sac only where site conditions require a cul-de-sac and there will be a through connection via a walkway or path at the end.
(f) Parking and loading requirements. All N districts shall meet the parking and loading requirements found in Article 12, except that the Village may allow adjacent on-street parking to apply toward the minimum parking requirements. For multi-family residential buildings and in mixed-use areas, shared use parking lots and structures are encouraged, off-street parking lots may not be adjacent to or opposite from a street intersection, and parking lots and structures shall be located to the rear or interior sides of buildings (see Figure 14.05(4) for examples). The edges of parking lots, landscaped islands, and all other areas not used for parking or vehicular circulation shall be landscaped per the requirements in Article 11. Reduction of impervious surfaces through the use of pervious pavement, interlocking pavers, and similar techniques is encouraged, particularly for remote parking lots and parking areas for periodic uses.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.14.05: N District Circulation and Parking
Requirements
through Section 94.14.05: N District Circulation and Parking
Requirements
Article 14: N NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT 14-6
Figure 14.05(1): Minimum Street Design Requirements in the N Planned Neighborhood District Street Classification Street Width, curb-face to curb-face (feet) Curb & Gutter Street Terrace Sidewalks Bicycle Lanes
Collector Street
30 (two-sided parking)
26 (one-sided parking)
24 (no parking)
Both sides, 1.5 feet wide
Both sides, minimum 8.5 feet wide
Both sides, minimum 5 feet wide and 1 foot from lot line
Where required, add two 5 foot wide lanes
Local Street
28 (two-sided parking)
24 (one-sided parking)
20 (no parking)
Both sides, 1.5 ft wide, ribbon curb may be permitted
Both sides, minimum 7 feet wide
Both sides, minimum 5 feet wide and 1 foot from lot line
None
Alley
12 (no parking)
1.5 foot flat ribbon
None
None
None
Figure .14.05(2): Schematic sketch of a typical collector street cross-section with one-sided parking and bike lanes.
Figure .14.05(3): Schematic sketch of a typical local street cross-section with two-sided parking.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.14.05: N District Circulation and Parking
Requirements
through Section 94.14.05: N District Circulation and Parking
Requirements
Article 14: N NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT 14-7
Figure 14.05(4): Examples of Required N Parking Lot Placement and Landscaping
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.14.06: Architectural Requirements. through Section 94.14.06: Architectural Requirements.
Article 14: N NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT 14-8
Section 94.14.14.06: Architectural Requirements.06: Architectural Requirements. .
In addition to meeting applicable requirements of Article 10, a variety of architectural features and building materials are encouraged to give each building or group of buildings a distinct character, while maintaining a compatible design theme throughout the N district. More specific design requirements are included in Figures 14.06(1) through (3), and as follows:
Figure 14.06(1): N District Architectural Requirements, Single-Family Residences
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.14.06: Architectural Requirements. through Section 94.14.06: Architectural Requirements.
Article 14: N NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT 14-9
Figure 14.06(2): N District Architectural Requirements, Multi-Family Residences
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.14.06: Architectural Requirements. through Section 94.14.06: Architectural Requirements.
Article 14: N NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT 14-10
Figure 14.06(3): N District Architectural Requirements, Neighborhood Business Uses
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.14.06: Architectural Requirements. through Section 94.14.06: Architectural Requirements.
Article 14: N NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT 14-11
(1) General Design. New buildings shall be of consistently high and lasting quality throughout the project. The bulk and height of each building shall relate to and flow from surrounding buildings, and shall be in proper proportion to the size of the lot on which it is to be placed. Design monotony shall be avoided (see Figure 14.06(4) for examples).
Figure 14.06(4): Examples of Design Variation with Consistent Form
(2) Maximum Height. New structures within an N district shall be no more than five stories.
(3) Entries and Facades. Similar architectural features, materials, and the articulation of a building façade shall be continued on all sides visible from a public street. The front façade of the principal building shall face onto the front of street side yard of a public street and shall parallel the line of the street to create a continuous edge. Porches, entry bays, covered walkways or stoops, hooded front doors, or other similar architectural elements shall define the front entrances to all dwelling units; such features shall generally be closer to the street than the remainder of the dwelling. Porches shall be a minimum of six feet deep to enhance aesthetics and function. For nonresidential buildings, a minimum of 50 percent of the public street façade(s) on the ground floor shall be transparent, consisting of window or door openings, and entries shall face the public street. Figures 14.06(1) through (3) provide examples of required treatments of entries and front facades.
(4) Garages. Garages accessed from the public street, where garage doors face a public street, shall occupy no more than 50 percent of the front façade of the house. Residential garages shall be set back a minimum of 2 feet to the rear of the main front façade of the dwelling structure (not including porches or other projections) to ensure that the garage does not dominate the view from the street. Where the house does not include a front porch or similar projection from the main living area of the house, garages shall be set back a minimum of four feet to the rear of the main front façade. Garage setbacks along alleys shall either be between two and eight feet from the alley right-of-way to allow proper turning radii but no driveway parking, or at least 16 feet to allow driveway parking without encroaching into the alley. Garage placement alternatives and standards are illustrated in Figure 14.06(5).
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.14.07: Additional N District Requirements through Section 94.14.07: Additional N District Requirements
Article 14: N NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT 14-12
Section 94.14.07: Additional N District Requirements
(1) Street Trees. Shall be required in accordance with Section 94.11.02(3)(a), except where alternate standards of comparably quality are included as part of an approved Specific Implementation Plan.
(2) Landscaping. Shall be required in accordance with Article 11, except where alternate standards of comparable quality are included as part of an approved Specific Implementation Plan.
(3) Natural Resource Protection. Shall be required in accordance with all local, state, and federal laws. Additionally, natural resources shall be integrated into the development design as aesthetic and conservation landscape elements. The development shall identify and provide for the permanent preservation of environmentally sensitive areas, including wetlands, floodplains, slopes of 20 percent or greater, areas of rare or endangered plant or animal species, land areas mostly covered by a mature
Figure 14.06(5): Alternative garage locations on an N residential lot:
a) Attached garage is accessed from a street (street-loaded garage). 4’ min setback required if no front porch or similar front yard building projection; 2’ with front porch.
b) Attached garage is accessed from a street (side-loaded garage). 2’ min setback required.
c) Detached garage, behind the house, is accessed from a street. 10’ separation between house and garage.
d) Detached garage is accessed from an alley. Either 2’ to 8’ setback from alley right-of-way, or 16’ minimum setback from alley right-of-way. 10’ separation between house and garage.
e) Attached garage is accessed from an alley. 16’ minimum setback from alley right-of-way to enable parking between garage and alley.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.14.08: Procedural Requirements for the N
Neighborhood District
through Section 94.14.08: Procedural Requirements for the N
Neighborhood District
Article 14: N NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT 14-13
woodland, and historic and archaeological sites. Permanent preservation of these areas shall be achieved through the implementation of techniques such as conservation easements, restrictive covenants, deed restrictions, dedication to the public or an appropriate non-profit organization, and/or the establishment of buildable or “no build” areas on the subdivision plat.
(4) Stormwater Management. Stormwater management and erosion control shall be accordance with the Village’s Municipal Code. Additionally, each N district shall include stormwater management systems that focus on Best Management Practices (BMPs). BMPs may include overland water transfer, natural landscape planting and restoration to increase infiltration and reduce runoff, bio-infiltration systems, natural stormwater basin design, residential roof runoff directed to yard areas, and rain gardens.
(5) Performance Standards and Signage. Shall be in accordance with Articles 12 and 13 accordingly, except where alternate standards of comparably quality are included as part of an approved Specific Implementation Plan. Additionally, features such as lighting and signs may be required to adhere to a design theme throughout the N district, as specified in an approved Specific Implementation Plan.
(6) Land Division. Shall comply with the Village’s Municipal Code, except as waivers and variations may be granted to respond to the particular design of the N project.
Section 94.14.08: Procedural Requirements for the N Neighborhood District
(1) Pre-application Conference. Prior to the official submission of a petition for the approval of rezoning to an N district, the owner or the owner’s agent shall meet with the Plan Commission to discuss the scope and proposed nature of the contemplated development.
(2) Petition for Rezoning Approval. Following the pre-application conference, the owner or the owner’s agent may file a petition with the Zoning Administrator for approval of a rezoning to the N district. Such petition shall be accompanied by payment of the required fee. The procedure for rezoning to a N district shall be as required for any other zoning district change as set forth under Section 94.16.03, except that, in addition thereto, an easily reproducible electronic copy of a General Development Plan (GDP), along with hard copies in a quantity and size determined by the Zoning Administrator, shall be filed by the applicant along with the petition for rezoning, together including the following information:
(a) A cover letter summarizing the request and the nature of the project in no more than two pages.
(b) Total area to be included in the N and a site inventory and analysis map with topography at two foot intervals to identify site assets, resources, and constraints, including but not limited to floodplains, wetlands, soils with limitations for building construction, utility easements, slopes greater than 12 percent, and existing mature trees and woodlands.
(c) Overall conceptual development plan for the entire site showing proposed areas to be retained in open space, residential density, number and type of dwelling units, projected population, availability of or requirements for municipal services and other similar data pertinent to a comprehensive evaluation of the proposed development.
(d) A general outline of the organizational structure of a property owners’ or management association, which may be proposed to be established for the purpose of providing any necessary private services.
(e) The expected date of commencement of physical development as set forth in the proposal and also an outline of any proposed development staging.
(f) A location map and a legal description of the boundaries of the property proposed to be included in the N district.
(g) A conceptual neighborhood development plan and/or preliminary plat, drawn to scale, that indicates existing and proposed public streets and paths; different land use areas by proposed type and density; and proposed recreational, open space, and generalized storm water management areas and facilities.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.14.09 Criteria for General Development Plan
(GDP) Approval
through Section 94.14.09 Criteria for General Development Plan
(GDP) Approval
Article 14: N NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT 14-14
(h) Adequate information to present the relationship of the proposed improvements to surrounding properties.
(i) A preliminary analysis and map showing the general locations of proposed public utility connections, and anticipated upgrades of public utilities to serve the project.
(j) A conceptual landscape plan showing general locations and types of proposed landscaping, including maintenance of existing vegetation where appropriate.
(k) A proposed schedule for the implementation of the project, including conceptual phasing plan, if the applicant intends to phase construction of the project.
(l) Schematic architectural plans showing the character of the proposed buildings, along with a generalized program of proposed signage and lighting.
(m) A preliminary list of land uses that are proposed to be allowed within the N district as permitted-by-right, conditional, and/or temporary uses.
(n) A written report that provides general information about the site; the project vision, objectives, themes, and images; its economic feasibility and financing; target markets; and relationship of the project to surrounding land uses, the Comprehensive Plan, and other applicable Village plans.
(3) Plan Commission Recommendation. In considering the petition and General Development Plan, the Plan Commission shall apply the criteria in Sections 9494.1.14.09 and 4.09 and 9494.16.16.03(7).03(7). Upon submission of a complete rezoning petition and the General Development Plan, the Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application and the General Development Plan and thereafter recommend to the Village Board that the petition and plan be approved as submitted, approved with modifications and/or conditions, referred for further consideration, or denied approval.
(4) Village Board Authorization. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Plan Commission, the Village Board may take such action thereon as it deems reasonable and appropriate. If the petition and General Development Plan are approved, said plan shall establish the basic right for use of the lands in conformity with the plan as approved. Such development shall be conditioned upon approval of a Specific Implementation Plan and shall not make permissible any of the uses as proposed until a Specific Implementation Plan is submitted and approved for all or a portion of the General Development Plan.
(5) Recording. The General Development Plan, if approved, shall be recorded by the applicant within 90 days following such approval, in the Marathon County Register of Deeds’ office. Within 30 days of its recording, the applicant shall provide the Village with three copies of the recorded General Development Plan, a copy in an easily reproducible and editable format, and proof of its recording.
Section 94.14.09 Criteria for General Development Plan (GDP) Approval
Each General Development Plan application shall meet the following criteria to obtain approval:
(1) Character and Integrity of Land Use. The uses proposed and their intensity and arrangement on the site will be of a visual and operational character that meets the following criteria:
(a) Is compatible to the physical nature of the site and surrounding land uses.
(b) Would produce an attractive environment of sustained aesthetic and ecological desirability, economic stability, community sustainability, and practicality compatible with the Comprehensive Plan.
(c) Would not adversely affect the anticipated provision of municipal services.
(d) Would not create traffic or parking demand incompatible with facilities designed to serve it.
(2) Economic Feasibility and Impact. The project will not adversely affect the economic prosperity of the Village or the values of surrounding properties.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.14.09 Criteria for General Development Plan
(GDP) Approval
through Section 94.14.09 Criteria for General Development Plan
(GDP) Approval
Article 14: N NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT 14-15
(3) General Engineering Standards. The proposed general plans for utilities, storm water management, and transportation systems follow required standards and are necessary to ensure the public safety and welfare as determined by the Village Engineer.
(4) Preservation and Maintenance of Open Space. Adequate provisions are made for the permanent reservation or dedication to the public as follows:
(a) For private reservation, the open area to be reserved shall be protected against building development minimally by conveying to the Village as part of the conditions for General Development Plan approval an open space easement over such open areas, restricting the area against any future building or use except as consistent with that of providing landscaped open space for the aesthetic and recreational satisfaction of the surrounding area.
(b) The care and maintenance of such open space reservations shall be ensured by establishment of appropriate management organization(s) for the project. The manner of ensuring maintenance and assessing such cost to individual properties shall be included in any contractual agreement with the Village and shall be included in the title to each property.
(c) Ownership and tax liability of private open space reservations are established in a manner acceptable to the Village.
(5) Implementation Schedule. A reasonable schedule has been established for the implementation of the development, including suitable provisions for assurance that each phase shall be brought to completion in a manner that would not result in an adverse effect upon the Village as a result of termination at that point.
(6) Considerations for Residential Components of an N District. The Village, in its review of the residential components of a General Development Plan, shall further consider whether:
(a) Such development will create an attractive residential environment of sustained desirability, including structures designed in relation and with respect to terrain; consideration of safe, convenient, and interconnected bicycle, pedestrian, and automobile flow; and ready access to recreation space.
(b) The density and design within the development will be consistent with the recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan as applicable to the N district area, and the community’s capacity to provide needed municipal services and facilities.
(c) Provision has been made for the installation of adequate public facilities, fire and police protection, and parking, and the continuing maintenance and operation of such facilities.
(d) Such development will contribute to the goal of environmental sustainability and energy efficiency through the proper arrangement, density, orientation, and design for development; transportation access; natural area preservation and enhancement; and other features unique to the project.
(7) Considerations for Non-residential Components of an N District. The Village, in its review of the non-residential components of a General Development Plan, shall further consider whether:
(a) The proposed development will be adequately served by parking, loading, and truck service facilities.
(b) The proposed development will be adequately provided with and shall not impose any undue burden on public services and facilities such as fire and police protection, street maintenance, water, sanitary sewer and storm water drainage, and maintenance of public areas.
(c) The locations of entrances and exits have been designated to prevent unnecessary interference with the safe and efficient movement of traffic on surrounding streets and the development will not create any adverse effect upon the general traffic pattern of the surrounding area.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.14.10 Specific Implementation Plan (SIP)
Approval
through Section 94.14.10 Specific Implementation Plan (SIP)
Approval
Article 14: N NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT 14-16
(d) The architectural design, landscaping, control of lighting, and general site development will result in an attractive area not adversely affecting the property values of the surrounding neighborhood.
Section 94.14.10 Specific Implementation Plan (SIP) Approval
(1) Specific Implementation Plan Application. After approval and recording of the General Development Plan and the zoning change to the N district, the applicant shall file with the Zoning Administrator one easily reproducible and editable copy of a Specific Implementation Plan (SIP), hard copies in a quantity and size determined by the Zoning Administrator, and associated fee. Unless and until a Specific Implementation Plan has been approved by the Plan Commission and recorded, no building permit shall be issued for any construction within the N district. Further, construction shall be limited to only those parts of the N that have an approved SIP. Each SIP application shall include the following information:
(a) A cover letter summarizing the request and the nature of the project.
(b) A location map and a legal description of the boundaries of the subject property included in the proposed SIP area and the approved GDP area (if different).
(c) A precise description of the type, number, and size of dwelling units; a description of the type and amount of square feet devoted to non-residential uses; the estimated number of employees; and character and volume of truck and automobile traffic generated by the site.
(d) Site summary data including gross site area, area and lineal feet of street rights-of- way, net area proposed for development and common open space uses, net subdivided area, total number of building sites, and average or typical lot and building site sizes.
(e) A detailed neighborhood development plan showing the precise mix of land uses; densities of use areas and development sites; building setbacks and massing; main driveways and parking areas; parks, squares, and other common open spaces; civic buildings; street trees and other natural elements; the street and block structure; and paths and other pedestrian ways.
(f) For all sites within the SIP where final plan approval is being sought, except for single- and two-family dwellings, detailed site and building plan(s) meeting the requirements of Section 94.16.09 and signage plan meeting the requirements of Article 13.
(g) Detailed signage plan and lighting plan, each demonstrating a unified or compatible sign and lighting theme throughout the SIP area.
(h) For single- and two-family dwellings, architectural design guidelines contained within a declaration of covenants, deed restrictions, or other similar document, in lieu of reviewing the plans for each individual dwelling.
(i) A final plat of the area included within the SIP that shows, at a minimum, detailed lot layout and the intended use of each lot or parcel of land, public dedications, public and private streets, driveways, storm water management facilities, easements, and walkways.
(j) Detailed public street, sidewalk, and path design plans.
(k) Existing and proposed topography on the site with contours at no greater than two-foot intervals.
(l) Detailed grading plan, storm water management plan, public utility plan, and erosion control plan, meeting all State, County, and Village requirements and consistent with the Village’s storm water management plan.
(m) If the site has any environmental contamination, a detailed plan of remediation.
(n) A development schedule indicating the following:
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.14.11 Amendment of General Development
Plan or Specific Implementation Plan
through Section 94.14.13 Delayed Effective Dates, Construction
Required
Article 14: N NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT 14-17
1. The approximate date when construction of the project is expected to begin;
2. The stages in which the project will be built and the approximate date when construction of each stage is expected to begin;
3. The anticipated pace of development and types and quantities of development in each stage; and
4. The approximate date when the development of each of the stages will be completed.
(o) Agreements, bylaws, provisions, or covenants that will govern the organizational structure, use, maintenance and continued protection of the N district.
(p) A written report describing the proposed SIP, including specific project themes and images (e.g., drawings, photos, simulations), a specific list of permitted-by-right, conditional, and temporary land uses, specific densities and dimensional standards for residential and nonresidential uses, the specific treatment of open space areas, and an evaluation of the proposed SIP in relationship to the previously approved General Development Plan (including an explanation if the SIP does not include the full area of the approved GDP).
(q) Any other plans, documents, or schedules required by the Village.
(2) Plan Commission Review and Approval. Upon submission of the Specific Implementation Plan(s), the Plan Commission shall review the same to determine if the plan(s) is in compliance with the approved General Development Plan, applicable provisions of this Article, and any other provisions of this Chapter that are applicable to the proposed development. The Plan Commission shall thereafter act to approve the Specific Implementation Plan(s) as submitted, approve with modification and/or conditions, or deny approval. The Village Board may still be required to approve any final plat associated with the SIP(s).
(3) Recording. If the Specific Implementation Plan is so approved it shall be recorded at the Marathon County Register of Deeds office within 30 days thereafter by the developer. Within 30 days of its recording, the applicant shall provide the Village with three copies of the recorded Specific Implementation Plan, along with proof of its recording.
Section 94.14.11 Amendment of General Development Plan or Specific Implementation Plan
Any subsequent change or modification of the approved GDP or SIP shall first be submitted to the Village for approval. If, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, such change or modification constitutes a substantial alteration of the original GDP and/or SIP, the procedures described in Sections 94.14.08 and/or 94.14.10, as appropriate, shall be followed before the modified Plan(s) may take effect. If the Zoning Administrator determines that such change or modification does not constitute a significant alteration, then he or she may approve such change or modification. All such modified Plan(s) shall be re-recorded by the applicant within 30 days of approval.
Section 94.14.12 Building Permit
Once a Specific Implementation Plan has been recorded at the Marathon County Register of Deeds Office, building permits may be issued within all parts of the N district for which a Specific Implementation Plan has been approved, provided that said permits are for buildings that are in accordance with the approved SIP and any applicable conditions of approval.
Section 94.14.13 Delayed Effective Dates, Construction Required
(1) In the event that a Specific Implementation Plan is not approved by the Village Board within 12 full calendar months following the date of the Village Board’s approval of the General Development Plan, no N district shall be effective therefore and the lands included within the N district shall revert to the zoning district in effect for the subject lands prior to the approval of the GDP and N zoning.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.14.14 Incorporation of New N Districts through Section 94.14.14 Incorporation of New N Districts
Article 14: N NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT 14-18
(2) Within 18 months following Plan Commission approval of the Specific Implementation Plan, the basic right of use for the areas included within that particular Specific Implementation Plan area, when in conformity with such approved plan, shall lapse and be null and void unless the project, as approved, is commenced by the issuance of a building permit. If said building permit once issued, expires in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, with no completed construction having occurred, then a new petition and approval process shall be required to obtain a Specific Implementation Plan approval.
Section 94.14.14 Incorporation of New N Districts
When the Plan Commission approves the Specific Implementation Plan for a particular N district, such Specific Implementation Plan shall become part of this Chapter and shall be enforceable as part of this Chapter, as it may from time to time be amended.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Article 15: NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES, STRUCTURES AND SITES 15-1
Article 15: NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES, STRUCTURES AND SITES
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.15.01: Purpose through Section 94.15.03: Nonconforming Uses
Article 15: NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES, STRUCTURES AND SITES 15-2
Section 94.15.01: Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to establish requirements for nonconforming and substandard lots, nonconforming uses, nonconforming structures, and nonconforming sites created legally prior to March 18, 2015. Nonconforming signs are also addressed in Article 13.
Section 94.15.02: Nonconforming and Substandard Lots
(1) No lot shall be created which does not meet the lot dimensional requirements of the associated zoning district.
(2) Legal nonconforming or substandard lots, as defined in Article 17, may be utilized as a building site for a permitted use (but not for a conditional use) in the associated zoning district, if all of the following apply:
(a) Such lot has never been developed with one or more of its structures placed partly on an adjacent lot or parcel.
(b) Such lot is developed to comply with this Chapter and other applicable chapters of the Weston Municipal Code.
(3) Conforming structures existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this Chapter may be continued, although the lot does not conform to the newly adopted or amended requirements of this Chapter, as long as all uses on the lands containing the structure are legal conforming uses.
(4) Each aforementioned structure may be extended, enlarged, substituted, moved, remodeled, modified, added to, or rebuilt as long as any such change conforms to the established building setback lines along streets and the yard, height, and floor area ratio provisions of this Chapter.
[Amended via Ord. 15-009, 6/17/2015; Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
Section 94.15.03: Nonconforming Uses
(1) Continuance of a Nonconforming Use.
Any nonconforming use lawfully established prior to the date it became prohibited by this chapter may be continued without expansion and in a manner of operation existing upon such date, except as specified for nonconforming uses in this section.
(2) Modification of a Nonconforming Use.
A nonconforming use shall not be expanded, enlarged, extended, or reconstructed unless the use qualifies under subsection (4).
(3) Discontinuance of a Nonconforming Use.
When any nonconforming use of any structure or land is discontinued for a period of twelve consecutive months, or is changed into different use, any future use of said structure or land shall be in complete conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(4) Maintenance and Repair of a Nonconforming Use.
The ordinary maintenance and repair of a nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary repairs and incidental alterations that do not exacerbate the adverse impacts of the nonconforming use in relation to the intent and purpose of this chapter. Except as otherwise provided in this section, whenever a nonconforming use is damaged to the extent of more than 50 percent of the then-current equalized assessed value of the use and associated structure, such use shall not be restored except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, the structural repairs or alterations in a conforming structure containing a nonconforming use shall not
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.15.04: Nonconforming Structures through Section 94.15.04: Nonconforming Structures
Article 15: NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES, STRUCTURES AND SITES 15-3
during its lifetime exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of said structure at the time of the first known structural repair or alteration, unless the use within said structure is permanently changed to a conforming use.
Section 94.15.04: Nonconforming Structures
(1) Continuance of a Nonconforming Structure.
Any structure lawfully established may be continued at the size and in a manner of operation existing upon such date, except as provided for nonconforming structures in this section.
(2) Expansion of a Nonconforming Structure. Any lawful nonconforming structure may be extended, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, provided that said extension, enlargement, reconstruction, movement or alteration does not create any new violation of any setback or building requirements of the zoning district, nor increase the degree of the existing nonconformity except as:
(a) permitted under subsection (3),
(b) required by law or governmental order,
(c) required to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or
(d) in accordance with a variance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(3) Damaged or Destroyed Nonconforming Structure. A damaged or destroyed nonconforming structure may be restored to the size, location, and use that it had immediately before the damage or destruction occurred, without any limits on the costs of the repair, reconstruction, or improvement, if all of the following apply:
(a) The nonconforming structure was damaged or destroyed on or after March 2, 2006.
(b) The damage or destruction was caused by violent wind, vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold, or infestation.
(4) Unsafe Structures.
Nothing in this Chapter shall preclude the Zoning Administrator from initiating remedial or enforcement actions when a lawful nonconforming structure is declared unsafe or presents a danger to the public health, safety, or welfare.
(5) Future Modification of a Nonconforming Structure.
When any lawful nonconforming structure in any district is modified so as to be in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter, any future modification of said structure shall be in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter.
(6) Ordinary Maintenance of a Nonconforming Structure.
Ordinary maintenance, repairs (including repairs reasonably necessary to prevent the deterioration of a structure), and remodeling of a nonconforming structure are permitted. Ordinary maintenance, repairs, and remodeling include internal and external painting, decorating, paneling, the addition of acoustical ceilings, the installation of heating, electricity, plumbing (including fixtures), insulation, and the replacement of doors, windows, and other non-structural components.
(7) Timing of Building Permit.
Any structure for which a building permit has been lawfully granted prior to an amendment to this Chapter causing the structure or use to become nonconforming, may be completed in accordance with the approved plans, provided construction is started within 365 calendar days after issuance of the permit, and construction is completed within the term of the permit. If all such conditions are met, the
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.15.05: Nonconforming Sites through Section 94.15.05: Nonconforming Sites
Article 15: NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES, STRUCTURES AND SITES 15-4
construction or alteration within the scope of the permit shall not be deemed a change in the use or an expansion of the nonconformity for purposes of this section.
Section 94.15.05: Nonconforming Sites
(1) Definition. A nonconforming site is one on which a principal use has been established prior to March 18, 2015 and on which one or more site development standards, such as minimum landscape surfaces, bufferyards, plantings, or minimum parking, have not been met or cannot be met owing to the configuration of the site or existing structures whether conforming or nonconforming.
(2) Blanket Variance. A blanket variance for the requirements of this Chapter is hereby granted to all development sites in their configuration existing or as finally approved as of March 18, 2015, except in the following circumstances:
(a) Where other Articles of this Chapter make a particular requirement applicable to existing development sites or components thereof.
(b) Where the predecessor zoning ordinance, or a Village zoning decision under that ordinance, required site improvements which have not been satisfactorily completed or maintained.
(c) Where a particular requirement of this Chapter reflects a condition or requirement of approval for the particular development site.
(d) Where the provisions of subsection (3) apply.
(3) Proposed Enlargements Require Compliance. After the March 18, 2015, additional site development that results in enlargement, expansion, or extension of uses or structures will not be allowed to occur without bringing the site into full compliance with all site development standards in this Chapter, or into compliance to the extent practical as provided in different sections of this Chapter, in accordance with the following:
(a) On lots where the site configuration and undeveloped area are sufficient to comply with nonconformities in site design, no enlargement, expansion, or extension of a use or structure shall be permitted if it makes compliance with site regulations of the Chapter impossible, even if said enlargement, expansion, or extension of the use or structure would otherwise be permissible.
(b) Enlargements, expansions, or extensions that would result in creation of one or more nonconformities, render a nonconforming site incapable of being brought into full or greater compliance with nonconforming site requirements, or increase the degree of existing nonconformities with the site development standards of this Chapter shall not be permitted, unless a variance is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals under Section 94.15.11.
(c) On lots with adequate configuration and area to bring the site into full or greater compliance with site design standards, said compliance shall be required at the time of any property improvement, modification, enlargement, or expansion requiring site plan approval. The degree to which the property shall be made to comply with substandard site design elements shall be proportional to the degree of property improvement.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-1
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.01: Purpose through Section 94.16.02: Amendments to Zoning Regulations
(Text Amendments)
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-2
Section 94.16.01: Purpose
The purpose of this
The purpose of this ArticleArticle is to establish the administrative and enforcement framework for the application is to establish the administrative and enforcement framework for the application of this Chapter.of this Chapter.
Section 94.16.02: Amendments to Zoning Regulations (Text Amendments)
(1) Authority. Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practice require, the Village Board may, by ordinance, amend the zoning regulations of this Chapter. All such amendments shall first be subject to the review and recommendation of the Plan Commission.
(2) Initiation. An amendment to the zoning regulations may be initiated by the Village Board, Plan Commission, by recommendation of Village staff to either of these two bodies, or by any member of the general public.
(3) Application Requirements for Amendment to the Zoning Regulations. No application for amendment to the zoning regulations shall be placed on any agenda as an item to be acted upon unless the Zoning Administrator has certified acceptance of a complete application. Prior to publication of the required Notice of Public Hearing, the applicant shall provide the Zoning Administrator with the complete application certified by the Zoning Administrator, including an easily reproducible electronic copy plus hard copies in a quantity directed by the Zoning Administrator. Said complete application shall be comprised of all of the following:
(a) A copy of the portion of the current provisions of this Chapter that are proposed to be amended, with said provisions clearly indicated in a manner that is clearly reproducible with a photocopier.
(b) A copy of the text that is proposed to replace the current text.
(c) Written justification for the proposed text amendment, consisting of the reasons why the applicant believes the proposed text amendment is in harmony with the Comprehensive Plan.
(d) Any required fee as stated in the Village’s fee schedule.
(4) Zoning Administrator Review and Recommendation.
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is complete and fulfills the requirements of this Chapter. Only a complete application in the determination of the Zoning Administrator shall entitle a public hearing under subsection (6). The Zoning Administrator or designee shall inform the applicant if the application is incomplete in his or her determination.
(b) Once the Zoning Administrator determines the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator or designee shall authorize a public hearing and prepare a written evaluation of the application based on the criteria for amending the zoning regulations in subsection (7). The Zoning Administrator or designee shall forward a copy of the evaluation to the Plan Commission, Village Board, and applicant.
(5) Notice of Public Hearing. Following acceptance of a complete application as determined by the Zoning Administrator, the Village Clerk in coordination with the Zoning Administrator shall schedule a public hearing before the Plan Commission, to be held within 45 days after acceptance of a complete application. Notice of the time, place, and purpose of such hearing shall be given by publication as a Class 2 Notice in conformance with the requirements of Wis. Stat. § 62.23 (7)(d). The Village Clerk in coordination with the Zoning Administrator shall also send said notice to the applicant and the clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any portion of the jurisdiction of this Chapter at least ten days prior to the date of such public hearing. Failure to mail said notice or failure to meet the time requirements herein, provided it is unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this Section.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.02: Amendments to Zoning Regulations
(Text Amendments)
through Section 94.16.02: Amendments to Zoning Regulations
(Text Amendments)
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-3
(6) Public Hearing and Recommendation. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing on all proposed amendments to the zoning regulations. Following the public hearing, and after consideration of comments provided therein, the Plan Commission shall review the proposed amendments to the zoning regulations and shall within 45 days of the public hearing make a recommendation to the Village Board that the application be granted as requested, modified, or denied. If the Commission fails to make a recommendation within this timeframe, the proposed amendment shall be forwarded to the Village Board without recommendation.
(7) Review Criteria for Amendments to the Zoning Regulations.
The Plan Commission and Village Board shall utilize the following criteria when reviewing each application to amend the text of this Chapter:
(a) Is the proposed text amendment consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, as is required by Wisconsin Statutes?
(b) Does the proposed text amendment further the purposes and intent of this Chapter and section to which the amendment is proposed?
(c) Does the amendment address any of the following deficiencies or omissions as compared to the current language of this Chapter?
1. A change has occurred in the land market, or other factors have arisen that require a new form of development, a new type of land use, or a new procedure to meet said change(s).
2. New methods of development or providing infrastructure make it necessary to alter this Chapter to meet these new factors.
3. Changing governmental finances require amending this Chapter in order to meet the needs of the government in terms of providing and affording public services.
4. There is an error or internal inconsistency in this Chapter.
(d) Does the proposed amendment maintain the desired compatibility with allowable land uses, land use intensities, and impact on resources of the affected zoning district(s)?
(8) Village Board Action.
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall schedule the proposed amendment for potential Village Board action. The Village Board shall within 120 days of submittal of a complete application act to approve or reject the proposed amendment, except if extended by written or electronic agreement from the applicant. Failure of the Board to act within such timeframe (unless said deadline is extended by written agreement of the applicant) shall constitute approval of any complete application as presented.
(b) The Village Board may approve an amendment by a simple majority of a voting quorum, except that if the Board action is opposed to or alters a recommendation of the Plan Commission, the amendment shall require an affirmative vote from three-fourths or greater of the full Village Board.
(9) Effect of Denial. No application that has been denied (either wholly or in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
(10) Fee. A fee may be required for this procedure, per a fee schedule approved by the Village Board.
[Amended via Ord. 16-007, 4/20/2016]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.03: Amendments to the Official Zoning
Map (Rezonings)
through Section 94.16.03: Amendments to the Official Zoning
Map (Rezonings)
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-4
Section 94.16.03: Amendments to the Official Zoning Map (Rezonings)
(1) Authority. Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practice require, the Village Board may, by ordinance, amend the Official Zoning Map of this Chapter. Such amendments, often called “rezonings” or “zoning map amendments,” shall first be subject to the review and recommendation of the Plan Commission.
(2) Initiation. An amendment to the Official Zoning Map may be initiated by any member of the Village Board or Plan Commission (or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee for land in the ETZ area), by recommendation of Village staff to either of these bodies, or by an application by the owner(s) of property proposed for rezoning.
(3) Applications for Amendment to the Official Zoning Map. No application for amendment to the Official Zoning Map shall be placed on any agenda as an item to be acted upon unless the Zoning Administrator has certified acceptance of a complete application. Prior to publication of the required Notice of Public Hearing, the applicant shall provide the Zoning Administrator with the complete application certified by the Zoning Administrator, including an easily reproducible electronic copy plus hard copies in a quantity directed by the Zoning Administrator. A complete application shall be comprised of all of the following:
(a) A map with a graphic scale and a north arrow showing the entire subject property included in the proposed map amendment including lot boundaries and dimensions of the subject property, and all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property. Said map shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject property, the current zoning of all property within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, and the jurisdiction(s) in which the subject and adjacent properties lie.
(b) A list of the names and addresses of the owners of all property within 300 feet of the subject property as they appear on the current tax records shall be provided by the applicant, though the Zoning Administrator or Village Clerk may at their discretion instead provide this list.
(c) A map, such as the Future Land Use map from the Comprehensive Plan, showing the generalized location of the subject property in relation to the Village as a whole.
(d) Written justification for the proposed map amendment, consisting of the reasons why the applicant believes the proposed map amendment is in harmony with recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan and other review criteria of this Section.
(e) Any required fee as stated in a fee schedule approved by the Village Board.
(4) Zoning Administrator Review and Recommendation.
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is complete and fulfills the requirements of this Chapter. Only a complete application in the determination of the Zoning Administrator shall entitle a public hearing under subsection (6). The Zoning Administrator shall inform the applicant if the application is incomplete in his or her determination.
(b) Once the Zoning Administrator determines the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator or designee shall authorize a public hearing and prepare a written evaluation of the application based on the criteria for amending the Official Zoning Map in subsection (7). The Zoning Administrator or designee shall forward a copy of the evaluation to the Plan Commission, Village Board, and applicant.
(5) Notice of Public Hearing. Following acceptance of a complete application as determined by the Zoning Administrator, the Village Clerk in cooperation with the Zoning Administrator shall schedule a public hearing before the Plan Commission (or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee if within the ETZ Area) to be held within 45 days after acceptance of a complete application. Notice of the time, place, and
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.03: Amendments to the Official Zoning
Map (Rezonings)
through Section 94.16.03: Amendments to the Official Zoning
Map (Rezonings)
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-5
purpose of such hearing shall be given by publication as a Class 2 Notice in conformance with the requirements of Wis. Stat. § 62.23 (7)(d). The Village Clerk in cooperation with the Zoning Administrator shall also send said notice to the applicant, owners of record of all lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, and the clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any portion of the jurisdiction of this Chapter at least ten days prior to the date of such public hearing. Failure to mail said notice or failure to meet the time requirements herein, provided it is unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this Section.
(6) Public Hearing and Recommendation. The Plan Commission (or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee for land in the ETZ Area) shall hold a public hearing on all proposed amendments to the Official Zoning Map. Following the public hearing, and after consideration of comments provided therein, the Plan Commission or Committee shall review the proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Map and shall within 45 days of the public hearing make a recommendation to the Village Board that the application be granted as requested, modified, or denied. If the Commission or Committee fails to make a recommendation within this timeframe, the proposed amendment shall be forwarded to the Village Board without recommendation. Such deadline may be extended by written or electronic agreement from the applicant. Nothing in this Chapter requires Town Plan Commission or Town Board action on proposed amendments to the Official Zoning Map in the ETZ Area.
(7) Review Criteria for Amendments to the Official Zoning Map.
The Plan Commission (or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee for land in the ETZ Area) and Village Board shall utilize the following criteria when reviewing each application to amend the Official Zoning Map:
(a) Is the proposed rezoning consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, as is required by Wisconsin Statutes?
(b) Does the rezoning further the purpose and intent of this Chapter?
(c) Does rezoning address any of the following that are not properly addressed on the current Official Zoning Map?
1. A mistake was made in mapping on the Official Zoning Map. That is, an area is or has developed in a manner and purpose different from that for which it is mapped. If this reason is cited, it must be demonstrated that the discussed inconsistency between actual land use and designated zoning is not intended, as the Village may intend to stop an undesirable land use pattern from being perpetuated.
2. Factors have changed, such as the availability of new data, the presence of new roads or other infrastructure, additional development, annexation, or other zoning changes, making the subject property more appropriate for a different zoning district.
3. Growth patterns or rates have changed, thereby creating the need for a rezoning.
(d) Does the proposed zoning district maintain the desired consistency of land uses, land use intensities, and land use impacts as related to the environs of the subject property?
(e) For applications to rezone land to a multi-family, commercial or industrial zoning district, is, or will there be, adequate public infrastructure available to accommodate the range of uses allowed in that zoning district?
(8) Village Board Action.
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall schedule the proposed amendment for potential Village Board action. After careful consideration of all comments, the Village Board shall within 120 days of submittal of a complete application, act to approve or reject the proposed amendment, unless extended by written or electronic agreement of the applicant. Failure of the Board to act within 120
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.04: Zoning Permits through Section 94.16.04: Zoning Permits
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-6
days of submittal of a complete application (unless said deadline is extended by agreement of the applicant) shall constitute approval of the application as presented.
(b) The Village Board may approve an amendment by a simple majority of a voting quorum, except that a two-thirds or greater vote of the full Village Board is required in one or more of the following circumstances:
1. The Board action is opposed to or alters a recommendation of the Plan Commission (or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee for land in the ETZ Area),
2. A valid protest petition against the requested amendment to the Official Zoning Map meeting the definition in Section 94.17.04 is filed, and/or
3. The amendment relates to down zoning as defined in Wis. Stat. § 66.10015(1)(as), unless the down zoning is requested or agreed to by all persons who own the land(s) affected by the proposed down zoning.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
(9) Effect of Denial. No application that has been denied (either wholly or in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
(10) Fee. The Village may require a fee may for this procedure, per the fee schedule approved by the Village Board.
[Amended via Ord. 16-007, 4/20/2016]
Section 94.16.04: Zoning Permits
(1) Applicability: No structure shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, structurally repaired, or structurally altered; and no other action requiring a zoning permit under this Chapter shall occur, until after the owner or his agent has secured a zoning permit or building permit. Every application for a zoning permit or building permit shall be deemed to be an application for a Certificate of Occupancy, governed under Section 94.16.04.
(2) Application. Each application for a zoning permit shall include the following:
(a) Name and address of the applicant, owner of the site, architect, professional engineer, and contractor.
(b) Description of the subject site by lot, block, and recorded subdivision, or by metes and bounds (or plat of survey); address of the subject site; type of structure; existing and proposed operation or use of the structure or site; number of employees if related to meeting parking standards in this Chapter; and the zoning district within which the subject site lies. The Zoning Administrator shall require the builder to survey the lot upon which the structure is being built if corner markers are not identified and lot lines cannot be accurately established without a survey.
(c) Map showing the locations, dimensions, and areas of all existing and proposed structures; existing and proposed easements; streets and other public ways; off-street parking (including spaces), loading areas, and driveways; existing highway access restrictions; outdoor storage areas; high water, channel floodway, and floodplain boundaries; and existing and proposed street, side, and rear yards.
(d) For structures intended for non-residential use, an operational plan including the hours of operation; number of employees total and per largest shift; predicted traffic impact; expected loading and outdoor activities; fire suppression measures; and emergency alarms, management plans, and contact information.
(e) List or copies of required federal, state, and county permits and licenses that will be required.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.05: Building Permit through Section 94.16.06: Conditional Use Permits
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-7
(f) Except for structures intended for single- or two-family residential use, a copy of a contract with a licensed garbage hauler.
(g) Additional information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator.
(h) Any required fee as listed in the fee schedule approved by the Village Board.
(3) Granting of Zoning Permit. A zoning permit shall be granted or denied by the Zoning Administrator (or Building Inspector where the Village combines the zoning permit and building permit) in writing within 20 days of a complete application (unless extended by written or electronic agreement of the applicant), and the applicant shall post such permit in a conspicuous place at the site.
(4) Expiration of Zoning Permit. The zoning permit shall become void unless visible on-site construction is commenced within six months from the date of issuance of the permit or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended at any time after work is commenced for a period of 60 days. The period of time may be extended by the Zoning Administrator if the delay was due to conditions beyond the control of the applicant. All permits granted under the terms of this section shall be valid for only 24 months, unless otherwise so regulated by the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(5) Relationship to Building Permit. Where a building permit is also required for the project per Chapter 14, the Village may combine the building permit and zoning permit into a single application and a single approval.
(6) Fees. The Village may require a fee may for this procedure, per the fee schedule approved by the Village Board.
Section 94.16.05: Building Permit
No building shall be erected, structurally altered, or relocated until a building permit has been issued by the Building Inspector certifying that such building, as proposed, would be in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and with Chapter 14. No building permit shall be issued until zoning compliance is determined.
Section 94.16.06: Conditional Use Permits
(1) Purpose and Applicability. The development and execution of this Chapter is based upon the division of the Village and its ETZ Area into zoning districts, within which districts the use of land and buildings, and bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation to the land, are mutually compatible and substantially uniform. However, there are certain uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as unrestricted permitted uses in any particular district or districts, without consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land or public facilities, and of the public need for the particular use at a particular location. Such uses, nevertheless, may be necessary or desirable to be allowed in a particular district provided that due consideration is given to their location, development, and operation. Such uses are classified as conditional uses and require a conditional use permit except as specified under subsection (14).
(2) Initiation of Conditional Use Permit. Any person, firm, corporation, or organization having a freehold interest or a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, or a contractual interest that may become a freehold interest or an exclusive possessory interest, and that is specifically enforceable on the land for which a conditional use is sought, may file an application to use such land for one or more of the conditional uses in the zoning district in which such land is located.
(3) Application for Conditional Use Permit. No application for a conditional use permit shall be placed on any agenda as an item to be acted upon unless the Zoning Administrator has certified acceptance of a complete application. Prior to publication of the required Notice of Public Hearing, the applicant shall provide the Zoning Administrator with the complete application certified by the Zoning Administrator,
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.06: Conditional Use Permits through Section 94.16.06: Conditional Use Permits
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-8
including an easily reproducible electronic copy plus hard copies in a quantity directed by the Zoning Administrator. Said complete application shall be comprised of all of the following:
(a) A completed conditional use permit application form furnished by the Zoning Administrator.
(b) A scale map of the subject property showing all lands for which the conditional use permit is proposed, and all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, together with the names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the same appear on the current records of the Register of Deeds. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a north arrow shall be provided.
(c) A written description of the proposed conditional use describing the type, duration, and density of activities, buildings, and structures proposed for the subject property and their general locations, plus such additional information as may be required for the particular land use under Article 4.
(d) A site plan of the subject property, with any alterations as may be proposed to accommodate the conditional use. Said site plan shall conform to any applicable requirements of Section 94.16.09, and any additional requirements as may be specified for the particular land use under Article 4. If the conditional use will make use of existing site improvements only, a site plan need only be of sufficient detail to confirm the portion of the site used by the conditional use.
(e) Written justification for the proposed conditional use consisting of the reasons why the applicant believes the proposed conditional use is appropriate, particularly as evidenced by compliance with the approval criteria set forth in this Section and all applicable requirements of this Chapter.
(f) Any other plans and information deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator or the Plan Commission (or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee if in the ETZ Area) to ensure that the requirements of this Chapter are or will be fulfilled.
(g) Any required fee per the fee schedule approved by the Village Board.
(4) Zoning Administrator Review and Recommendation.
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is complete and fulfills the requirements of this Chapter. Only a complete application in the determination of the Zoning Administrator shall entitle a public hearing under subsection (4). The Zoning Administrator shall inform the applicant if the application is incomplete in his or her determination.
(b) Once the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator or designee shall authorize the public hearing and prepare a written evaluation of the application based on the criteria for evaluating conditional use permits in subsection (8) below. The Zoning Administrator shall forward a copy of the evaluation to the Plan Commission (or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee for land in the ETZ Area).
(5) Public Hearing. The Village Clerk shall schedule a public hearing before the Plan Commission (or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee for land in the ETZ Area) to be held within 45 days after acceptance of a complete application as determined by the Zoning Administrator. Notice of the time, place, and purpose of such hearing shall be given by publication as a Class 2 Notice in conformance with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d) and (de). The Village Clerk shall also send said notice to the applicant, owners of record of all lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, and the clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any portion of the jurisdiction of this Chapter at least ten days prior to the date of such public hearing. Failure to mail said notice or failure to meet the time requirements herein, provided it is unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this Section.
(6) Review and Action by the Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee. Within 60 days after the public hearing, or an extension of said period requested in writing or electronic format by the
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.06: Conditional Use Permits through Section 94.16.06: Conditional Use Permits
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-9
applicant and granted by the Commission or Committee, the Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee shall take final action on the conditional use permit request. Prior to acting on a conditional use permit application, the Plan Commission or the Extraterritorial Zoning Committee may request further information and/or additional reports from the Zoning Administrator, the applicant, outside experts and/or any other source. The Commission or Committee may approve the conditional use as originally proposed, may approve the proposed conditional use with conditions or modifications, or may deny approval of the proposed conditional use and include reasons for denial. Any action to approve or amend the proposed conditional use permit requires a majority vote of Commission or Committee members in attendance. Nothing in this Chapter requires town plan commission or town board action on proposed conditional use permits in the ETZ Area.
(7) Appeal to the Village Board. An appeal of a decision under subsection (6) may be taken to the Village Board by any person, firm or corporation; any officer, department, board, commission or agency of the Village or, in the case of lands within the ETZ Area, the town in which the affected land is located, who is aggrieved by the decision. Such appeal shall be made in writing to the Zoning Administrator within ten days after the date of the Commission’s or Committee’s decision. In the case of an appeal:
(a) The Zoning Administrator and Building Inspector shall issue no permits to enable commencement or continuation of building and other activities authorized by the conditional use permit and shall issue a “stop work” order for any such activities already commenced.
(b) The Zoning Administrator shall immediately notify the applicant and property owner of the appeal in writing and shall schedule the appeal for Village Board consideration.
(c) The Village Board shall, by resolution, make a final decision to grant, with or without conditions, or to deny each application for a conditional use permit after receiving and reviewing the Commission’s or Committee’s findings and making its own findings as to whether or not the proposed use will satisfy the criteria for approval set forth in section (8), and shall have all of the powers of the Commission under this Section. The Village Board’s determination shall be final and subject to appeal to the circuit court under any procedure authorized by statute.
(8) Review Criteria for Conditional Use Permit.
(a) If the applicant meets, or agrees to meet, all of the applicable requirements specified in this Chapter and conditions imposed by the Plan Commission or the Extraterritorial Zoning Committee, the Commission or Committee shall under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(de)2.a. grant the conditional use permit. The Village may require written agreement from the applicant in a form prescribed by the Village Attorney.
(b) Any decision to grant or deny the conditional use permit must be supported by substantial evidence, as that term is defined in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(de)1.b. Any condition or modification must be related to the purpose of this Chapter, reasonable, measurable to the extent practicable, and based on substantial evidence.
(c) To the extent consistent with Subsections (a) and (b), no conditional use permit shall be granted unless the Plan Commission or the Extraterritorial Zoning Committee finds that the use authorized thereby meets the following criteria:
1. The proposed conditional use is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, this Chapter, and all other plans, programs, and ordinances adopted by the Village.
2. The proposed conditional use, in its proposed location and as depicted on the required site plan, will not result in a substantial or undue adverse impact on nearby property, the character of the neighborhood, environmental factors, traffic factors, parking, public improvements, public property or rights-of-way, or other matters affecting the public health, safety, or general welfare, either as they now exist or as they may in the future be developed as a result of the
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.06: Conditional Use Permits through Section 94.16.06: Conditional Use Permits
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-10
implementation of the provisions of this Chapter, the Comprehensive Plan, or all other plans, programs, and ordinances adopted by the Village.
3. The proposed conditional use will maintain the desired consistency of land uses, land use intensities, and land use impacts as related to the environs of the subject property.
4. The proposed conditional use is located in an area that will be adequately served by, and will not impose an undue burden on, any of the improvements, facilities, utilities, or services provided by public agencies serving the subject property.
5. Tthe potential public benefits of the proposed conditional use outweigh potential adverse impacts of the proposed conditional use, after taking into consideration the applicant’s proposal and any requirements recommended by the applicant to ameliorate such impacts.
(9) Issuance, Notice, and Recording of Conditional Use Permit or Denial. Within 30 days following the granting of a conditional use permit, the Zoning Administrator shall issue to the applicant the approved conditional use permit. Said permit shall enumerate the details of the conditional use permit, including an identifiable description of the use and subject property and any specific conditions or requirements of approval. The Zoning Administrator shall record the conditional use permit against the property, assigning all costs thereof to the applicant, and shall make record of the conditional use permit on the Official Zoning Map. In the case of a denial of a conditional use permit, the Zoning Administrator shall provide written notification to the applicant that the conditional use permit was denied, including the reasons for denial.
(10) Effect of Denial. No conditional use permit application that has been denied (either wholly or in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of factors relative to the review criteria in subsection (8) that are found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
(11) Penalties, Revocation, or Modification of an Approved Conditional Use Permit.
(a) Any violation of an approved conditional use permit shall be subject to Section 94.16.19.
(b) A conditional use permit shall be automatically revoked if:
1. All buildings and other improvements authorized by the conditional use permit have not been developed, and the conditional use has not commenced operation, within two years of final site plan approval, unless the Commission or Committee has extended this period by request of the applicant, based on reasons beyond the reasonable control of the applicant.
2. Once initially made operational, the operation of the conditional use has been discontinued for a period exceeding one year. The burden of proof shall be with the conditional use permit holder or operator to conclusively demonstrate that the conditional use was operational during this period.
(c) A conditional use permit may be revoked or modified by the Plan Commission or the Extraterritorial Zoning Committee, where the Commission or Committee determines that the use, its operation, and/or associated improvements are not in compliance with (i) the terms of this Chapter including one or more criteria in subsection (8) and/or (ii) the approved conditional use permit including any associated plan or approval condition. The Commission, Committee, or Zoning Administrator may commence proceedings to consider revocation or modification, with such proceedings following the process in subsections (5) and (6). An appeal of any such decision shall be allowed per subsection (7).
(12) Duration and Transfer. The Commission or Committee may approve a conditional use permit with a limitation on the Permit’s start date, duration, and/or transfer if such limitations(s) relate to the purpose of this Chapter and the conditional use permit review criteria in subsection (8). Unless the Commission or Committee approved a conditional use permit with a transfer limitation, or Article 4 prescribes a
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.07: Temporary Use Reviews through Section 94.16.07: Temporary Use Reviews
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-11
transfer limitation for the particular conditional use, all requirements of the approved conditional use permit shall be continued regardless of ownership or operation of the subject property or use and shall run with the land, except as otherwise limited by this Chapter or by a specific condition attached to the conditional use permit.
(13) Amendments to Approved Conditional Use. Any expansion of or amendment to a previously approved conditional use permit or grandfathered conditional use, including any change in an associated plan or approval condition found to be material by the Zoning Administrator, shall be processed in accordance with subsections (2) through (10), except where its initial approval allowed expansion or amendment by some other process.
(14) Uses Now Regulated as Conditional Uses That Were Legal Land Uses (Permitted-by-Right or as Conditional Uses) Prior to the Effective Date of This Chapter. A use regulated as a conditional use under Figures 3.04 and 3.05 or elsewhere this Chapter that was a legal land use--either permitted-by-right or as a conditional use--prior to March 18, 2015 shall be considered a legal, conforming land use so long as any previously approved conditions of use and site plan are followed. Any substantial expansion or modification of such use or any previously approved condition of such use, in the determination of the Zoning Administrator, shall require application and Village consideration of a conditional use permit under this Section.
[Amended via Ord. 16-008, 4/20/2016; Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
Section 94.16.07: Temporary Use Reviews
(1) Purpose.
(a) The purpose of this Section is to provide regulations that govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or denial, of proposed temporary uses, as described in this Chapter.
(b) Temporary uses are those uses that have the potential to create undesirable impacts on nearby properties if allowed on a permanent basis under the general requirements of this Chapter. Owing to their varied nature, temporary uses also have the potential to create undesirable impacts on nearby properties that potentially cannot be determined except on a case-by-case basis. In order to prevent undesirable outcomes, all temporary uses are required to meet requirements of this Section, of Section 94.4.10, and applicable within the zoning district in which the subject property is located.
(c) Allowable temporary uses permitted within each zoning district are listed in Article 3 of this Chapter.
(d) Every application for a temporary use shall be deemed to be an application for a temporary Certificate of Occupancy, governed under Section 94.16.04.
(e) For special events, defined as any planned extraordinary occurrence on the public right-of-way or public premises including, but not limited to, parades, processions, bicycle or foot races, or festivals; the Zoning Administrator may substitute the requirements and procedures of Chapter 67 for the requirements of this Section.
(2) Regulations Applicable to All Temporary Uses. No public hearing is required to review a temporary use that is permitted by right in the zoning district, however, a demonstration that the applicant proposes to meet all temporary use requirements of this Section must be made at time of application. Any temporary use found not to be in compliance with the terms of this Chapter shall be considered in violation of this Chapter and shall be subject to all applicable procedures and penalties.
(3) Application Requirements. All applications for proposed temporary uses shall be approved as complete by the Zoning Administrator prior to certification of the proposed temporary use. Said complete application shall be comprised of all of the following:
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.08: Sign Permits through Section 94.16.09: Site Plan Procedures
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-12
(a) A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the temporary use is proposed. Said map shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject property and its environs, and the jurisdiction(s) that maintains that control. Said map and all its parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form that is clearly reproducible with a photocopier. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a north arrow shall be provided.
(b) A map, such as the Future Land Use Map in the Comprehensive Plan, of the generalized location of the subject property in relation to the Village as a whole.
(c) A written description of the proposed temporary use describing the type of activities, buildings, and structures proposed for the subject property and their general locations.
(d) The Zoning Administrator may require a site plan of the subject property. Said site plan shall conform to those requirements of Section 94.16.09 deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
(e) The Zoning Administrator may require some or all of the information normally required for an application for a zoning permit, under Section 94.16.04(2).
(f) Any required fee per Chapter 67 or the fee schedule approved by the Village Board.
(4) Action on Requested Temporary Use. Except for those temporary uses that require a conditional use permit under Article 3, action on an allowable temporary use shall be taken by the Zoning Administrator within ten working days of a complete application, except where extended by written or electronic agreement of the applicant. Such action may include approval, conditional approval to meet the requirements of this Chapter, or denial if compliance with this Chapter cannot be achieved. If the temporary use is approved, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a written permit enumerating the details of the temporary use, including what temporary land use(s) and/or development was approved and any conditions of approval. For those temporary uses that are listed as conditional uses under Article 3, a conditional use permit shall first be required.
(5) Fee. The Village may require a fee for this procedure, per the fee schedule approved by the Village Board or Chapter 67.
Section 94.16.08: Sign Permits
Sign permits shall be issued in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 94.13.02, and other applicable procedures set forth in Article 13.
Section 94.16.09: Site Plan Procedures
(1) Applicability. Site plan approval shall be required in advance of construction for all development projects that are listed in Section 94.3.03(10) or as otherwise stated elsewhere in this Chapter.
(2) Pre-application Conference. Prior to the official submission of an application for site plan review, the applicant shall confer with the Zoning Administrator or designee. The purpose of this conference will be to discuss the proposed nature of the contemplated development project. The Zoning Administrator or designee may also refer the matter to the Plan Commission (or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee for land in the ETZ Area) for concept plan review prior to submittal of a formal application.
(3) Application Completeness. The applicant shall submit a site plan application to the Zoning Administrator. The site plan application shall not be placed on an agenda as an action item unless the application is approved and certified as complete by the Zoning Administrator. The review of a site plan application for completeness shall occur within ten working days of application submittal, or else the application shall be considered complete. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of the date and time of the applicable Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee meeting, if Commission or Committee review is required. Applications must be complete at least 10 days in advance
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.09: Site Plan Procedures through Section 94.16.09: Site Plan Procedures
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-13
of a Commission or Committee meeting to be scheduled for action at such meeting (as opposed to the subsequent meeting), except under exceptional circumstances as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(4) Application Contents. The applicant shall provide the Zoning Administrator with the complete application certified by the Zoning Administrator, including an easily reproducible electronic copy plus hard copies in a quantity directed by the Zoning Administrator. Except as otherwise allowed below or with the express approval of the Zoning Administrator, the application shall include the following information within the site plan or in supporting documentation to be considered complete:
(a) A completed application on a form provided by the Zoning Administrator.
(b) A title block that indicates the name, address, and phone/fax number(s) of the current property owner and/or agent(s) (developer, architect, engineer, planner) for project.
(c) The date of the original plan and the latest date of revision to the plan.
(d) A north arrow and a graphic scale.
(e) A legal description or plat of survey of the subject property.
(f) All property lines and existing and proposed right-of-way lines with bearings and dimensions clearly labeled.
(g) Delineations and labels of floodplains, shoreland-wetlands, shoreland areas, steep slopes, and other natural resource areas.
(h) All existing and proposed easement lines and dimensions with a key provided and explained on the margins of the plan as to ownership and purpose.
(i) All required building setback lines/minimum yards applicable to the zoning district(s), including setbacks from natural resource areas.
(j) A grading plan at the same scale as the main site plan; showing existing and proposed grades; finish floor elevations of all existing and proposed buildings; elevations of adjacent curbs, property lines, and street center lines; and retention walls and related devices.
(k) An erosion control plan, meeting applicable state and local requirements.
(l) The location of existing and proposed stormwater management and structures, along with any technical data required by the Director of Public Works or designee to determine the adequacy of the proposed facilities.
(m) Proposed land use or uses, with projected number of employees, residents, and maximum customer capacity.
(n) All existing and proposed buildings, structures, and hard surfaced and graveled areas, including building entrances, walks, drives, decks, patios, fences, utility poles, drainage facilities, walls, wells (in use or abandoned), on-site waste treatment tank locations and drainage fields, labeling actual and proposed setbacks from all lot lines.
(o) The location and dimension of all access points onto public streets.
(p) The location and dimension of all on-site parking (and, if applicable, off-site parking), including a summary of the number of parking stalls provided versus required by this Chapter.
(q) The location and dimension of all loading and service areas on the subject property and labels indicating the dimension of such areas.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.09: Site Plan Procedures through Section 94.16.09: Site Plan Procedures
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-14
(r) The location of all outdoor storage areas including dumpsters and the design and materials for all screening fences, including pre-approval from the contracted hauler on proposed design and location.
(s) The location of all outdoor areas for daily, seasonal, or longer-term sales, display, and/or collection of merchandise, including but not limited to donation drop-off boxes and vending machines.
(t) The location, type, height, fixture design, and cut-off angle of all exterior lighting, including a detailed photometric plan showing the distribution of light output across the property to the property lines.
(u) A detailed landscape plan for the subject property at the same scale as the main plan showing the location, type, and size of all proposed landscaping. All landscape plans shall be subject to the requirements of Article 11, including but not limited to professional quality and preparer qualifications under Section 94.11.02(2).
(v) Elevation drawings, drawn to a recognized architectural scale, of proposed buildings or proposed remodeling of existing buildings to include exterior or roof mechanical equipment and lighting, and showing finished exterior treatment, with adequate labels provided to clearly depict exterior materials, texture, color, and overall appearance. Drawings shall also include or be accompanied by calculations of each exterior facade building material by type, square footage, and percentage of total façade area.
(w) The location, type, height, size and lighting of all existing signage on the subject property, and for proposed signage to the extent practical at the time. Multitenant retail centers and group developments shall provide a sign plan for the project that:
1. Meets the submittal requirements of Section 94.13.02(2).
2. Includes proposed signable areas on building facades.
3. Includes a group development sign with space for individual business identification if desired.
(x) In the site plan map legend, the following additional data for the subject property:
1. Proposed zoning (or existing zoning if no change)
2. Lot area
3. Total number and type of residential dwelling units (if applicable)
4. Total gross floor area of building and outdoor storage space
5. Landscape surface area, and percentage of site to be covered in green space
6. Building heights
(y) Plans and methods for fire control and suppression, which may include hydrants, sprinklers, alarms, and/or access rooms. Compliance with the Fire Code shall be required.
(z) If hazardous materials are to be kept or stored on site, a written description of such materials and the operations involving such materials conducted on their property. The Village may also require a process safety management, risk management, containment, and emergency response program.
(aa) All other materials required to assure compliance with the performance standards associated with the particular land use, as indicated in Article 4.
(bb) Any required fee per the fee schedule approved by the Village Board.
(5) Review by Other Local Staff. Promptly upon his or her approval of a complete site plan application, the Zoning Administrator shall forward the complete site plan application and all associated materials to the following: Village Administrator, Building Inspector, Public Works Director, Village Engineer, Village Parks and Recreation Director, Police Chief, Fire Inspector, Plan Commission members if in the Village, and Chairperson of the associated town if in the ETZ Area. Such persons may review the site plan application, and if so shall provide advice and recommendations to the Zoning Administrator within 12
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.09: Site Plan Procedures through Section 94.16.09: Site Plan Procedures
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-15
days of their receipt of such materials to assure consideration in the Zoning Administrator’s approval or report to the Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee.
(6) Site Plan Review Criteria. In acting on any site plan approval request, the appropriate site plan approval authority shall review the request against all applicable requirements of this Chapter. Should additional public facilities be needed to serve the proposed site, the approval authority shall forward its recommendations to the Village Board and shall not issue final approval until the Village Board has entered into an agreement with the applicant regarding the development of such facilities.
(7) Action by Zoning Administrator; Appeal Procedure. Except as provided in subsection (8), the Zoning Administrator shall, within 20 days of a complete submittal and following consultation with the Village Administrator, approve the site plan as presented, approve the site plan with conditions, or reject the site plan indicating reasons for rejection, unless this timeframe is extended by written agreement of the applicant. Such deadline may be extended by written or electronic agreement from the applicant. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of such action in writing on a form designed for that purpose. Within 20 days of such action, the applicant may appeal in writing all or part of the Zoning Administrator’s decision to the Plan Commission (or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee for land in the ETZ Area). During the appeal process, the Zoning Administrator and Building Inspector are authorized to hold the issuance of permits to enable commencement or continuation of building and other activities authorized by the Zoning Administrator’s decision, and to issue a “stop work” order for any such activities already commenced. The Commission or Committee may affirm, modify, or reverse the Zoning Administrator’s decision. The Zoning Administrator shall inform the Commission or Committee of all site plans submitted, reviewed, approved, and rejected under this subsection (7) during each meeting. Nothing in this Chapter requires Town Plan Commission or Town Board action on site plan applications in the ETZ Area.
(8) Action by Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee. The Zoning Administrator shall not determine a site plan application, but shall forward the complete site plan application or components thereof, all associated materials, and a report and recommendation to the Plan Commission or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee in all cases where at least one of the following conditions is present:
(a) The applicant has indicated on the application form a desire for Commission or Committee action instead of Zoning Administrator action.
(b) The application is filed concurrently with a rezoning application, conditional use permit application, or both for the same site.
(c) The site plan is for a Large Retail and Commercial Service Development as described in Section 94.10.04.
(d) The site plan proposes public improvements other than driveway connections to public streets and sanitary sewer or water lateral connections to existing public mains, or in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator requires such improvements.
(e) The Zoning Administrator is unable to determine whether one or more of the standards for approval within subsection (6) will be met.
(f) Review under subsection (5) reveals differences that cannot be resolved by the Zoning Administrator, following consultation with the Village Administrator.
(g) A written agreement between the Village and applicant requires Plan Commission approval of the site plan.
(h) For projects in the ETZ Area, the town board has adopted a resolution requiring the Extraterritorial Zoning Committee to determine all site plan applications instead of the Zoning Administrator.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.10: Certificate of Occupancy Procedures through Section 94.16.10: Certificate of Occupancy Procedures
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-16
In the above instances, the Commission or Committee shall, between ten and 60 days of submittal of a complete application, approve the site plan as presented, approve the site plan with conditions, or reject the site plan including reasons for rejection, unless this timeframe is extended by written or electronic agreement of the applicant. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of such action in writing on a form designed for this purpose.
(9) Construction Management. Construction of all projects obtaining site plan approval shall be overseen by a professional construction manager or project manager, whose name and contact information shall be provided by the project owner to the Zoning Administrator upon request.
(10) Modification of an Approved Site Plan. Any and all variation between development and/or land use activity on the subject property and the approved site plan is a violation of this Chapter. An approved site plan shall be revised and approved via the procedures for original approval above, so as to clearly and completely depict any and all proposed modifications to the previously approved site plan, prior to the initiation of said modifications.
(11) Sunset Clause. All buildings on an approved site plan not fully developed within two years of final site plan approval shall expire, and no additional site development shall be permitted on undeveloped portions of the subject property. The appropriate site plan approval authority may extend this period, if requested by the applicant, based on reasons beyond the reasonable control of the applicant.
(12) Fee. The Village may require a fee may for this procedure, per the fee schedule approved by the Village Board.
[Amended via Ord. 16-016, 4/20/2016; Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
Section 94.16.10: Certificate of Occupancy Procedures
(1) Certificates Required. No building or addition hereafter constructed or structurally altered shall be used for any purpose, and no addition to a previously existing building shall be occupied, no land (except land used for garden or public recreation purposes and land without buildings or structures), and no change in a use shall occur until a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the Zoning Administrator. Every Certificate of Occupancy shall state that the use of occupancy complies with all of the provisions of this Chapter.
(2) Application for Occupancy Permits. Every application for a zoning permit or building permit shall be deemed to be an application for a Certificate of Occupancy. Every application for a Certificate of Occupancy for a new use or change in use of land or building shall be made directly to the office of the Zoning Administrator.
(3) Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. No Certificate of Occupancy for a building or portion thereof hereafter constructed or structurally altered shall be issued until construction has been substantially completed and the premises inspected and certified by the office of the Zoning Administrator to be in conformity with the plans and specifications upon which the zoning certificate was based. The Zoning Administrator may issue a temporary Certificate of Occupancy for a part of a building or site.
(4) Termination of a Certificate of Occupancy. It shall constitute a violation of this Chapter for any person, firm, corporation, or voluntary association, either owner or agent, to occupy a building in the Village without having first obtained a Certificate of Occupancy. Any Certificate issued upon a false statement of any fact that is material to the issuance thereof shall be void. Whenever the fact of such false statement shall be established to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator, he or she shall forthwith revoke the Certificate of Occupancy by notice in writing to be delivered by him to the holder of the void Certificate upon the premises where the violation has occurred, or if such holder be not found there, by mailing said notice of revocation by certified letter to his last known address. Any person who shall
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.11: Variance Procedures through Section 94.16.11: Variance Procedures
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-17
proceed thereafter with such work or use without having obtained a new Certificate of Occupancy shall be deemed guilty of violation of this Chapter.
Section 94.16.11: Variance Procedures
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide regulations that enable a hearing and decision on requests for permitted variation from the terms of this Chapter, in accordance with the requirements of this Section and Wisconsin law.
(2) Eligible Provisions for Which Variances may be Granted. A variance may be granted to any term or regulation of this Chapter, subject to the procedures and criteria in this Section, except that no variance may enable a land use that is not allowed in the zoning district under Article 3 of this Chapter.:
(3) Initiation of Request for Approval of a Variance. Proceedings for approval of a requested variance shall be initiated by an application of the owner(s) or their authorized agent of the subject property.
(4) Application Requirements. The applicant shall provide the Zoning Administrator with the complete application certified as complete by the Zoning Administrator under subsection 5(a), including an easily reproducible electronic copy plus hard copies in a quantity directed by the Zoning Administrator. Said complete application shall be comprised of all of the following:
(a) A completed application on a form provided by the Zoning Administrator.
(b) A scale map of the subject property showing all lands for which the variance is proposed, and all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, together with the names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the same appear on the current records of the Register of Deeds. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a north arrow shall be provided.
(c) A written description of the proposed variance describing the type of specific requirements of the variance proposed for the subject property.
(d) A site plan of the subject property, including existing conditions and proposed changes. Said site plan shall conform to those requirements of Section 94.16.09 to the extent deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator
(e) Written justification for the requested variance consisting of the reasons why the applicant believes the proposed variance is appropriate, particularly as evidenced by compliance with the criteria set out in subsection (7) below.
(f) Any fee as may be required under the fee schedule approved by the Village Board.
(5) Review by the Zoning Administrator.
The requested variance shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator as follows:
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is complete and fulfills the requirements of this Chapter. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is not complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this Chapter, he or she shall return the application to the applicant with explanation. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is complete, he or she shall certify the application as complete. No placement of the application on any agenda, as an item to be acted upon, shall occur unless said certification has occurred.
(b) Once the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator or designee shall authorize the public hearing and prepare a written evaluation, including whether there is justification for the proposed variance based on the application and the criteria for variance approval.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.11: Variance Procedures through Section 94.16.11: Variance Procedures
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-18
(c) The Zoning Administrator shall forward the application and evaluation report to the Zoning Board of Appeals for that Board’s review and action.
(6) Review and Determination.
(a) Within 45 days after filing of the complete application as determined by the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the requested variance and the public hearing shall conform to the requirements of Wis. Stat. § 62.23(7)(d). Said notice shall contain a description of the subject property and the proposed variance. In addition, at least ten days before said public hearing, the Village Clerk shall mail an identical notice to the applicant of the proposed variance to the clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any portion of the subject property, and to all property owners within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property. Failure to mail said notice, provided it is unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this Section.
(b) Within 30 days after the holding of the public hearing or, within an extension of said period approved by the applicant and granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals, that Board shall make its findings based on the criteria in this Section, and its determination regarding the application as a whole. The Board may request further information and/or additional reports from the Zoning Administrator and/or the Applicant. The Board may take final action on said request for approval of the requested variance at time of its initial meeting, or said proceedings may be continued from time-to-time for further consideration. The Board shall make a written report of its findings and determinations following its decision.
(c) If the Board fails to make a determination within 30 days after said public hearing, then the request for the variance shall be considered denied.
(d) Said report shall include a formal findings of fact developed and approved by the Board concerning the requirements of subsection (7).
(7) Criteria for Grant of a Variance. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine that all of the following criteria have been met before granting a variance:
(a) That the variance will not be contrary to the public interest, safety, welfare, and justice.
(b) That compliance with the strict letter of the zoning ordinance would unreasonably prevent the owner from using the property for a permitted purpose or would render conformity with such restrictions unnecessarily burdensome. It is not sufficient that a variance applicant show that the zoning regulation(s) prevents or burdens his or her planned activity. Such applicant must show by competent evidence that the regulation unreasonably prevents or unnecessarily burdens the proposed activity.
(c) That compliance with the strict letter of the zoning ordinance would create unnecessary hardship due to a unique property condition, meaning a special physical feature or limitation of the property that is not generally shared on most other properties within the same zoning district, subject to the following limitations:
1. If a variance applicant fails to prove the existence of a unique property condition and a connection between the condition and the hardship, even if the hardship is great, a variance may not be granted.
2. Loss of profit or pecuniary hardship shall not, in and of itself, be grounds for a variance.
3. Self-imposed hardship shall not be grounds for a variance. Reductions resulting from the sale of portions of a property reducing the remainder of said property below buildable size or cutting-off existing access to a public right-of-way or deed restrictions imposed by the owner’s predecessor in title are considered to be such self-imposed hardships.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.11: Variance Procedures through Section 94.16.11: Variance Procedures
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-19
4. The alleged hardship shall not be one that would have existed in the absence of a zoning ordinance. (For example, if a lot were unbuildable because of topography in the absence of any or all setback requirements.)
(d) That the requested variance will not be contrary to the intent and purpose of this Chapter and the Village’s Comprehensive Plan.
(e) That the requested variance is for a provision of this Chapter authorized for potential variances under Section 94.16.11(2), and in no case shall allow a land use that is not listed as a permitted, conditionally permitted, or temporary land use in the associated zoning district.
(f) That the granting of the proposed variance shall not impose a substantial detriment to adjacent properties. The applicant shall clearly indicate how the proposed variance will have no substantial detriment on adjacent properties.
(g) That the proposed variance would make the subject property developable so that property rights enjoyed by the owners of similar properties can be enjoyed by the owners of the subject property. Violations by, or variances granted to, other properties shall not justify a variance.
(8) Recording of Variance. The Zoning Administrator shall record the variance against the property, assigning all costs thereof to the applicant, and shall make record of the variance on the Official Zoning Map. The document recording the variance shall indicate that the property owner has the burden of proof to conclusively demonstrate that activities associated with the variance are being completed within the following applicable periods, or the variance shall become null and void:
(a) A building permit associated with the approved variance shall be obtained within one calendar year of the approval.
(b) Upon issuance of a building permit, the associated work must be completed in accordance with Section 94.16.04.
(c) In the event the variance does not require a building permit; the associated work must be completed within two calendar years of the variance approval.
In the event that a variance is rendered null and void under this subsection, the Zoning Administrator may record an amendatory document against the property, assigning all costs thereof to the applicant, and shall remove or modify record of the variance on the Official Zoning Map.
(9) Effect of Denial. No application for a variance that has been denied (either wholly or in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
(10) Limited Effect of a Variance. Where the Zoning Board of Appeals has granted a variance, such approval shall neither change the use classification of the building or premises, nor give it any status as a nonconforming use other than that which it has as a result of the variance. Granting of a variance shall be considered unique to the variance granted, and shall not be construed as precedent for any other proposed variance. A variance granted under this Chapter shall run with the land, meaning it shall be in effect regardless of ownership or operation of the building or premises, except as otherwise limited by this Chapter or by a specific condition attached to the variance.
(11) Stay of Proceedings. An application for a variance shall stay all legal proceedings furthering enforcement of any provisions of this Chapter from which the applicant is requesting a variance, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals after the request for the variance has been filed, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals, or by a Court of Record on application, on notice to the Zoning Administrator, and on due cause shown.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.12: Interpretations through Section 94.16.12: Interpretations
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-20
(12) Fee. The Village may require a fee may for this procedure, per the fee schedule approved by the Village Board.
[Amended via Ord. 15-023, 10/21/2015; Ord. 16-009, 4/20/2016; Ord. 16-026, 5/18/2016; Ord. 17-018, 6/21/2017; Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
Section 94.16.12: Interpretations
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to assign responsibility for the official interpretation of the provisions of this Chapter, and to describe the required procedure for securing such interpretation.
(2) General Considerations. Interpretations of and determinations under this Chapter range from those that can be made with satisfactory accuracy by a reasonable person using normal senses and no mechanical equipment, to those requiring great technical competence and complex equipment for precise measurement. It is the intent of this Chapter that:
(a) Where determinations can be made by the Zoning Administrator using equipment normally available to the Village or obtainable without extraordinary expense, such determinations shall be so made before notice of violations is issued.
(b) Where technical complexity or extraordinary expense makes it unreasonable for the Village to maintain the personnel or equipment necessary for making difficult or unusual determinations, procedures shall be available for causing corrections or apparent violations of performance standards; for protecting individuals from arbitrary, capricious, and unreasonable administration and enforcement of performance standard regulations; and for protecting the general public from unnecessary costs for administration and enforcement.
(3) Initiation of Request for an Interpretation. Proceedings for an interpretation may be initiated by the Village Board, Plan Commission, or Extraterritorial Zoning Committee for land in the ETZ Area; or by application from an owner(s) or leaseholder of property within the Village or ETZ Area.
(4) Application Requirements. All applications for interpretations, regardless of the party of their initiation, shall be approved as complete by the Zoning Administrator a minimum of ten days prior to the initiation of this procedure. The submittal of an application to initiate this procedure shall not occur until the Zoning Administrator has certified acceptance of the complete application. No placement of the application on any agenda, as an item to be acted upon, shall occur unless said certification has occurred. The applicant shall provide the Zoning Administrator with the complete application certified by the Zoning Administrator, including an easily reproducible electronic copy plus hard copies in a quantity directed by the Zoning Administrator, with said complete application shall be comprised of all of the following:
(a) Indication of the part of the text of this Chapter for which the interpretation is requested and the specific questions the applicant has regarding said text.
(b) If the requested interpretation relates to the application of this Chapter to a specific property, the following additional information shall be required:
1. A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the interpretation is requested, and all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, together with the names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the same appear on the current records of the Register of Deeds as provided by the Village. Said map shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject property and its environs, and the jurisdiction(s) that maintains that control. Said map and all its parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form that is clearly reproducible with a photocopier. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a north arrow shall be provided.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.12: Interpretations through Section 94.16.12: Interpretations
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-21
2. A map, such as the Future Land Use Map from the Comprehensive Plan, of the generalized location of the subject property in relation to the Village as a whole.
3. A written description of the reason for the requested interpretation and how the proposed interpretation relates to type of activities, buildings, and structures currently located on, and proposed for, the subject property.
4. An existing site plan that accurately reflects the current conditions of the property, along with any proposed changes, with sufficient details relevant to the inquiry.
(c) If the requested interpretation relates to the classification or treatment of a particular land use under the provisions of this Chapter, responses to the following questions:
1. How is the subject land use (in general) in harmony with the Comprehensive Plan and this Chapter?
2. How is the subject land use in harmony with the purposes, goals, objectives, policies, and standards of the pertinent zoning district for which the interpretation is being sought?
3. Do the potential public benefits of the proposed interpretation outweigh any and all potential adverse impacts of the proposed interpretation?
(5) Review by Zoning Administrator.
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is complete and fulfills the requirements of this Chapter. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is not complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this Chapter, he or she shall return the application to the applicant.
(b) Within 30 days of the filing of a complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall review the application and shall evaluate and comment on the written justification for the proposed interpretation provided in the application. This review shall also take into consideration the standards for review presented in subsection (2).
(6) Standards for Review of Requested Interpretations.
This Chapter shall be interpreted in a manner that is consistent with the purposes intended by the Village Board as noted in this Chapter. To this end, the Zoning Administrator shall proceed as follows:
(a) Articulate certain public purpose(s) underlying the standard(s) for which an interpretation is required.
(b) Articulate the actual impact of various proposed interpretations, permitting flexibility in design and prohibiting any interpretation that lowers the protection afforded to the public.
(c) Determine whether the proposed interpretation will ensure a just balance between the rights of the landowner and all others who will be affected by that person’s proposal.
(d) The Zoning Administrator shall not substitute his own judgments for the legislative acts of the Village Board.
(e) In addition to the applicant’s responses to the questions required by subsection (4) above, the following standards shall govern the decision on the requested interpretation on land use interpretation matters:
1. No interpretation shall allow the establishment of any land use that was previously considered and rejected by the Village Board on an application for an amendment to the text of this Chapter, the Official Zoning Map, or a previously applied for appeal from a requested interpretation.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.13: Appeals of Zoning Interpretations through Section 94.16.13: Appeals of Zoning Interpretations
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-22
2. No interpretation shall allow a land use in any district other than those listed as allowable within each district or permit such use without meeting all review and approval procedures specified for that use.
3. No interpretation shall permit a land use in a zoning district unless evidence is presented that demonstrates that the land use will comply with any and all regulations applicable to development in the zoning district.
4. No interpretation shall permit a land use not specifically allowed in the particular zoning district unless such use is substantially similar to other uses permitted in that same district and is more similar to such other permitted uses than to uses either not permitted in said district, or uses requiring a conditional use permit. If the proposed land use is more similar to a land use permitted only as a conditional use in the subject property’s district than to a use permitted by right, then an interpretation permitting such use shall be conditioned upon the approval of a conditional use permit.
(7) Effect of a Favorable Land Use Interpretation. No interpretation finding a particular land use to be allowed or conditionally allowed in a specific zoning district shall authorize either the establishment of such use or the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any building or structure. A favorable interpretation merely authorizes the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any permits and approvals that may be required by this Chapter. These permits and approvals include, but are not limited to, required site plans, conditional use permits, and certificates of occupancy.
(8) Limitations on Favorable Land Use Interpretation. No interpretation finding a particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a specified zoning district shall be valid for a period of more than 365 days from the date of issuance of the interpretation, unless a building permit is issued and development is actually begun within that period, and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion, or a certificate of occupancy is obtained and a use commenced within that period. An interpretation finding a particular land use to be allowed or conditionally allowed in a specified zoning district shall be deemed to authorize only that particular use at that particular location for which the interpretation was issued. The interpretation shall not be deemed to authorize any allegedly similar use for which a separate interpretation has not been issued. A favorable interpretation shall automatically expire and cease to be of any force or effect if the particular use for which it was issued shall, for any reason, be discontinued for a period of 365 consecutive days or more.
(9) Fee. The Village may require a fee may for this procedure, per the fee schedule approved by the Village Board.
Section 94.16.13: Appeals of Zoning Interpretations
(1) Scope and Manner of Appeals. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the Village affected by any decision under this Chapter of the Zoning Administrator or other administrative official affecting property within the Village or ETZ Area. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the alleged grievance or judgment in question. Such appeal shall be a notice in writing and filed with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Zoning Board of Appeals, including an easily reproducible electronic copy plus hard copies in a quantity directed by the Zoning Administrator. The notice of appeal shall specify the grounds of such appeal, and any matter omitted therefrom shall not be considered by that Board. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to that Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(2) Stay of Proceedings. An appeal shall stay all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certified to the Zoning Board of Appeals that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause immediate peril to life or
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.14: Comprehensive Plan Amendments through Section 94.16.14: Comprehensive Plan Amendments
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-23
property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order that may be granted by the Board of Appeals, or by a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.
(3) Public Hearing for Appeals of Zoning Interpretation. The Board of Appeals shall conduct at least one public hearing on the proposed appeal. Notice of such hearing shall be given not more than 30 days and not less than 10 days before the hearing in one or more of the newspapers in general circulation in the Village, and shall give due notice to the parties in interest, the Zoning Administrator, and the Plan Commission. At the hearing the applicant may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney. The Board shall thereafter reach its decision within 30 days after the final hearing and shall transmit a written copy of its decision to the appellant or applicant, Zoning Administrator, and Plan Commission.
(4) Concurring Vote and Decision. The concurring vote of a majority vote of the members present of the Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of any such administrative official or to decide in favor of any applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under the zoning ordinance or to affect any variance in such ordinance. The grounds of any such determination shall be stated.
[Amended via Ord. 16-010, 4/20/2016]
Section 94.16.14: Comprehensive Plan Amendments
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide procedures and criteria for amending and updating the Comprehensive Plan. Comprehensive plan amendments may involve changes in the written text or maps of the Comprehensive Plan. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit the legislative authority of the Village to consider and adopt amendments and revisions to the Village of Weston Comprehensive Plan or the Village’s development regulations.
(2) Amendment Procedure—Generally. The Village shall follow the procedure in Wis. Stat. § 66.1001(4), for all amendments to the Comprehensive Plan. The Village will consider Comprehensive Plan amendments only once per calendar year, so that the cumulative effects of all proposed amendments can be analyzed for consistency and the overall effect on the remainder of the Comprehensive Plan. The Village Board may elect to amend the Comprehensive Plan on a more frequent or different cycle for amendments that the Board determines necessary to:
(a) Address changes in state or federal law.
(b) Address an emergency situation.
(c) Resolve a court decision or challenge to the Comprehensive Plan that may result in court action.
(d) Capture a unique economic development opportunity.
(e) Address rapidly changing land use or other needs or circumstances.
(3) Annual Amendment Cycle and Procedure.
(a) By August 1st of each year, the Zoning Administrator shall obtain Plan Commission approval of a Comprehensive Plan amendment schedule, with the intent to adopt any Comprehensive Plan amendments in that annual amendment cycle by February of the following year.
(b) Applications for Comprehensive Plan amendments shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator in writing each year by the annual application deadline established in the approved amendment schedule, using a Village provided application form, in order to be considered in that year’s amendment cycle. Only complete applications will be processed.
(c) In addition to such applications, Village staff, the Village Plan Commission or any member thereof, or the Village Board or any member thereof may request amendments to the Comprehensive Plan,
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.14: Comprehensive Plan Amendments through Section 94.16.14: Comprehensive Plan Amendments
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-24
by the annual application dateline or another date if established in the approved amendment schedule.
(d) The Zoning Administrator shall refer all proposed amendments under subsections (a) and (b) to the Plan Commission, within 30 days following the latest required date of submittal.
(e) The Commission shall advise Village staff as to which proposed amendments should be considered for further review, providing an opportunity for public comment. Depending upon the number and nature of the proposed amendments, the Commission may hold a public hearing before it decides which proposed amendments should be recommended for consideration. Notice of such hearing shall be given by publication of a Class 1 Notice. In the case of a site-specific Future Land Use map amendment, the Zoning Administrator shall also provide written notification to all property owners within 100 feet of the site.
(f) After consideration of the proposed amendments and no later than January in the annual amendment cycle, the Plan Commission shall recommend the approval of any proposed amendment to the Village Board. The Commission is under no obligation to recommend approval of any requested amendment, and may recommend the amendment with modification. Such Commission action shall be via adoption of a resolution.
(g) Following the Commission recommendation by resolution, and after a required 30-day public hearing notice period under Wisconsin Statutes, the Village Board shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of receiving public comment regarding the merits of the proposed amendments that have been recommended by resolution of the Plan Commission.
(h) Following the public hearing, the Village Board may adopt all or some of the recommended Comprehensive Plan amendments by ordinance, either as recommended or with modifications.
(4) Review Criteria for Amendments to Comprehensive Plan.
The Plan Commission and Village Board shall utilize the following criteria when reviewing each application to amend the Comprehensive Plan:
(a) The change is consistent with the goals and objectives of the Village of Weston Comprehensive Plan.
(b) The requested amendment was not reviewed and denied during a previous comprehensive plan amendment cycle.
(c) The amendment or projected development that would result will not create an adverse impact on public services and facilities, unless such impact will be successfully mitigated.
(d) Projected development that would result from the amendment will not create an undue or adverse impact on surrounding properties, and will be consistent with or upgrade the character of the site and the surrounding neighborhood.
(e) The amendment or projected development that would result will not create an adverse impact on the following, unless such impact will be successfully mitigated: public facilities; public services; the natural environment including trees, slopes, and groundwater; any landmarks or other historically significant structures or properties.
(f) The amendment is justified by a change in Village actions or neighborhood characteristics.
(g) The change corrects an error in the Comprehensive Plan.
(h) There is a community or regional need identified in the Comprehensive Plan for the proposed land use or service.
(i) The proposed amendment is consistent with other Village plans, policies, and regulations.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.15: Zoning Administrator through Section 94.16.15: Zoning Administrator
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-25
(j) If the proposed amendment is to the Future Land Use map, the amendment must
1. Respond to a substantial change in conditions beyond the property owner’s control applicable to the area within which the subject property lies, or
2. Better implement applicable Comprehensive Plan polices than the current map designation; or
3. Correct a mapping error; or
4. Address a deficiency in the Comprehensive Plan as identified by the Commission or Board.
(5) Revocation. Any approved Comprehensive Plan amendment may be reversed by the Village Board outside the regular amendment period upon the findings of any of the following:
(a) The approval was obtained by fraud or other intentional or misleading representations, or
(b) The amendment is being implemented contrary to the intended purpose of the amendment or other provisions of the Comprehensive Plan or Village ordinances, or
(c) The amendment is being implemented in a manner that is detrimental to the public health or safety.
(6) Fee. The Village may require a fee may for this procedure, per the fee schedule approved by the Village Board.
Section 94.16.16..1515: Zoning Administrator: Zoning Administrator
(1) Designation. The Village Board shall designate the Zoning Administrator. As permitted by law, the Zoning Administrator may designate another employee or contractor of the Village to perform the duties of the Zoning Administrator, on a recurring, occasional, or case-by-case basis. Where a duty in this Chapter is assigned to the Zoning Administrator, it shall be assumed that his or her designee may also permit such duty except where otherwise restricted by law.
(2) Duties. The general responsibility of the Zoning Administrator is to interpret and administer this Chapter and to issue permits required by this Chapter, who in addition thereto and in furtherance of said authority shall:
(a) Determine that all detailed plans and supporting materials comply with all provisions of this Chapter.
(b) Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, waters, and land to determine compliance with all provisions of this Chapter.
(c) Be permitted access to premises and structures during reasonable hours to make those inspections as deemed necessary by him to ensure compliance with this Chapter. If, however he or she is refused entry after presentations of his identification, he or she may procure a special inspection warrant in accordance with Wis. Stat. § 66.0119(2).
(d) Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, waters, and land to determine compliance with all provisions of this Chapter.
(e) Maintain permanent and current records of this Chapter, including but not limited to all maps, amendments, conditional uses, temporary uses, sign permits, site plans, occupancy permits, variances, appeals, interpretations, and applications therefore.
(f) Receive, file, and forward all applications for all procedures governed by this Chapter to the designated official bodies.
(g) Investigate all complaints made relating to the location of structures and the use of structures, lands, and waters, give notice of all violations of this Chapter to the owner, resident, agent, or occupant of the premises, and report uncorrected violations to the Village Attorney in a manner specified by him.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.16: Village Plan Commission and
Extraterritorial Zoning Committee
through Section 94.16.16: Village Plan Commission and
Extraterritorial Zoning Committee
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-26
(h) Institute, in the name of the Village, any appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator of this Chapter, as provided by law.
(i) Prohibit the use or erection of any structure, land, or water until he or she has inspected and approved such use or erection.
(j) Where useful, set marks on bridges or buildings or other markers that show the depth of the regional flood, or set marks delineating the boundaries of wetlands.
(k) Request assistance and cooperation from the Building Inspector, Police Department, Fire Department, Village Attorney, Village Engineer, Village Clerk, Village Public Works Director, and other Village staff and consultants as he or she deems necessary, either as a designee or advisor.
(l) Make available to the public, to the fullest extent possible, all reports and documents concerning the Village’s Comprehensive Plan and ordinances. In addition, information in the form of reports, bulletins, maps, and engineering data shall be readily available and widely distributed. The Village Board may set fees necessary to recover the cost of providing such information to the public.
(m) Make interpretations regarding the provisions of this Chapter per Section 94.16.12.
[Amended via Ord. 16-011, 4/20/2016]
Section 94.16.16..1166: Village Plan Commission: Village Plan Commission and Extraterritorial Zoning Committeeand Extraterritorial Zoning Committee
(1) Village Plan Commission Duties.Village Plan Commission Duties. TheThe Village Plan CommisVillage Plan Commission, together with itsion, together with its other dutiess other duties under under Wisconsin Statutes and Chapter 62 of the Weston Municipal CodeWisconsin Statutes and Chapter 62 of the Weston Municipal Code, shall, shall with reference to this Chapterwith reference to this Chapter, , have the following duties and responsibilities within the Village limitshave the following duties and responsibilities within the Village limits::
(a) Review and consider final site plan approval as provided in this Chapter, or consider appeals to Zoning Administrator action on a site plan, where provided under Section 94.16.09.
(b) Conduct public hearings for applications to amend the provisions of this Chapter including the Official Zoning Map, conditional use permits, and General Development Plans within an N zoning district.
(c) Approve or deny conditional use permit applications.
(d) Review and make recommendations to the Village Board regarding approval of any General Development Plan for an N district, and approve or deny Specific Implementation Plans associated with an N district.
(e) Review and advise the Village Board on all applications for text amendments to the zoning regulations, and to all amendments to the Official Zoning Map.
(f) Assist the Zoning Administrator in the performance of his or her duties as specified in this Chapter.
(g) Review and advise on conceptual development plans foron conceptual development plans for potential future applications under this potential future applications under this Chapter.Chapter.
(h) Review and make recommendations to the Village Board on policies and amendments to the Village’s Review and make recommendations to the Village Board on policies and amendments to the Village’s building, health and safety codes.building, health and safety codes.
(2) Extraterritorial Zoning Committee Duties.Extraterritorial Zoning Committee Duties. Within the ETZ Area, the ExtratWithin the ETZ Area, the Extraterritorial Zoning erritorial Zoning Committee shall have the same duties Committee shall have the same duties under this Chapter under this Chapter as the Village Plan Commission has within the as the Village Plan Commission has within the Village limits.Village limits.
[Amended via Ord.
[Amended via Ord. 1919--010122, , 88/2/211/201/20199]]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.17: Zoning Board of Appeals through Section 94.16.18: Fees
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-27
Section 94.16.17: Zoning Board of Appeals
(1) Membership. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Village Board.
(2) Meetings and Rules. All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the Board or its staff may determine. All hearings conducted by the said Board shall be open to the public, except as otherwise required by law. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be public record. The Zoning Board of Appeals may adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with this Municipal Code or with the applicable Wisconsin Statutes.
(3) Offices. The Village Board shall provide suitable offices for the Zoning Board of Appeals for holding of hearings and the presentation of records, documents, and accounts.
(4) Appropriations. The Village Board shall appropriate funds to carry out the duties of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority to expend, under regular procedure, all sums appropriated to it for the purpose and activities authorized herein.
(5) Jurisdiction and Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the jurisdiction and authority as specified in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e) and shall have the following powers:
(a) Hear and decide applications in such specific cases where it is alleged there is error in any interpretation pertaining to the order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator or other administrative officer under this Chapter.
(b) Hear and grant requests for variances to this Chapter under Section 94.16.11.
In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and may issue or direct the issue of a permit.
[Amended via Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
Section 94.16.16..1818: Fees: Fees
(1) Payment of Fees for Procedures. The fees for the procedures and permits established by this Chapter are established per a fee schedule approved by the Village Board, as amended from time to time, or under other related sections of the Municipal Code.
(2) Fees for Procedures Requested by the Village. There shall be no fee in the case of applications filed in the public interest by the Village Board, Plan Commission, Extraterritorial Zoning Committee, or other agency or official of the Village.
(3) Payment of Fees. Fees shall be payable at the time applications are filed with the appropriate officer of the Village (per the requirements of this Chapter) and are not refundable.
(4) Reimbursable Costs. The Zoning Administrator, Village Engineer, Public Works Director, Village Attorney, Village Administrator, Building Inspector, and other Village staff and consultants may expend time in the investigation and processing of procedures regulated by this Chapter. The Village may also retain the services of other professional consultants including but not limited to landscape architects, planners, engineers, architects, environmental specialists, and recreation specialists in the administration, investigation, and processing of such matters. Any person, firm, or corporation requesting action by the Village on matters under this Chapter may be required to reimburse the Village for staff time expended in
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.18: Fees through Section 94.16.18: Fees
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-28
the administration, investigation, and processing of applications for such permits or amendments and the cost to the Village charged by any professional consultant retained by the Village on any such matter.
(5) Parkland Fees.
(a) Authority. Wis. Stat. § 62.23(7), confers upon the Village the authority to regulate and restrict by ordinance, land uses in the manner provided for therein, for the purposes of, among other things, “. . . to facilitate schools, parks and other public requirements . . .” and that any such ordinance so executed shall be liberally construed in favor of the Village.
(b) Purpose and Intent. The development of lands within the Village for residential uses creates demands upon the Village to provide, among other things, adequate provision for parks. As the resident population of the Village increases due to such development, the need to acquire and equip parks must be addressed. Accordingly, the following provisions are established to preserve and provide properly located public sites and open spaces as the Village develops, and to insure that such public sites and open spaces are provided and developed to serve the need for parks generated by the additional persons brought into the areas by such development, in accordance with standards for such as adopted in the Village’s comprehensive outdoor recreation plan, as approved from time to time. These provisions are intended to apply to all lands proposed to be rezoned or subject to a conditional use permit or site plan approval for any residential purpose on or after August 1, 2016.
(c) Implementation. The Village intends to implement the public policies contained herein, through the provisions of this Section or Chapter 74 Subdivision Regulations of this Code of Ordinances, whichever is applicable. In the event that land dedication pursuant to Chapter 74 Subdivision Regulations would result in sites too small to be usable or if the Village’s comprehensive outdoor recreation plan calls for such public sites or open spaces to be located elsewhere, or if such sites would not otherwise be suitable for park purposes as determined by the Plan Commission or the Village Board, a payment of a park fee in lieu of land dedication shall be required, as hereinafter set forth. Payment of such fee shall be a condition precedent to the approval of the rezoning of any lands for the residential uses described in (b) above.
(d) Fee Calculation. Whenever a park fee is imposed by the site plan approval authority as a condition of rezoning, conditional use permit, or site plan approval, the park fees shall be computed on the basis of the maximum residential use of each lot or residential building site approved or permitted in the particular zoning district under this Zoning Code. The amount of the park fee shall be determined by application of the following formula:
A x B = Park Fee
Where:
A = the maximum number of residential units in the applicable residential zoning district that may be located on the land area in question, or the specific number of housing units authorized by the conditional use permit or site plan approval.
B = the Zoning Fee as stated in the Schedule of Fees per residential unit.
(e) Payment. Payment of the park fee shall be due and payable at the time of the issuance of a building permit for the construction of any improvement on the real estate subject to the site plan approval. Such fee shall be deposited into a special account for parks and recreation facilities and shall be used exclusively for such purposes in the Village.
(f) Partial Dedication. Where the Village Board, in its sole discretion, permits a developer of land to satisfy the requirements of Chapter 74 Subdivision Regulations of this Code by dedicating a portion of the land that would otherwise be required to be dedicated under that section, then in such event, the Village Board may reduce the park fee provided for in this Section, in recognition of the partial
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.19: Violations and Penalties through Section 94.16.19: Violations and Penalties
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-29
dedication that has in fact occurred. Such reduction shall be in proportion to the percent of total required park land dedication.
[Amended via Ord. 16-037, 8/18/2016]
Section 94.16.19: Violations and Penalties
(1) Violations. It shall be unlawful to construct, develop or use any structure, land, water or air anywhere within the Village in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter or action or order taken under this Chapter. In case of any violation, the Village may institute appropriate action or proceeding to enjoin a violation of this Chapter, including seeking abatement, removal, forfeiture, penalty, citation, or some combination, as outlined in this Section. Adoption of this Section does not preclude the Village Board from adopting any other ordinance or providing for the enforcement of any other law or ordinance relating to the same or other matter.
(2) Procedure for Notice of Violation.
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall give written notice to the person or persons responsible for all The Zoning Administrator shall give written notice to the person or persons responsible for all alleged violations of the pralleged violations of the provisions of this Chapter or action taken under this Chapter. The notice ovisions of this Chapter or action taken under this Chapter. The notice shall describe the particulars of the alleged violation and the reasons why the Zoning Administrator shall describe the particulars of the alleged violation and the reasons why the Zoning Administrator believes there is a violation in fact, and shall require an answer or correction ofbelieves there is a violation in fact, and shall require an answer or correction of the alleged violation the alleged violation to the satisfaction of and within a reasonable time limit set by the Zoning Administrator.to the satisfaction of and within a reasonable time limit set by the Zoning Administrator.
(b) The notice shall state, and it is hereby declared, that failure to reply or to correct the alleged violation The notice shall state, and it is hereby declared, that failure to reply or to correct the alleged violation to the satisfactionto the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator within the time limit set in the written notice constitutes admission of violation of the provisions of this Chapter or action taken under this Chapter. The notice shall further state that upon request of those to whom it is directed, technical determination as described in this Chapter will be made, and that if violations as alleged are found, costs of such determinations shall be charged against those responsible for the violation, in addition to such other penalties as may be appropriate, but that if it is determined that no violation exists, the cost of the determination will be paid by the Village.
(3) Penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this Chapter or action taken under this Chapter shall forfeit not less than $100.00, plus any applicable costs of prosecution, assessments, and court costs for each violation, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding 30 days. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(4) Village Promulgated Correction of Violation. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Section for a violation of the provisions of this Chapter, the Village reserves and maintains the continued right to abate violations of this Chapter.
(a) Hazardous Condition CausHazardous Condition Caused by Violation of this Chapter. ed by Violation of this Chapter. If the Zoning Administrator determines that a violation of this Chapter exists, and further determines that the nature of such violation poses a great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals, or decency, the Zoning Administrator shall cause the violation to be abated. Costs associated with said abatement shall be charged to the owner of the property on which said violation has occurred. The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to abate a violation of this Chapter.
(b) NonNon--Hazardous Condition Caused by Violation of this Chapter. Hazardous Condition Caused by Violation of this Chapter. If the Zoning Administrator determines that a violation of this Chapter exists, and further determines that the nature of such violation is not such as to pose great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals, or decency, the Zoning Administrator shall serve written notice on the current owner of the property (as indicated by current tax records) on which said violation is occurring to remove said violation within 10 working days. If such violation is not removed within such 10 working days, the
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: AUGUST 21, 2019
Section 94.16.19: Violations and Penalties through Section 94.16.19: Violations and Penalties
Article 16: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 16-30
Zoning Administrator shall cause the violation to be abated. Costs associated with said abatement shall be charged to the owner of the property on which said violation has occurred.
(c) Cost of Abatement. Cost of Abatement. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Section for a violation of the provisions of this Chapter, the cost of abating a violation of this Chapter shall be collected as a debt from the owner of the property on which said violation has occurred. An account of the expenses incurred by the Village to abate the violation shall be kept and such expenses shall be charged to and paid by the property owner. Notice of the bill for abatement of the violation shall be mailed to the last known address of said property owner by registered mail, and shall be payable within 30 calendar days from the receipt thereof. Within 60 days after such costs and expenses are incurred and remain unpaid, the Village Clerk shall enter such charges onto the tax roll as a special tax as provided by Wisconsin Statutes.
(d) Chronic Nuisance Abatement.Chronic Nuisance Abatement. In addition to or in lieu of a determination of violation of this In addition to or in lieu of a determination of violation of this Chapter or action taken hereunder, the Village may determine that a chronic nuisance Chapter or action taken hereunder, the Village may determine that a chronic nuisance exists under exists under Section 50.104 of the Weston Municipal Code, and in such event the procedures and provisions Section 50.104 of the Weston Municipal Code, and in such event the procedures and provisions under said Section 50.104 shall apply.under said Section 50.104 shall apply.
[Amended via Ord. 16-013, 4/20/2016]
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Article 17: DEFINITIONS 17-1
Article 17: DEFINITIONS
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.17.01: Introduction to Word Usage,
Abbreviations and Definitions
through Section 94.17.03: Abbreviations
Article 17: DEFINITIONS 17-2
Section 94.17.01: Introduction to Word Usage, Abbreviations and Definitions
The purpose of this Article is to define words, terms, and phrases contained in this Chapter that are essential to the understanding, administration, and enforcement of this Chapter, and that may not be part of common English usage or may have a different definition for purposes of this Chapter than common English usage suggests.
Section 94.17.02: Word Usage
The interpretation of this Chapter shall abide by the provisions and rules of this Section, except where the context clearly requires otherwise, or where the result would clearly be inconsistent with the apparent intent of this Chapter.
(1) Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and derivative forms.
(2) Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and words in the plural number shall include the single number.
(3) The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and vice versa.
(4) The words “shall,” “must,” and “will” are mandatory.
(5) The words “may,” “can,” “should,” and “might” are permissive.
(6) The word “person” includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, associations, trusts, and any other legal entity.
(7) If there is any ambiguity between the text of this Chapter and any caption, illustration, or table, the text shall control.
Section 94.17.03: Abbreviations
The following abbreviations in this Chapter are intended to have the following meanings:
Abbreviation Meaning
2F
2F Two Family Residential (standard zoning district)
Ac
Acre
AH
AH Airport Height (overlay zoning district)
AR
AR Agricultural and Residential (standard zoning district)
B-1
B-1 Neighborhood Business (standard zoning district)
B-2
B-2 Highway Business (standard zoning district)
B-3
B-3 General Business (standard zoning district)
BP
BP Business Park (standard zoning district)
Db
Decibel
DNR
Wisconsin Department or Natural Resources (also “WisDNR”)
DOT
Wisconsin Department of Transportation (also “WisDOT”)
D
D Design (overlay zoning district)
Du
Dwelling unit (also “housing unit”)
FAA
Federal Aviation Administration
FAR
Floor Area Ratio
Ft
Foot
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.17.04: Definitions through Section 94.17.04: Definitions
Article 17: DEFINITIONS 17-3
Abbreviation Meaning
FP
FP Farmland Preservation (standard zoning district)
GFA
Gross Floor Area
GI
GI General Industrial (standard zoning district)
GSA
Gross Site Area
HUD
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
INT
INT Institutional (standard zoning district)
ISR
Impervious Surface Ratio
LI
LI Limited Industrial (standard zoning district)
LSR
Landscape Surface Ratio
Max
Maximum
MF
MF Multiple Family Residential (standard zoning district)
MGD
Maximum Gross Density
MH
MH Manufactured Home (standard zoning district)
Min
Minimum
MLA
Maximum Lot Area
MSA
Minimum Site Area
N/A or NA
Not applicable
N
N Neighborhood (refers both to a special zoning district and each unique development within such a district)
PSC
State of Wisconsin Public Services Commission
RM
RM Rural Mix (standard zoning district)
RR-2
RR-2 Rural Residential (standard zoning district)
RR-5
RR-5 Rural Residential (standard zoning district)
SF or sq. ft.
Square feet
SF-L
SF-L Single Family Residential – Large Lot (standard zoning district)
SF-S
SF-S Single Family Residential – Small Lot (standard zoning district)
UDC
Uniform Dwelling Code
WHP
WHP Wellhead Protection Area (overlay zoning district)
-
Or fewer (as in “8-“)
+
Or more (as in “9+”)
[Amended via Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
Section 94.17.04: Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, wherever they occur in this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this Section.
Abutting: Having a common border with, or being separated from such common border by an alley or easement.
Access: A means of providing vehicular or non-vehicular egress from or ingress to a property, highway, or private roadway.
Access, direct: A condition of immediate physical connection resulting from a highway, alley, or private road abutting a property.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.17.04: Definitions through Section 94.17.04: Definitions
Article 17: DEFINITIONS 17-4
Access, secondary: A means of providing vehicular or non-vehicular ingress to or egress from a property and a source other than a street or alley (e.g., easement, common driveway).
Access standards: See Chapter 71 of the Weston Municipal Code.
Acre: 43,560 square feet.
Accessory dwelling unit (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Accessory land use or structure: A use or structure subordinate to, and serving, the principal use or structure on the same lot and customarily incidental thereto.
Accessory residential use or dwelling unit: For purposes of this Chapter, a dwelling unit that is accessory to one or more principal land uses. Includes “In-Home Suites,” “Accessory Dwelling Units,” and similar uses.
Active outdoor public recreation (land use): See Section 94.4.04.
Addition: Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter and/or height of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall. Any walled and roofed addition that is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls shall be considered new construction.
Address and/or identification sign: An accessory wall sign containing only the name and/or address of the premises on which it is located.
Adjacent: Abutting a separate lot.
Adult entertainment or adult-oriented establishment (land use): See Section 94.4.05.
Agricultural-related use (land use): See Section 94.4.03.
Agricultural use (land use): See Section 94.4.03.
Agricultural (zoning) district or agriculturally zoned: Either or both the FP Farmland Preservation zoning district or AR Agricultural and Residential zoning district.
Air dome: An enclosed building, or portion of an enclosed building, where either the shape of the building or portion of said building is maintained either by elevated air pressure within the usable area or by air pressurization of cells or tubes to form a barrel vault over the useable area. Except where explicitly allowed under this Chapter, air domes are a prohibited building type. Not the same as a “Hoop Building,” which is separately defined and regulated.
Air pollution standards: See Section 94.12.14.
Airport or heliport (land use): See Section 94.4.07.
Alley: A public right-of-way which normally affords a secondary means of access to the side or rear of an abutting property, and which is not intended for through traffic.
Amateur radio antenna: Any combination of materials or equipment located outside of a principal structure on some premises used exclusively for the purpose of sending and/or receiving electromagnetic waves for amateur radio service, including any towers, support structures, guy wires, foundations or similar components of a support structure.
Amateur radio service: The transmission and reception of electromagnetic signals for non-commercial purposes, by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission.
Animal confinement facilities: Locations of confinement of livestock at a density exceeding three of such livestock animals per acre, except as applies to dairy production facilities which incorporate areas for manure application (at rates not to exceed the nutrient requirements of the crops grown thereon) as an integral part of the operation.
Animal fancier (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Animal unit: A term which has the meaning that was given in NR 243.05(3), Wis. Admin. Code. Animal units are not the same thing as the number of animals on a farm. A conversion factor is used for each different animal type (beef, dairy, swine) and size (mature or immature) to determine animal units. Example: a
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.17.04: Definitions through Section 94.17.04: Definitions
Article 17: DEFINITIONS 17-5
mature dairy cow is equal to 1.4 animal units. The Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection has created Worksheet 1 – Animal Units to determine the number of animal units.
Apartment: See definition of Multi-Family Residence.
Appeal: A means for obtaining review of a decision, determination, interpretation, order, or failure to act pursuant to the terms of this Chapter as expressly authorized by the provisions of Section 94.16.14.
Aquifer: A saturated, permeable, geologic formation that contains, and will yield, significant quantities of water.
Arterial street: See Street, Arterial.
Artisan studio (land use): See Section 94.4.05.
Artwork: Means a sculpture, monument, or structure erected solely for aesthetic purposes, which in no way identifies a product or business or is used for commercial purposes.
Auction yard (land use): See Section 94.4.06.
Awning: A shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building, constructed of non-rigid materials on a supporting framework.
Banner: A sign made of fabric or any non-rigid material with no enclosing framework.
Basement: A portion of a building located partly underground, but having one-half or less of its floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
Bed and breakfast (land use): See Section 94.4.05.
Bedroom: A room in a residence marketed, designed, or otherwise likely to function primarily for sleeping.
Billboard: An off-premise advertising sign that directs attention to a business, product, or service offered at a location other than on the premises on which the sign is located.
Blanket variance: A variance that is automatically granted by a provision of this Chapter in order to reduce the creation of legal nonconforming sites (see Section 94.15.05).
Board of Trustees: See “Village Board.”
Boarder: A person renting a room, or being provided a room as a stipulation of employment, in a Boarding House.
Boarding house (land use): See Section 94.4.05.
Brewpub: A use that is accessory to a restaurant or tavern use, produces less than 10,000 barrels of beer per year, is permitted under Wis. Stat. § 125.295, and where beer is primarily produced for on-site consumption.
Bufferyard: Any permitted combination of distance, vegetation, fencing, and/or berming that results in a reduction of visual and other interaction with an adjoining property, as required for certain land uses and activities and specified in Section 94.11.02(3)(d).
Building: A structure having a roof and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels.
Building, accessory: A building that meets the following criteria:
(1) Is subordinate to and serves a principal structure and/or principal use;
(2) Is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal structure or use served;
(3) Is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use served except as otherwise expressly authorized by provisions of this Chapter; and
(4) Is customarily incidental to the principal structure or use. Any portion of a principal building devoted or intended to be devoted to an accessory use is not an accessory building.
Building coverage: The percentage of a lot covered by all principal and accessory buildings, including all structures with a roof.
Building front: That exterior wall of a building that faces the front lot line of the lot.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.17.04: Definitions through Section 94.17.04: Definitions
Article 17: DEFINITIONS 17-6
Building height: The vertical distance from the average curb level in front of the lot or the finished grade at the building line, whichever is higher, to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof; the deck line of a mansard roof; or to the average height of the highest gable of an umbral, hip, or pitched roof.
Building Inspector: The employee or contractor of the Village officially designated to administer the Building Code.
Building, principal: A building in which is conducted, or in which is intended to be conducted, the main or principal use of the lot on which it is located.
Building separation: The narrowest distance between two buildings. See Minimum Building Separation.
Building size: The total gross floor area of a building.
Bulk (of a building): The combination of building height, size, and location on a lot.
Business day: Any 24-hour day from Monday to Friday, except for any day on which Village employees are not required to work due to its association with a state or federal holiday.
Campground (land use): See Section 94.4.05.
Camping cabin: A camping unit that is a hard-sided tent or shelter less than 400 square feet in area whose foundation is not part of the cabins structure that is designed to be moveable which may or may not have an inside water connection or water using sanitary fixtures.
Camping unit: Any structure, equipment or vehicle intended for temporary sleeping accommodations for recreation or travel, not more than 400 square feet in area, including recreational vehicles (RV’s), pick-up trucks with sleeper attachments, motor homes, camping trailers, tents, park models, yurts, camping cabins, and similar equipment.
Camp site: A clearly signed piece of land within a camp ground that provides a location for a camping unit(s), with its location delineated on a campground site plan map.
Camping trailer: A camping unit that is a vehicle with a collapsible or folding structure and towed upon a highway by a motor vehicle.
Canopy (building): A rigid multisided structure covered with fabric, metal, or other material and supported by a building at one or more points or extremities and by columns or posts embedded in the ground at other points or extremities.
Canopy (freestanding): A rigid multisided structure covered with fabric, metal, or other material and supported by columns or posts embedded in the ground.
Carport: An attached or detached structure having a roof designed to shelter a motor vehicle, but open on more than one side.
Cellar: That portion of the building having more than one-half of the floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
Certificate of Occupancy: See Section 94.16.10.
Collector street: See Street, Collector.
Commercial animal establishment (land use): See Section 94.4.05.
Commercial indoor lodging (land use): See Section 94.4.05.
Commercial land use(s): See Section 94.4.05.
Common ownership: Any combination of contiguous parcels singly owned by one uniquely named entity as identified by deed. Such an entity includes, but is not necessarily limited to, an individual person, a married couple or family trust, or a partnership or corporation.
Communications tower (land use): See Section 94.4.08.
Community character: The impression an area makes in regard to the type, intensity, density, quality, appearance, and age of development.
Community garden (land use): See Section 94.4.03.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.17.04: Definitions through Section 94.17.04: Definitions
Article 17: DEFINITIONS 17-7
Community living arrangement (land use): See Section 94.4.04.
Company cafeteria (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Company provided on-site amenities (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Comprehensive Plan: The adopted Comprehensive Plan of the Village, as may be from time to time amended. The Comprehensive Plan is intended to promote public health, safety, and welfare of the Village by effectively guiding long-range growth and development within the Village and its extraterritorial area. The Comprehensive Plan provides goals, objectives, policies, and recommendations for future land use, transportation, housing, economic development, utilities, community facilities, agricultural resources, natural resources, cultural resources, intergovernmental relations, and implementation. Implementation of the Comprehensive Plan is accomplished through this Chapter, other chapters of the Municipal Code, more detailed plans, public investments, private development decisions, intergovernmental cooperation, and citizen involvement. The authority for the Village of Weston to prepare and adopt a Comprehensive Plan is established under Wis. Stats. § 62.23 and 66.1001.
Conditional use: A land use that requires a conditional use permit in order to develop.
Conservation neighborhood design: A technique of designing neighborhoods in which the preservation of natural resources is central to the overall design.
Construction, start of: The installation of foundation footings and/or materials for road construction.
Contractor’s on-site equipment storage facility (land use): See Section 94.4.10.
Contractor’s project office (land use): See Section 94.4.10.
County: Marathon County, Wisconsin.
Cul-de-sac: A local street having one end open to traffic and the other end permanently terminated in a vehicular turnaround meeting Village standards.
Day care: See “Family Day Care Home,” “Intermediate Day Care Home,” or “Group Day Care Center.”
Deck: A structure that has no roof or walls and is considered part of a building or structure.
Dedication: The transfer of property interest from private to public ownership for a public purpose. The transfer may be of fee-simple interest or of a less than fee-simple interest, including an easement.
Density: A term used to describe the number of dwelling units per acre.
Detached accessory structure (for non-residential use) (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Detached accessory structure (for residential use) (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Detached garage: See “Garage, detached.”
Developer: The legal or beneficial owner(s) of a lot or parcel of any land proposed for inclusion in a development, including an option or contract purchaser.
Development: The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any buildings; any use or change in use of any buildings or land; any extension of any use of land; or any clearing, grading, or other movement of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to this Chapter.
Disposal land use(s): See Section 94.4.06.
Distribution center (land use): See Section 94.4.07.
Donation Drop-off box or vending machine (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Drainage: The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading, or other means. Drainage includes the control of runoff, to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after development, and the means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
Drive-in or drive-through sales or service (land use): See Section 94.4.05.
Drive-in theater: See “Outdoor Commercial Entertainment.”
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.17.04: Definitions through Section 94.17.04: Definitions
Article 17: DEFINITIONS 17-8
Dwelling: A building or one or more portions thereof, containing one or more dwelling units, but not including habitations provided in nonresidential uses such as lodging uses and campgrounds.
Dwelling, attached: A dwelling joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a shared wall or walls.
Dwelling, detached: A dwelling entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot.
Dwelling unit: A room or group of rooms providing or intended to provide permanent living quarters for not more than one family. Also “housing unit.”
Dwelling unit separation: The narrowest distance between two dwelling units. See Minimum dwelling unit separation.
Earth filling/excavating: See Section 94.12.02.
Easement: Written authorization, recorded in the Register of Deeds' office, from a landowner authorizing another party to use any designated part of the land owner’s property for a specified purpose.
Encroachment: Any fill, structure, building, use, or development that advances beyond proper limits.
Erosion: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, and/or gravity.
Essential services: Facilities that meet the following criteria:
(1) Are owned or maintained by public utility companies or public agencies;
(2) Are located in public ways or in easements provided for the purpose, or on a customer's premises and not requiring a private right-of-way;
(3) Are reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate water, sewer, gas, electric, communication, or similar services to adjacent customers, and;
(4) Do not include any cross-country line on towers.
Existing Facilities and Land Uses: Pertaining to the wellhead protection regulations of this Chapter, those facilities, practices, or activities existing as of the date that the WHP Wellhead Protection Area overlay zoning district is first mapped in that area and in continuous operation since that date, which may cause or threaten to cause environmental pollution within the WHP district. Existing facilities and land uses include but are not limited to the type listed in the Department of Natural Resources’ form 3300-215, Public Water Supply Potential Contaminant Use Inventory Form, incorporated herein as if fully set forth.
Explosion standards: See Section 94.12.17.
Exterior storage standards: See Section 94.12.06.
ETZ Area: The area outside of the Village municipal limits in which the Village exercises joint zoning authority with the Town of Weston, under extraterritorial zoning authority granted by Wisconsin Statutes. Also “extraterritorial zoning area.”
Extraterritorial Area: The area outside of the Village municipal limits in which the Village may exercise extraterritorial powers of planning, land division, official mapping, and/or zoning under Wisconsin Statutes.
Extraterritorial Zoning Committee: The committee formed under Wisconsin Statutes to make and advise zoning decisions within the ETZ Area. Also referred to as the “Joint Committee” or “Joint Extraterritorial Committee.”
Façade: The entire building front including the parapet.
Family: An individual or two or more persons, each related by blood, marriage, adoption, or guardianship, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a group of not more than four persons not so related, maintaining a common household in which bathrooms, kitchen facilities, and living quarters are shared.
Family day care home (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Farm: A parcel or parcels of land (a) where the majority of the land is used for growing farm products—such as vegetables, trees , and grain—and/or for the raising of the farm animals, (b) from which at least $6,000 of gross farm revenue in the prior full calendar year (or $18,000 total over the last 3 years) have been earned or
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.17.04: Definitions through Section 94.17.04: Definitions
Article 17: DEFINITIONS 17-9
where the land is enrolled in a farm commodity or conservation program, and (c) in common ownership as defined in this Section. Also referred to as a “farm operation.”
Farm animal: Any animal that is customarily raised for a profit on a farm and/or to supplement household food supplies or income, and that has the potential for causing a nuisance or public health concerns if not properly maintained. Includes bovine animals, equine animals, goats, poultry, sheep, swine, farm raised deer, farm raised game birds, camelids, ratites, farm raised fish, and bees, but does not include pot-bellied pigs. Refer to Wis. Admin. Code ATCP § 51 for applicable definition related to certain livestock facilities covered by those rules. Also referred to as “livestock” for purposes of this Zoning Ordinance.
Farm residence: The only single-family residence located on a farm.
Farmers’ Market: The days the Village of Weston provides a time and space for vendors to peddle, vend, sell, serve, display, offer to sell or give away a grown or homemade good, product, food or beverage.
Fencing standards: See Section 94.12.03.
Fire and explosion standards: See Section 94.12.17.
Flag: Any fabric, plastic, or similar material containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols used as a symbol or emblem of any corporation, nation, organization of nations, state, Village, or religious, fraternal, educational or civic organization displayed for noncommercial purposes.
Flashing sign: A directly or indirectly illuminated sign on which artificial light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use.
Flicker: The moving shadow created by sun shining on the rotating blades of the wind turbine.
Floor area: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building including interior balconies, mezzanines, basements, attached accessory buildings, fitting rooms, stairs, escalators, unenclosed porches, detached accessory buildings utilized as dead storage, heating and utility rooms, inside off-street parking or loading space (decks are not included in this measurement). Measurements shall be made from the inside of the exterior walls and to the center of interior walls.
Floor area ratio (FAR): The ratio calculated by dividing the Gross Floor Area of all buildings on a site by the Gross Site Area.
Footcandle: A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which are one-foot from a uniform point source of one candle, or approximately 10 LUX.
Freight terminal and mass transportation depot (land use): See Section 94.4.07.
Garage: A detached garage or a portion of the principal building, not including a carport, which is used primarily for storing vehicles and equipment. S. See also “Detached Accessory Structure (for Residential Use).”
Garage, detached: A detached accessory building that is 200 square feet in area or greater; used primarily to store vehicles and equipment; and installed on a foundation, hard surface, or graveled surface. A detached garage is not a utility shed.
Gas station: See “Drive-In or Drive-Through Sales or Service.”
Gazebo: A detached accessory structure that is covered but that also allows open air and views on all sides, and is for recreational use that does not include storing vehicles or equipment.
Geothermal energy system (GES) (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
General floor plans: A graphic representation of the anticipated utilization of the floor area within a building or structure, but not necessarily as detailed as construction plans.
Glare: The brightness of a light source that causes eye discomfort.
Glare standards: See Section 94.12.16.
Green space: Includes all landscape surfaces, in ground stormwater management facilities, woodlands, and permanently protected natural resource areas that allow ground water infiltration.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.17.04: Definitions through Section 94.17.04: Definitions
Article 17: DEFINITIONS 17-10
Gross density: The result of dividing the number of dwelling units located on a site by the gross site area. See Maximum gross density.
Gross floor area (GFA): The total floor area on all levels of a building.
Gross site area (GSA): The total area of a site available for inclusion in calculations of the maximum permitted density or intensity of development.
Group day care center (land use): See Section 94.4.05.
Group development: Any unified non-residential or mixed-use development that consists of two or more separated, individual business spaces within one or more buildings, or a collection of buildings and businesses on separate lots or building pads developed as a unified project, including industrial parks, health care complexes, and shopping centers.
Habitable building: Any building, or portion thereof, used for human habitation.
Hard surface: A dustless, all-weather surface including concrete, asphalt paving, “black-top,” pervious pavement, interlocking pavers, paving stones commercially designed and manufactured for the proposed purpose, any combination of these materials, or other similar material approved by the Zoning Administrator. Does not include gravel, other crushed stone, limestone screenings, clay, or other loose aggregate or organic material.
Hazardous materials: See Section 94.12.20.
Heat standards: See Section 94.12.16.
Heavy duty trucks: A Federal Highway Administration classification of including all trucks with a gross vehicle weight rating of over 26,000 pounds.
Heavy industrial (land use): See Section 94.4.08.
Height of structure: See Building Height.
Historic structure: Any building or portion of a building that is (a) listed or eligible for listing on the National or State Registers of Historic Places or (b) identified as having historic or architectural significance by a comprehensive survey of historic resources conducted by or with authorization of the Village.
Hobby farm: A type of agricultural use that produces food or fiber, or that houses horses or similar animals, but is operated for pleasure or supplemental income rather than for primary income and exceeds the limitations associated with the “keeping of farm animals on residential lots and school sites” land use.
Hoop building: A steel or plastic framed and fabric material covered building, or a metal covered open walled structure. Also known as and including a hoop shed, hoop house, hoop barn, hoop shelter, canvas building, tarp shed, arch building, fabric tensioned structure, tent garage, or metal car port. Not permitted outside of agricultural zoning districts, except on a temporary basis for a maximum of five consecutive days within a 30-day period for a special event such as a sale or on the property. Does not include an “Air Dome,” which is separately defined and regulated under this Chapter.
Home occupation (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Hotel: See “Commercial Indoor Lodging.”
Ice shanty: A portable shed placed on a frozen lake to provide shelter during ice fishing. Also called an ice shack, ice house, fishing shanty, fish house, fish coop, or ice hut. Where placed or stored outside of another fully enclosed building on land, an ice shanty shall be classified and regulated as a “recreational vehicle” if it has wheels and as a “detached accessory structure” if it does not have wheels.
Impervious surface: Areas designed and installed to prohibit infiltration of stormwater. Homes, buildings, and other structures, as well as hard surfaces as defined in this section are considered impervious. For the purposes of this Chapter, gravel areas and areas with landscaped pavers and pervious pavement that are intended for vehicular traffic shall also be considered impervious.
In-home suite (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Indirectly (externally) illuminated sign: A sign that is illuminated from a source outside of the actual sign.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.17.04: Definitions through Section 94.17.04: Definitions
Article 17: DEFINITIONS 17-11
Indoor commercial entertainment (land use): See Section 94.4.05.
Indoor institutional—general (land use): See Section 94.4.04.
Indoor institutional—intensive (land use): See Section 94.4.04.
Indoor repair and maintenance (land use): See Section 94.4.05.
Indoor sales incidental to storage or light industrial land use (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Indoor sales or service (land use): See Section 94.4.05.
Indoor storage or wholesaling (land use): See Section 94.4.06.
Institutional and recreational land use(s): See Section 94.4.04.
Institutional residential (land use): See Section 94.4.04.
Intensity: A term used to describe the amount of gross floor area or landscaped area, on a lot or site, compared to the gross area of the lot or site.
Intermediate day care home (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Internally illuminated sign: A sign designed to give any artificial light directly through any transparent or translucent material from a source of light originating within such sign.
Interpretations: See Section 94.16.12.
Joint Extraterritorial Committee: See Extraterritorial Zoning Committee.
Junkyard or salvage yard (land use): See Section 94.4.06.
Keeping of farm animals on residential lots and school sites (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Landscape points: See Section 94.8.02(4).
Landscaped area: The area of a site that is planted and continually maintained in vegetation, including grasses, flowers, herbs, garden plants, native or introduced groundcovers, shrubs, bushes, and trees. Landscaped area includes the area located within planted and continually maintained landscaped planters. Landscaped areas do not include stormwater detention ponds unless the Zoning Administrator deems that the design of the facility also meets the aesthetic, screening, or other open space requirement applicable to the use or site.
Landscaped surface area ratio (LSR): The percentage of the gross site area or lot area that is preserved as permanently protected landscaped area, including vegetative roofs meeting the definition in this section.
Landscaping: A deliberately designed collection of living plants installed and maintained on a lot, generally including a combination of trees, shrubs, and perennial plantings.
Land use: The type of use, development, and/or activity occurring on a piece of property.
Large exterior communication device (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Lawn care: Any activity involving the preparation, installation, and maintenance of vegetative ground cover, including but not limited to grass. Lawn ornaments. Decorative, human-made objects placed in the yard area of a property, such as statuary, bird baths, bird feeders, sundials, fountains, and similar features. Yard accessories that serve a more utilitarian or recreational purpose, such as clothes lines and play sets, are not considered lawn ornaments.
Light duty trucks: A Federal Highway Administration classification including all trucks with a gross vehicle weight rating of up to 14,000 pounds.
Light industrial (land use): See Section 94.4.08.
Light industrial activities incidental to indoor sales or service (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Lighting standards, exterior: See Section 94.12.11.
Livestock or farm commodity trucking (land use): See Section 94.4.07.
Loading standards: See Section 94.12.10.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.17.04: Definitions through Section 94.17.04: Definitions
Article 17: DEFINITIONS 17-12
Local collector street: See “Street, Collector.”
Local residential street: See “Street, Local Residential.”
Local street: See “Street, Local.”
Lot: A parcel of land that: (a) is undivided by any street or private road; and (b) has frontage on a public street or other officially approved means of access, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal structure or use and sufficient in size to meet the lot width, lot frontage, lot area, yard, parking area and other provisions of this Chapter and the Village Subdivision Ordinance.
Lot area: The area contained within the exterior boundaries of a recorded lot, excluding public streets and land under bodies of water.
Lot, corner: A lot situated at the junction of and abutting two or more intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed 135 degrees.
Lot depth: The average distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot.
Lot frontage: Lot width measured at the front lot line.
Lot interior: A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot line: A lot line is a property line bounding a lot, except that where any portion of a lot extends into the public right-of-way or a proposed public right-of-way, the line of such public right-of-way shall be the lot line for purposes of this Chapter.
Lot line, front: A lot line that abuts a public or private street right-of-way. For corner lots, the lot line along the street from which the house is addressed shall be the front lot line. (See also lot line, street side).
Lot line, interior side: Any boundary of a lot that is not a front lot line, a street side lot line, or a rear lot line.
Lot line, rear: In the case of rectangular or most trapezoidal shaped lots, the lot line that is opposite and most distant from the front lot line of the lot is the rear lot line. In the case of an irregular, triangular, or gore-shaped lot, a line 20-feet in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the front line shall be considered to be the rear lot line. In the case of a double frontage lot, there shall be no rear lot line
Lot line, street side: For corner lots, the lot line that abuts a public or private street right-of-way but that is not the front lot line.
Lot of record: A platted lot or lot described in a certified survey map or in metes and bounds description that has been approved by the Village and/or by Marathon County; and has been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds.
Lot, through: A lot that has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two substantially parallel streets (one or more of which may be a portion of a cul-de-sac).
Lot width: The maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot, measured at a location of the lot that is (a) parallel to the front lot line and at (b) at the minimum required front yard. Such minimum required front yard shall be per this Chapter for the associated zoning district, or further towards the rear lot line if so delineated on an approved subdivision plat or certified survey map. See also “Minimum lot width.”
Lowest floor: The lowest enclosed floor (including basement). Any unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosed area is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Chapter.
Manufactured home: A home built entirely in the factory under a federal building code administered by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). The Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards (commonly known as the HUD Code) went into effect June 15, 1976. A manufactured home may be constructed of single or multiple sections.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.17.04: Definitions through Section 94.17.04: Definitions
Article 17: DEFINITIONS 17-13
Maximum accessory building coverage: The largest permitted area of all accessory buildings on a lot.
Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): The largest amount of floor area permitted on a lot. See also “floor area ratio.”
Maximum gross density (MGD): The maximum number of dwelling units permitted per acre of Gross Site Area. See also “gross density.”
Maximum height: The maximum height of the highest portion of any structure. See also “height.”
Micro-beverage production facility (land use): See Section 94.4.05.
Minimum building separation: The narrowest permitted building separation for buildings on the same building lot or site.
Minimum dwelling unit separation: The narrowest permitted dwelling unit separation on the same building lot or site.
Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): The lowest permitted landscape surface ratio. See also “landscape surface ratio.”
Minimum lot area (MLA): The minimum size lot permitted within the specified zoning district and development option.
Minimum lot width: The smallest permissible lot width within the applicable zoning district.
Minimum setback: The narrowest distance permitted from a front, street side, interior side, or rear property line to a building or structure as specified in this Chapter.
Minimum site area (MSA): The minimum gross site area in which the specified development option may occur. See also “gross site area (GSA)”.
Mixed use: Some combination of residential, commercial, industrial, office, institutional, or other land uses within a district or development, except as may otherwise defined in the standards for an N district.
Mixed use dwelling unit (land use): See Section 94.4.02.
Manufactured home community (land use): See Section 94.4.02.
Mobile food vending unit: Any motorized or non-motorized vehicle, trailer, kiosk, pushcart, pedal cart, stand, display, carried container, blanket, ground covering or other device designed to be portable and not permanently attached to the ground from which food and/or beverages are being peddled, vended, sold, served, displayed, or offered for sale or given away. This definition does not include a mobile wholesale delivery unit, a vehicle which is used solely to transport or deliver food, or a common carrier regulated by the state or federal government. See Section 94.4.10(13).
Mobile food vendor: means a person who peddles, vends, sells, serves, displays, offers to sell or give away food or beverages from a mobile food vending unit.
Mobile home: A transportable factory-built structure as defined in Wis. Stat. § 101.91(10), designed for long term occupancy by one family and built prior to June 15, 1976, the effective date of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act.
Modular home: Includes homes that are built to State, County, and Village building code standards and consist of one or more modules, panels, and pre-cut sections that are manufactured off-site and are transported to the site for final assembly.
Multi-family residence (land use): See Section 94.4.02.
Navigable water: All natural lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages, and other waters that are navigable under the laws of this state. The Wisconsin Supreme Court has declared navigable all bodies of water with a bed differentiated from adjacent uplands and with levels of flow sufficient to support navigation by a recreational craft of the shallowest draft on an annually recurring basis. [Muench v. Public Service Commission, 261 Wis. 492 (1952), and DeGaynor and Co., Inc. v. Department of Natural Resources, 70 Wis. 2d 936 (1975)] For the purposes of this Chapter, rivers and streams will be presumed to be navigable if they
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.17.04: Definitions through Section 94.17.04: Definitions
Article 17: DEFINITIONS 17-14
are designated as either continuous or intermittent waterways on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps until such time that the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources has made a determination that the waterway is not, in fact, navigable.
Noise standards: See Section 94.12.13.
Non-metallic mineral extraction (land use): See Section 94.4.08.
Nonconforming lot: See “Substandard Lot.”
Nonconforming sign: A sign that was legally constructed under the regulations in place at the time, but does not conform to the regulations of this Chapter.
Nonconforming site: Any development that was lawfully established prior to March 18, 2015 or subsequent amendments thereto, but that would not conform to one or more current site, building, landscape, lighting, or other design regulations within this Chapter. See Section 94.15.05.
Nonconforming structure: Any building, or other structure, that was lawfully established prior to March 18, 2015 or subsequent amendments thereto, but that would not conform to one or more current density, intensity, or bulk regulations within this Chapter. See Section 94.15.04.
Nonconforming use: An active and actual use of land, building(s), or structure(s) that was lawfully established prior to March 18, 2015 or subsequent amendments thereto, that has continued as the same use to the present, and that does not comply with all the applicable use regulations of this Chapter. See Section 94.15.03.
Non-Residential and Mixed Use (Zoning) Districts: The INT, B-1, B-2, B-3, BP, LI, GI and RM districts, and any property within an N district approved for non-residential use. Alternately referred to as “Non-Residential Zoning Districts” in this chapter.
Non-residential building: Any building containing a non-residential land use.
Non-residential land use(s): All uses that are not intended for long term or permanent use as a dwelling unit. Commercial lodging and similar land uses intended for short-term occupancy are considered non-residential land uses.
Noxious matter or materials: Material capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction, or capable of causing detrimental effects on the physical or economic well-being of individuals.
Noxious materials standards: See Section 94.12.18.
Odor standards: See Section 94.12.15.
Office (land use): See Section 94.4.05.
Official map: A map adopted and designated by the Village as being the “Official Map,” pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.23(6), which shows current and proposed municipal sites, rights-of-way, and/or drainageways.
Official Overlay Zoning Map: The map adopted and designated by the Village as being the “Official Zoning Map” that includes all lands within the Village municipal limits and ETZ Area, and that visually represents the location of overlay zoning districts under this Chapter.
Official Zoning Map: The map adopted and designated by the Village as being the “Official Zoning Map” that includes all lands within the Village municipal limits and ETZ Area, and that visually represents the location of zoning districts under this Chapter.
On-site: Located on the lot in question, except in the context of on-site detention, when the term means within the boundaries of the development site as a whole.
On-site agricultural retail (land use): See Section 94.4.03.
On-site real estate sales office (land use): See Section 94.4.10.
Opacity: The degree to which vision is blocked by a bufferyard. Opacity is a measure of complete visual obstruction measured as the percentage of a bufferyard's vertical plane to a height of six feet above ground level measured from the property or land use to be screened.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.17.04: Definitions through Section 94.17.04: Definitions
Article 17: DEFINITIONS 17-15
Operational plan: A plan describing the basic characteristics and approach for operating a proposed use.
Outdoor assembly or special event (land use): See Section 94.4.10.
Outdoor commercial entertainment (land use): See Section 94.4.05.
Outdoor display (land use): See Section 94.4.05.
Outdoor institutional (land use): See Section 94.4.04.
Outdoor solid fuel furnace (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Outdoor storage of firewood standards: See Section 94.12.05.12.05.
Outdoor storage or wholesaling (land use): See Section 94.4.06.
Outdoor vehicle repair and maintenance (land use): See Section 94.4.05.
Overlay zoning district: A zoning district that imposes uniform restrictions on all properties within its area that are in addition to the restrictions specific to standard zoning districts and the general restrictions of this Chapter. See Article 6.
Owner: The person, persons, or other legal entity having the right of legal title to a lot or parcel of land.
Parapet: The extension of a false front or wall above the roofline.
Parcel: The area within the boundary lines of a lot.
Parking requirements: For minimum parking requirements associated with individual land uses refer to Article 4. For parking space and lot design standards, see Section 94.12.09.
Passive outdoor public recreation (land use): See Section 94.4.04.
Penalty: See Section 94.16.19.
Pennant: A sign made of fabric, plastic, or similar material, which may or may not contain distinctive colors, patterns or symbols of a corporation or business, often in series, and usually mounted without a frame and hung from poles and structures to allow movement by air. Such attention-getting displays not specifically defined as a flag or banner are considered pennants.
Performance guarantee: A financial guarantee to ensure that all improvements, facilities, or work required by this Chapter will be completed in compliance with the Chapter regulations and the approved plans and specifications of a development.
Performance standard: Criterion established to control and limit the impacts generated by, or inherent in, uses of land or buildings.
Permitted by right, use: A particular type of land use that is allowed as a matter of right within an associated zoning district, provided that all other requirements of this Chapter are met.
Personal or professional service (land use): See Section 94.4.05.
Personal storage facility (land use): See Section 94.4.06.
Placemaking: A multi-faceted approach to the planning, design and management of small scaled public, quasi-public and private spaces, in which visitors, customers, and/or the public is both directly and indirectly invited and welcomed to utilize. The design incorporates sociability, complementary land uses and activities, access and linkages, and comfort and image. See Section 94.6.02.
Plan commission: The Plan Commission of the Village, also commonly referred to as the Planning Commission. See Section 94.16.16.
Pole building: A building with sides consisting of corrugated steel or aluminum panels supported by vertical poles secured in the ground to serve as both the foundation and framework.
Porch: A covered platform, usually having a separate roof, at an entrance to a dwelling, or an open or enclosed gallery or room, which is not heated or cooled, that is attached to the outside of a building.
Portable sign: A sign not permanently attached to the ground that is designed to be moved from one location to another, not including a sandwich board/pedestal sign.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.17.04: Definitions through Section 94.17.04: Definitions
Article 17: DEFINITIONS 17-16
Predatory bird: An owl, hawk, falcon, eagle or similar bird that feeds principally by catching living prey.
Principal building: See Building, principal.
Principal use: Any and all of the primary uses of a property, treated as a use permitted by right or as a conditional use (rather than as an accessory use or a temporary use).
Private On-Site Wastewater Treatment System (POWTS): A sewage treatment and disposal system serving a single principal building with a septic tank and soil absorption field, holding tank where permitted under this Chapter, or alternative private sewage system located on the same lot as the principal building. Private on-site wastewater treatment systems are regulated under SPS 383, Wis. Admin. Code, other state regulations, and the Marathon County Sanitary Ordinance.
Prohibited sign: A sign that is not allowed to be erected within the jurisdiction of this Chapter.
Protest petition: A written protest against a proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Map (or Official Zoning Overlay Map), duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent or more either of the areas of the land included in such proposed amendment, or by the owners of 20 percent or more of the area of the land immediately adjacent extending 100 feet therefrom, or by the owners of 20 percent or more of the land directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land.
Public improvement: Any improvement, facility, or service, together with customary improvements and appurtenances thereto, necessary to provide for public needs such as streets, roads, alleys, pedestrian walks or paths, storm sewers, flood control improvements, water supply and distribution facilities, sanitary sewage disposal and treatment, public utility and energy services.
Public sanitary sewer: Includes the Village sanitary sewer system and other forms of sanitary sewer systems approved by the State Department of Natural Resources and maintained by a public agency authorized to operate such systems.
Public service or utility (land use): See Section 94.4.04.
Railroad right-of-way: A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for track operation, but not including freight depots or stations, loading platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops, or car yards.
Rain garden: A specially-designed, depressed garden that collects and infiltrates stormwater from impervious areas such as roofs, driveways, and heavily-compacted lawns. Rain gardens are usually planted with native vegetation, though ornamentals may also be used.
Real estate sign: A sign that is used to offer for sale, lease, or rent the property upon which the sign is placed.
Recorded lot: See “Lot of record.”
Recreational vehicle: For purposes of this Chapter, includes any of the following pieces of equipment or vehicles designed for human habitation and/or recreation: all-terrain motorized vehicles (e.g., “four-wheelers”); golf carts; snowmobiles; water craft (e.g., boats, jet-skis, canoes and kayaks 19 feet or longer); towed, motorized, or truck-mounted campers; motor homes; travel trailers; roof mounted cargo carriers; ice shacks or shanties on wheels; any trailer whether flat-bed or with a chassis-mounted container and for any purpose; or any vehicle or vehicle trailer similar to the above as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
Relocatable building (land use): See Section 94.4.10.
Residential agriculture (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Residential business (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Residential (land) use(s): A land use intended for use as a long-term residence or dwelling, whether owner or renter occupied, including “institutional residential” and “community living arrangement” land uses in any district and accessory residential land uses. Excludes commercial lodging, tourist lodgings, and campgrounds.
Residentially zoned or residential (zoning) district(s): The SF-L, SF-S, 2F, MF, and MH zoning districts, and any property within an N district approved for residential use.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.17.04: Definitions through Section 94.17.04: Definitions
Article 17: DEFINITIONS 17-17
Restrictive, more/less: A regulation imposed by this Chapter is more/less restrictive than another if it prohibits or limits development to a greater/lesser extent or by means of more/less detailed specifications.
Restaurant: A type of “Indoor Commercial Entertainment” land use in which food and beverages are sold to paying customers for on-site consumption.
Restaurant, fast food: A type of “Drive-In or Drive-Through Sales or Service” use in which food and beverages are sold to customers ordering and/or picking up such food or beverages in vehicles, with or without an option or eat and drink in the premises instead.
Rural and open space (zoning) district: The FP, AR, RR-2, RR-5, and PR zoning districts.
Scale (of development): A term used to describe the gross floor area, height, or volume of a single structure or group of structures.
Seasonal outdoor sales of farm products (land use): See Section 94.4.10.
Sedimentation: The deposition of soil that has been transported from its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity, or other natural means as a result of erosion.
Setback: The shortest distance between a building’s or structure’s exterior and the nearest point on the referenced lot line. See also “minimum setback.”
Shadow: The outline created on the surrounding area by the sun shining on the wind energy system.
Shrub: A low-lying deciduous or evergreen plant.
Sign: An emblem, name, identification, description, or illustration that is affixed to or appears directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or piece of land and that directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business. Definitions, descriptions, and regulations for various types and configurations of signs are found in Article 13.
Sign, abandoned: A business sign that is no longer being used in connection with an ongoing business on the lot; a sign that is no longer being used because the business is discontinued; and/or a sign that has not been maintained in a manner that renders it legible.
Sign, gross area of: The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of such sign and in no case passing through or between any adjacent elements of such sign. However, such perimeter shall not include any structural elements lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display.
Signable wall: A front wall, street side wall, or interior or rear side wall with a customer building entrance facing a customer parking lot. No individual wall shall count as more than one signable wall for purposes of determining the allowable number and area of business signs.
Signal receiving antenna (satellite dishes) standards: See “Small Exterior Communication Device” and “Large Exterior Communication Device.”
Single-family detached residence (land use): See Section 94.4.02.
Site area: See Gross site area.
Site plan: See Sections 94.3.03(10) and 94.16.09.
Skylight: A window or other paned area located on the ceiling or roof of a structure.
Small exterior communication device (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Small solar energy system (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Small wind energy system (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Solid waste disposal, composting, and/or recycling facility (land use): See Section 94.4.06.
Spreading of municipal waste/compost (land use): See Section 94.4.10.
Standard zoning districts: Zoning districts that primarily regulate the use of land and intensity or density of such use, as opposed to “overlay” or “special” zoning districts.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.17.04: Definitions through Section 94.17.04: Definitions
Article 17: DEFINITIONS 17-18
Start of construction: The date the building permit is issued, provided the actual start of activity was within 365 calendar days of the permit date. The actual start of activity means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on the site such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, or the construction of columns. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, or filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations; nor does it include the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure.
State: The State of Wisconsin.
Steep slope: Steep slopes are areas that contain a gradient of 12 percent or greater.
Stormwater management structure/facility: Includes in ground detention/retention ponds, basins, swales, ditches, stormwater drains, and similar site features or structures. See Section 94.12.02.
Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above; or if there is no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. Neither a basement nor a cellar shall be counted as a story.
Street: A public or private right-of-way that affords a primary means of vehicular access to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane, throughway, or however otherwise designated, but excepting driveways to buildings.
Street, arterial: A street that serves longer intra-urban trips and traffic traveling through the Village, has limited to no direct access for abutting land uses, and has measured or projected traffic volume of over 6,000 vehicles per day; or as otherwise may be designated as an arterial street within the Comprehensive Plan or by the Village Board. Private access may be permitted with limitations imposed by the Village, Marathon County, the Wisconsin Department of Transportation and/or the Federal Highway Administration. The Functional Classification System includes designations as principal and minor arterials.
Street, collector: A street that collects and distributes internal traffic within the Village (such as within a residential neighborhood), provides connections between local and arterial streets and limited restrictions on access for abutting land uses, and has a measured or projected traffic volume of between 1,500 and 8,000 vehicles per day; or as otherwise may be designated as a collector street within the Comprehensive Plan or by the Village Board. The Functional Classification System includes designations as major and minor collectors.
Street side lot line: See “Lot line, street side.”
Street, local: A street designed to provide access to abutting land uses and leading into a collector or occasionally into an arterial street, but which is not designed to carry through traffic from outside the neighborhood where it is located. Not an arterial street or a collector street.
String of lights: Lighting used to enhance or decorate store fronts, displays, or signage and associated only with decoration.
Substandard lot: A legally created lot that met any applicable lot dimensional requirement when it was created but does not meet the minimum dimensional requirements applicable to the zoning district that are listed in this Chapter. Also referred to as a “legal nonconforming lot.” See Section 94.15.02.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a more or less permanent location on the ground, or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, excepting public utility fixtures and appurtenances.
Swale: A linear depression in land running downhill or having a marked change in contour direction in which sheet runoff would collect and form a temporary watercourse.
Swimming pool standards: See Section 94.12.04.
Swimming pool: Either an above ground or inither an above ground or in--ground outdoor structure ground outdoor structure that that containcontainss a body of water in a a body of water in a receptacle or other container having a depth for water at any point greater than receptacle or other container having a depth for water at any point greater than 1818 inches below the inches below the adjacent adjacent ground ground or deck or deck elevationelevation;; used or intended to be used soleused or intended to be used solely by the owner, operator, or lessee thereof and his ly by the owner, operator, or lessee thereof and his
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.17.04: Definitions through Section 94.17.04: Definitions
Article 17: DEFINITIONS 17-19
family and
family and invitees;invitees; and includand includinging all structural facilities, appliances, appurtenances, equipment, and other items all structural facilities, appliances, appurtenances, equipment, and other items intended to be used for the operation and maintenance of intended to be used for the operation and maintenance of thethe swimming pool.swimming pool. Includes hoIncludes hot tubs, spast tubs, spas,, and any and any other structure meeting the above definition. other structure meeting the above definition. For the purposes of the associated regulations in Section 94.12.04, a swimming pool does not include any oes not include any pond or any pond or any pool that is designed to be readily and/or pool that is designed to be readily and/or seasonally seasonally disassembled, stored, and reassembled to its original integrity, provided that pool wall height does not disassembled, stored, and reassembled to its original integrity, provided that pool wall height does not exceed 48 inches.exceed 48 inches.
Temporary outdoor sales (land use): See Section 94.4.10.
Temporary portable storage container (land use): See Section 94.4.10.
Temporary shelter (land use): See Section 94.4.10.
Temporary vehicle shelter: A structure typically supported by poles, having a fabric roof and/or sides, and usually used to cover automobiles, boats, or recreational vehicles. See Section 94.4.10.
Temporary unscreened outdoor storage accessory to an industrial use (land use): See Section 94.4.10.
Temporary use: A land use that is present on a property for a limited and specified period of time. See Section 94.4.10 for temporary uses, and 94.16.07 for applicable procedures.
Tent: A portable easily collapsible sleeping shelter made of canvas, plastic, or other woven or foldable materials and supported by poles or framework.
Terrace area: The land within a public street right-of-way between the street curbing and the sidewalk on the same side of the street. Where no sidewalk exists, the area within six feet from the street surface edge (or within six feet from curb if curb exists) shall be deemed to be a terrace area for the purpose of this Chapter.
Throat length: The centerline length of a driveway that accesses a public road and that serves an off-street parking lot, as measured between the nearest public street right-of-way and the point where the driveway merges into the off-street parking lot.
Total height (for wind turbine): The distance measured from ground level to the blade extended at its highest point.
Tourist rooming house (land use): See Section 94.4.05.
Toxic materials standards: See Section 94.12.18.
Tower: The monopole or freestanding structure on which a cellular communication device, wind turbine, and accessory equipment are mounted.
Townhouse: A type of Multi-family Residence containing between 3 and 8 dwelling units, where each unit has a private individual exterior access (beyond one that connects only to a private patio, porch, deck, or balcony), shares at least one common wall with an adjacent dwelling unit, and is not stacked on top of and does not share interior space with any other unit. Also referred to as a “row house.”.
Turf grass: Grass commonly used in regularly-cut lawns or play areas such as, but not limited to, bluegrass, fescue, and ryegrass blends.
Two-family residence (land use): See Section 94.4.02.
Unnecessary hardship: A circumstance where strict compliance with this Chapter would unreasonably prevent the property owner from using the property owner’s property for a permitted purpose or would render conformity with this Chapter unnecessarily burdensome. The property owner bears the burden of proving that the unnecessary hardship is based on conditions unique to the property, rather than considerations personal to the property owner, and that the unnecessary hardship was not created by the property owner.
Urban development: Development that is connected to public sanitary sewer and water services.
Use: The purpose or activity for which land or any building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
Use, accessory: See Accessory Use.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.17.04: Definitions through Section 94.17.04: Definitions
Article 17: DEFINITIONS 17-20
Use, conditional: See Conditional Use.
Use, principal: See Principal Use.
Utility Shed: A detached accessory building that is less than 200 square feet in area and used primarily to store maintenance equipment for the same property. A utility shed is not a detached garage.
Variance: Permission to depart from the literal requirements of this Chapter granted pursuant to Section 94.16.11.
Vegetative roof: An extension of a typical gravel-ballasted flat roof built on top of a human-made structure that allows vegetation to grow in either a growing medium, and designed by an experienced vegetated roofing consultant to address gravity loads, slope stability, wind uplift, fire safety, waterproofing, drainage, water retention, vegetative performance, and maintenance in accord with industry standards and state and Village building codes.
Vehicle course or track (land use): See Section 94.4.09.
Vibration standards: See Section 94.12.12.
Violation: See Section 94.16.19.
Village: The Village of Weston, Wisconsin.
Village Board: The Board of Trustees of the Village.
Visibility and vision clearance standards: See Section 94.12.08(12).
Waste materials standards: See Section 94.12.19.
Well field: A piece of land used primarily for the purpose of locating wells to supply a municipal water system.
Well recharge area: The land area that contributes water to a well by infiltration or water into the subsurface and movement towards the well, regardless of the municipal or zoning jurisdiction of such land area.
Wetland: An area where water is at, near, or above the land surface long enough to be capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which has soils indicative of wet conditions.
Wind turbine: The blades and associated mechanical and electrical conversion components mounted on top of the tower whose purpose is to convert kinetic energy of the wind into rotational energy used to generate electricity.
Working days: Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday; excluding holidays recognized by the Village.
Yard: A required open space on a lot that is unoccupied and unobstructed by a structure from its lowest ground level to the sky, except as expressly permitted in this Chapter. A yard shall extend along a lot line and at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
Yard, front: The yard between the side lot lines extending from the front lot line to the nearest part of the nearest principal building. For corner lots and other double frontage lots, the yard abutting the street on which the lot is addressed shall be the front yard.
Yard, interior side: The yard between the front and rear lot lines extending from the interior side lot line to the nearest part of the nearest principal building.
Yard, rear: The yard between the side lot lines extending from the rear lot line to the nearest part of the nearest principal building.
Yard, street side: For corner lots, the yard between the front and rear lot lines, extending from the street side lot line to the nearest part of the nearest principal building.
Zero lot line structure: A structure that is built over the property line, where walls separating occupancy units follow lot lines, such as a zero-lot-line duplex or townhouse.
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
VILLAGE OF WESTON
ADOPTED: MARCH 18, 2015
LAST AMENDED: JANUARY 23, 2019
Section 94.17.04: Definitions through Section 94.17.04: Definitions
Article 17: DEFINITIONS 17-21
Zoning Administrator: The person authorized and charged by the Village with the administration of this Chapter. See Section 94.16.15.
Zoning Board of Appeals: See Section 94.16.17. Also commonly referred to as “Board of Zoning Appeals” or “Board of Appeals.” Not the same as the Village Board or Board of Trustees.
Zoning district: A designation for a portion of the community designated for certain types of land uses and/or with certain standards for land development that are different than other portions.
Zoning map: See “Official Zoning Map.”
[Amended via Ord. 15-006, 5/22/2015; Ord. 16-021, 4/20/2016; Ord. 16-044, 10/20/2016; Ord 17-019, 6/21/2017; Ord. 17-034, 11/24/2017; Ord. 18-012, 4/18/2018; Ord. 19-001; 1/23/2019]
State Law Reference Table Page 1
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Wisconsin Statutes, International and National Codes, AASHTO, ASTME .
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
66.035
Chapter 1 Table of Contents
990.01(38)
Sec. 1.101
990.01(48)
990.01(49)
95.20
66.0109
Sec. 1.111
66.0111
66.0115
66.0114
814.65
938.17(1)
Sec. 1.112(a)
938.17(2)
938.17(1)
Sec.1.112(b)
938.17(2)
118.163
125.02(20m)
Sec. 1.112(c)
Chapter 125
Chapter 125
Sec. 1.112(d)(1)
125.07(4)(bs)
125.07(4)(c)
125.07(4)(bs)
Sec. 1.112(d)(3)
125.07(4)(c)
Chapter 29
340.01(4)
938.346
Sec. 1.112(e)
66.035
Sec. 1.114
66.042
Sec. 2.201
62.09(13)(c)
61.24
Chapter 32
Sec. 2.203(5)
61.34(1 through 4)
Sec. 2.204
985.02(2)
Sec. 2.206
985.08(4)
985.08(1)
61.32
19.85
Sec.2.210
66.1201
Sec. 2.214(d)(6)d.
66.1213
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
66.1333
Sec. 2.214(d)(6)d.
66.1201
Sec. 2.214(d)(6)e.
66.1105
Sec. 2.214(d)(6)f.
66.1301 to 66.1329
66.1331
66.1333
66.1337
61.23(1)
Sec. 2.307
61.23(1)
Sec. 2.310
61.197(1)
Sec. 2.314
70.46
Sec. 2.400
70.47
70.46
Sec. 2.403
70.47
Sec. 2.404
70.47(7)(af)
Sec. 2.405
19.35(1)
19.21 et seq.
Sec. 2.502(e)
19.35(1)
Sec. 2.503(a)
19.34
Sec. 2.503(g)
19.37
Sec. 2.504(a)
19.37(1)
Sec. 2.504(c)
19.361
Sec. 2.505(a)
43.30
Sec. 2.505(b)
905.03
Sec. 2.505(c)(7)
Chapter 442
Sec. 2.506(a)
16.61(3)(e)
Chapter 442
Sec. 2.506(b)
16.61(3)(e)
16.61(3)(e)
Sec. 2.506(c)
19.21(4)(a)
Sec. 2.506(d)
16.61(7) (a) and (b)
Sec. 2.507
19.21(4)
Sec. 2.508
66.0420
Sec. 4.100
66.0420(2)
Sec. 4.200
66.0420(5)(b)
Sec. 4.400(e)(2)a.
125.01 et seq.
Chapter 6
Chapter 125
Sec. 6.100(a)
Chapter 125
Sec. 6.100(b)
125.02
State Law Reference Table Page 2
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
125.04
Sec. 6.100(b)
125.07
125.09
125.11(1)
125.12
125.13
125.14
125.17
125.18
125.185
125.25
125.26
125.27
125.28
125.32
125.33
125.51
125.66
125.67
125.68
125.70
Chapter 125
Sec. 6.101(a)
125.12(2)
Sec. 6.101(b)
111.321
Sec. 6.104(a)(1)
111.322
111.335
125.12(1)(b)
125.04(5)(c)
125.04(5)(b)
111.335(1)(cs)
Sec. 6.104(a)(3)
Guideline 2 (c)
Chapter 125
Sec. 6.104(a)(3)
Guideline 3 (a)
Chapter 125
Sec. 6.104(a)(3)
Guideline 3 (b)
Chapter 125
Sec. 6.104(a)(3)
Guideline 3 (c)
125.04(5)(b)
Sec. 6.104(a)(3)
Guideline 4
125.12
Sec. 6.104(a)(3)
Guideline 5
125.04(5)(a)5
Sec. 6.104(b)
125.185
Sec. 6.104(d)
125.51
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
Chapter 125
6.104(d)
125.32(3)
6.105
Chapter 172
10.101
174.13
10.104
961.14
10.109
100.30(2)(e)
10.113(b)
95.21(6)
10.120(d)(1)
95.21(6)
10.120(d)(2)
95.21(6)
10.120(d)(3)
95.21(8)
10.120(d)(6)
174.02(3)
10.201
prohibited dangerous animals (f)
173.13(1)
10.207(a)
173.23
10.207(d)
174.02(3)
10.208
SPS 320
14.200(a)
SPS 321
SPS 322
SPS 364
SPS 316
SPS 382
SPS 383
SPS 384
SPS 385
SPS 315
14.200(b)
SPS 316
SPS 316
14.201(a)
Chapter 985
14.318(f)(2)
Chapter 68
14.401(b)(3)b.
68.13
18.110(3)
68.13
18.114(b)
111.335, 134.59
18.115
66.0627
18.118
202.12
18.122(h)
68.07 through 68.16
18.125
423.203(1)(a), (b) and (c), (2) and (3)
18.126(b)(2)
66.083
18.129
84.31
18.130
Wis. Admin Code SPS Chapter MTBT1 through MTBT7
18.134
State Law Reference Table Page 3
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
Wis. Admin Code SPS Chapter MTBT1 through MTBT7
18.135(5)
18.136
18.139(a)
18.141(a)(4)
18.141(a)(5)
18.141(a)(11)
18.141(a)(19)
18.141(b)
18.141(b)(1)
18.141(b)(2)
18.141(b)(3)
18.141(b)(4)
18.141(f)
18.142(4)
70.11
18.135
944
18.140(b)
961
18.141(7)
944, 961
18.142(a)(3)
944, 961
18.142(a)(4)
134,71
18.143(a)(1)
70.995(2)(x)
18.143(b)(5)b.
111.321, 111.322, 111.335
18.143(i)(1)a.
134.71, 943.34, 948.62, 948.63
18.143(n)(1)
134.71, 138.10
18.144
440.92
18.148(b)(1)
115.01(1)
18.148(b)(7)
118.165
344.62
18.148(i)(1)
18.148(i)(2)
501.(c)(3)
18.148(j)(1)
68.07 through 68.16
18.148(p)
18.148(q)
Chapter 98
18.149(a)
Chapter 98
18.149(b)
ATCP 90, 91, 92
98.04(2)
18.149(c)(1)
Chapter 98
18.149(d)
Marathon County Ordinance
Chapter 6
22.101
Chapter 6
22.102
66.0301
26.100(a)
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
755.01(4)
755.03
26.100(b)
757.02(1)
26.100(c)2.
8.10, 8.11
26.100(c)3.
755.03
26.100(c)4.
755.045, 755.05
26.100(d)
755.045(2), 66.0119
938.17(2)(cm)
800, 938
26.100(f)
800.12
26.100(g)
Chapter 6
30.101
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
5.01 et seq.
30.102
Chapter 6
30.103(b)
61.65(2)
Chapter 34 Table of contents
SPS 305
34.203(b)(1)
SPS 307
34.203(b)(2)
SPS 314
34.203(b)(3)
SPS 316
34.203(b)(4)
SPS 318
34.203(b)(5)
SPS 323
34.203(b)(6)
SPS 326
34.203(b)(7)
SPS 328
34.203(b)(8)
SPS 340
34.203(b)(9)
SPS 361
34.203(b)(10)
SPS 362
34.203(b)(11)
SPS 363
34.203(b)(12)
SPS 364
34.203(b)(13)
SPS 365
34.203(b)(14)
SPS 366
34.203(b)(15)
SPS 361- 366
Appendix A
34.203(b)(16)
SPS 361- 366
Appendix B
34.203(b)(17)
SPS 375
34.203(b)(18)
SPS 376
34.203(b)(19)
SPS 377
34.203(b)(20)
State Law Reference Table Page 4
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
SPS 378
34.203(b)(21)
SPS 379
34.203(b)(22)
NFPA 1
34.203(b)(23)
NFPA 54
34.203(b)(24)
NFPA 58
34.203(b)(25)
NFPA 101
34.203(b)(26)
66.0627, Chapter 74
34.204(c)
SPS 314
34.206(a)(8)
International Building Code Tables 307.7(1) through 307.07(24)
34.206(a)(43)
International Building Code Tables 307.7(1) through 307.07(24)
34.206(a)(43)e.
International Building Code I-1, I-2, I-3, I-4
34.206(a)(44)
Wisconsin Administrative Code
34.206(a)(52)
ASTME
34.206(a)(52)a.
ASTME
34.206(a)(52)b
International Fire Code Section 202
34.206(a)(55)
NFPA 13
34.206(a)(72)a.
NFPA 72
34.206(a)(72)b.
NFPA 72
34.206(a)(72)c.
AWWA C502
34.207(i)(1)
2006 Edition of the Life Safety Code NFPA No. 101
34.213(a)
SPS 314
34.214(a)(3)
SPS 318.1702(10)(b)3.b
34.214(b)(2)
167.10
34.214(e)(3)
167.10
34.214(e)(4)
167.10
34.214(e)(5)
Wisconsin SPS Codes
34.214(e)(6)
NFPA 14
34.214(i)(2)
800.095(4), 343.30, 345.47
34.215(e)
281.48(2)(d.)
38.103(2)(e)
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
801.11, 968.04(3)(b)2.
42.101(b)
Chapter 814
42.102(b)8.
800.093
42.102(b)9.
345.11
42.102(c)
23.33(11)(am)
30.77
23.54
345.26
42.104(a)(i)
23.67
42.104(a)(ii)
Chapter 814
42.104(c)
346.63(1)
42.104(d)
Chapter 800
42.105
800.01
800.02
800.025
800.035(2)(d)
800.05
800.06
800.065
800.07
800.08
800.09
800.095
800.10
800.11
800.12
800.13
800.14
66.0435(2)(d)
46.100
66.0435(1), 101.91(2), and 340.01(6m)
46.101
66.0435(3)
46.109(c)
66.0435(3)
46.112(a)
66.0435(4)
46.112(b)
66.0701
50.100(12)(c)
SPS 382.40
50.102(f)(2)a.
SPS 321.04(3)
50.102(f)(2)d.
SPS 321.04
Wisconsin Commercial Building Code
50.102(f)(2)f.
State Law Reference Table Page 5
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
Wisconsin Electric Code
50.102(f)(2)g.
National Electric Code,
SPS 316
50.102(f)(2)g. vi.
SPS 321.04,
SPS 362
IBC 2009
50.102(g)(4)j
SPS 321.09,
SPS 321.097,
SPS 321.1200,
SPS 362.0907,
101.645
50.102(g)(4)p
66.0407
50.102(g)(4)2.u.vi.
66.0407
50.102(h)(2)a.
66.0517
50.102(h)(2)b.
66.0407
50.102(h)(3)1.
Chapter 985
50.102(j)(3)a.
66.0435(2)
50.104(b)(2)
125.12(2)
50.104(b)(3)
823.113(1m)(6)
50.104(b)(4)
Chapter 985
50.104(c)
Chapter 985
50.104(f)
66.0701
50.104(g)(1)
66.0701
50.104(j)(1)
66.0701
50.104(j)(2)
Chapter 823
50.104(j)(3)
18.131(a)
50.105
940.19
54.100
940.291
940.34
940.42
941.01
941.10
941.12(2), (3)
941.23
941.235
941.237
941.24
941.2965
941.297
941.36
943.01(1),(3), and (4)
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
943.017(1)
943.11
943.125
943.13
943.14
943.15
943.20(1),(2)
943.21(1),(2)
943.215
943.22
943.225
943.23(4m)
943.24
943.26
943.34
943.37
943.41(2),(3)(a)--(d), (4)(b)
943.45(1),(2),(3)(a), (b)
943.455(1),(2),(4), (a), (b)
943.46(1),(2),(4)(a), (b)
943.50(1),(1m),(2), (3), (3m)
943.55
943.61(1),(2),(3),(4)
943.70(1),(2),(a),(b) (1)
54.100
947.012
948.63
Chapter 961
895.035
54.101(e)
941.295, 941.24
54.102(a)(3)
175.60
54.102(b)
943.13(2)(bm)
54.102(f)
943.13, 175.60(17)
54.115(b)(1)
State Law Reference Table Page 6
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
980.01(6)
54.115(b)k.
48.02(7), 48.02(15d)
48.02(17), 48.02(6)
48.02(17m), 48.65
120.13(14)
48.651
96.01(2)
301.45
54.115(b)(6)a.
Chapter 111
54.116(e)(1)a.ii
Chapter 111
54.116(e)(1)(b)ii
Chapter 111
54.116(e)(1)(c)ii
68.13
54.116(g)
944.30
54.117(a)
48.02(2)
54.200(a)
48.19(1)(d)(8)
54.200(d)
938.343
54.201(e)(2)
118.15, 118.16(4)
54.202(a)(1)
118.15(1)(b)-(d)
54.202(a)(2)
118.15(1),(3)
54.254.2
118.15
938.37
54.202(b)(1)b.
938.34(5g)
54.202(b)(2)b.
938.342
54.202(b)(2)d.
103.70, 103.72
54.202(b)(2)e.
938.342(1g)
54.202(b)(2)f.
938.37
54.202(b)(2)h.
938.34(2)
54.202(b)(2)j.
155.01(6)
54.300(a)
647.01(6)
101.123(1)(ab), and 101.123(2)(bm)
54.300(c)(4)
HFS 45.02(4)
HFS 45.06)8)(g)
HFS 46.03(13)
HFS 46.06(2)(h)
54.300(c)(4)
HFS 46.08(2)(c)
101.123
54.300(l)(1)
101.123
54.300(l)(2)
134.66
54.301(a)3.
139.30(1)
54.301(a)
30.50(4s)
139.75(12)
134.65(1)
54.301(c)
134.66
54.302(a)
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
49.983(3)
54.302(b)(1)
254.92
54.302(b)(2)a.
489.83
54.302(b)(2)b.
134.65, 129.34, 139.79
54.302(d)(2)
70.47(7)(af)
54.400(a)
19.35(1)
74.37
54.400(b)(5)
27.13
Table on Contents Chapter 58
943.01(1), (3) and (4)
58.103(a)
943.13, 778.26
54.103(b)
895.035, 895.035(4),(5),(6),
(7)
58.103(c)(1)
62.23
62.100
62.23(1)
62.101
9.20
63.100
289.01 et seq.
Table of Contents Chapter 66
287.09, 287.11
66.101
NR 544
NR 544
66.102
287.09(2)
66.104
287.15(1)(a)
66.105(1)
ATCP 137
66.105(9)
ATCP 137
66.105(10)
291.01(7), 298.01(17)
66.105(15)
ATCP 137
66.105(20)
66.0131(1)(a)
66.105(21)
ATCP 137
66.105(22)
291.01(7), 298.01(17)
66.105(24)
ATCP 137
66.105(25)
ATCP 137
66.105(26)
ATCP 137
66.105(27)
NR 544.03(33), 287.07, 287.07(5)
66.105(28)
283, 254.31(10), 254.31(1)
66.105(30)
287.11(2m)
NR 544.14
66.108(c)
State Law Reference Table Page 7
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
287.093
66.111(b)
291.01(7)
66.111(e)(2)
287.07(7)(c)1.c
66.111(e)(9)
287.07(5)
66.111(e)(19)
NFPA 1
66.115(a)(2)
SPS 101
67.102(b)(1)
61.34, 66.0907
Table of Contents Chapter 70
62.16
70.100
81.01(11)
70.107
985
70.111(b)
62.15
70.111(c)
AASHTO Designation T180-74
70.124(2)a.
61.34(1), 83.027(10)
71.1.02
86.04, 86.07(2)
AASHTO WB-67
71.1.04
AASHTO WB-67
71.3.01(1)(c)3.
236.01 et seq.
Table of Contents Chapter 74
236.703
74.100(a)
236.293
74.101
281.31
23.32(1)
35.93, 227
236.30, 236.31, 236.32, 236.335
74.102
62.23(7)(e)10--15
74.106
236.45(4)
74.107
236.12(2)
74.109(b)
236
74.111(d)(1)d.
236.10 or 236.12
74.111(d)(2)a.
236, 236.12(6)
74.111(e)
236.25(2)(b)
74.111(g)
236.27
74.111(h)
236
74.117
236.29, 236.34
74.123(d)(5)f.
66.1003
74.125(e)
236
74.126(1)
236.34
74.131(a)
236.34
74.132
70.27
74.134
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
77.51(4)(a),(b) and (c)
78.101
254.61(1)
66.75(1)
66.75
78.102
66.0615, 77.57(2)(a)1.
78.105(a)(2)
66.0703, 66.0703(8)(c), (8)(d), (8)(e)
78.114(a)
985
78.114(a)(2)
66.0703(12)
78.114(a)(3)
66.0703
78.115(b)
66.0703
78.124(a)
340.01 et seq.
Table of Contents Chapter 82
340 through 348
82.100(a)
340 through 348
82.100(b)
340.01
341.04(1) and (2)
341.08(6)
341.11(4)
341.15
341.16(4)
341.55
341.57(3)
341.61
341.615
341.62
341.63
341.65
342.05(4)
342.06(3)
342.15
342.15(5), (6), (7)
342.155(2), (3)
342.156(1), (2)
342.16
342.30
342.31
342.33
342.34
342.40
343.01
State Law Reference Table Page 8
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
343.10(8)
343.12(1)
343.19(2)
343.305
343.35
343.43
343.435
343.44
343.45
343.46
343.50(11)
343.50(12)
343.52
343.60 -- 343.72
343.73
344.01
344.45 -- 344.47
344.51
345.01
345.20
345.53
345.55
346.01
346.20
346.53
346.55
346.01
346.02
346.03
346.04
346.05 -- 346.16
346.075
346.17
346.18
346.21
346.22
346.23
346.30
346.31 -- 346.35
346.36
346.37 -- 346.42
346.43
346.44 -- 346.485
346.49
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
346.50 -- 346.595
346.60
346.61
346.62
346.63
346.64
346.65
346.66
346.67 -- 346.73
346.74
346.77 -- 346.804
346.82
346.87 -- 346.945
346.95
347.01 -- 347.05
347.06 -- 347.29
347.30
347.35 -- 347.49
347.48(2m)
348.01, 348.02
348.05 -- 348.10
348.11
348.15 -- 348.20
348.21
348.25 -- 348.27
348.28
Chapter 340-348
82.101
Chapter 341-348
82.102(b)
345.28(4)
TRANS 128, 345.28(4)
82.103(b)
346.503 - 346.55
82.103(c)
345.28
82.103(f)
345.20 - 345.53,
Chapter 799
66.12
82.104(a)
66.12(1)(b),
345.27
345.11
82.104(b)
345.26
82.104(c)
345.26(3)(b),
345.26(1)(a),
345.27(2),
345.11
82.104(d)
State Law Reference Table Page 9
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
349.09, 346.41
82.106(b)
349.07(6)(a)
82.106(c)
349.13
82.107(a)
346.70,
346.70(4)(f),
346.73
82.108
118.105
82.109
118.105
82.109(g)
118.105,
23, 28,
343 - 348
350
82.109(h)
349.085,
349.065
82.110
342.40
82.111(c)
350
82.112(a)
350
82.112(b)
350.01
350.02
350.03
350.05
350.07
350.09
350.09
350.10
350.101
350.102
350.1025
350.103
350.104
350.101076
350.11(1,3(a)(1),(4))
350.12
350.15
82.112(b)
350.17(2)
350.19
350.02,
350.045,
350.04
82.112.1(1)
Chapter 341
82.121(6)
346.57,
349.11
82.200 Section 1
346.57,
349.11
82.200 Section 2
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
SPS 381 - 387
86.102
Chapter 68
86.104
196.49,
PSC 184,
196.19
Editor’s note pg 10
SPS 316, NEC 250
86.115
NR 811
86.117(b)
NR 811.09(2)
86.117(c)
66.0119
86.117(e)
Chapter 68
86.118
281.45
86.140
NR 812.07
86.147
NR 812
NR 812.07(19)
NR 812.26
86.147
NR 812
86.149(c)(1)
NR 811.10(2)
86.149(c)(2)
SPS 382
86.150(c)(1)
66.0809
86.155(d)
68
86.203(g)
66.0627
86.203(h)
NR 151 Subchapter III and IV
86.300
61.354,
61.35
86.301(1)
281.16,
283.33
86.301(4)(a)
NR 151.004
86.301(4)(b)
281.16
86.303(2)
227.01(1),
281.3(2)
86.304(3)
61.354
86.305(1)
281.16
86.305(2)
DNR SLAMM P8
86.305(3)
NR 102.11
86.305(14)
NR 115.03(6)
86.305(30)
NR 102.10
86.305(31)
283.01(13)
86.305(37)
281.01(10)
86.305(38)
NR 140.05(17)
86.305(41)
283.01(20)
86.305(54)
NR 151 Subchapter V
86.306(1)
151.124(6)
86.307(3)(c)3.a.
State Law Reference Table Page 10
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
NR 216.21(2)(a)
86.307(3)(c)3.a.i.
NR 811.16(4)
86.307(3)(c)3.a.ii.
NR 720.03(2)
86.307(3)(c)4.a.ii.
NR 815
86.307(3)(c)4.a.iii.
NR 140
86.307(3)(c)6.a.
NR 151.124
86.307(3)(c)8.
NR 103.03
86.307(3)(d)1.g.
NR 59.692(1v)
86.307(3)(d)4.c.
WDNR Tech Standard 1003 Vegetated Infiltration Swale
86.307(3)(f)1.b.
Federal Clean Water Act Section 303(d)
86.307(3)(f)2.a.iii.
NR 151.004
86.307(3)(f)2.a.iv.
Chapter 30
86.307(5)(d)1.
NR 130
86.307(5)(e)2.
NR 151.122,
NR 151.125
86.307(7)
Chapter 66 Subchapter VII
86.308(4)(g)
NR 811.16
86.309(1)(c)1.
Chapter 66 Subchapter VII
86.310(2)(h)
61.354(4)(b)
86.314(1)
NR 151
86.400
61.354,
61.35
86.401(1)
281.16,
283.33
86.401(4)(a)
NR 151.004
86.401(4)(b)
NR 216
Subchapter III
86.404(1)(a)1.
Code of Federal Regulations Chapter 40 Part 122
86.404(1)(b)1.
227.01(1),
281.33(2)
86.405(3)
61.354
86.405(1)
281.16(1)
86.405(2)
283.01(13)
86.405(18)
281.01(10)
86.405(19)
283.01(20)
86.405(27)
NR 151
86.406(1)(a)
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
66.0119(1),(2),(3)
86.412
Chapter 66 Subchapter VII
86.413(5)
61.354(4)(b)
86.414(1)
61.354
86.501(a)
Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.S. 1251 et seq.)
86.501(c)
66.0821
86.605(e)
23.235(1)(a),
66.0407
Chapter 90 Cross Reference Table of Contents
66.0407(4)
90.101(c)
Chapter 27
90.102(c)
27.09,
86.03
90.103(d)
27.09
90.103(f)(1)
66.0119
90.103(g)(1)a.
27.09(4),(5),(6) and (7)
90.103(g)(1)b.
66.0627
90.103(j)(1)
NR 812
94.3.03(13)
State of Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code
94.4.02(1)
Wis UDC
94.4.02(2)2.
NR 151
94.4.03(1)6.
46.03(22)
94.4.04(8)
48.743(1)
48.02(6)
50.01(a)(b)
61.53
62.23(7)(i)
48.62,
50.032(1m)(b)
94.4.04(8)3.
50.01(1)(b)
94.4.04(8)4.
Wis Admin Code
94.4.05(13)2.
298.01(33)
94.4.06(5)
66.0404(4),
66.0406(2)
94.4.08(3)12.
295 Subchapter I, 295.13, 295.14
94.4.08(4)19.a.
66.1017(1)(a)
94.4.09(3)
48.65
94.4.09(4)
State Law Reference Table Page 11
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
NR 151
94.4.09(10)7.b.
254
94.4.09(169.
National Electric Code,
Federal Communications Commission
94.4.09(17)2.
National Electric Code,
Federal Communications Commission
94.4.09(18)7.
Federal Cable Communications Policy Act 1984
94.4.09(18)11.
IGSHPA
International Ground Source Heat Pump Association
94.4.09(19)6.
PSC 128, 66.0401
94.4.09(20)1.
114.135, 114.136
Federal Aviation Administration 14 CFR Part 77
94.4.09(20)2.a.
PSC 128.30(2), 128.60, 128.105, 128.30(5)
94.4.09(20)3.
66.0401(4)(a)1.
94.4.09(20)4.b.
PSC 128.32(5)(b)
94.4.09(20)5.
PSC 128.33(5), 128, 66.0401
94.4.09(20)6.
PSC 128. 66.0401
94.4.09(20)7.
PSC 128.12(2), 128.18(3)(am),
Chapter 91
94.4.09(20)8.
66.0401, 66.0403
94.4.09(21)2.
SPS 323.045, Uniform Dwelling Code
94.4.09(22)6.
Section 501(c)(3) Internal Revenue Code
94.4.10(8)1.
62.23(7)(a) and (c)
94.6.03(1)
40 CFR Part 370
Figure 6.03
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
NR 140, SARA/EPCRP, 40 CFR Part 302 and 353, SPS 10
Figure 6.03
City of Wausau Municipal Code Title 27
94.6.04(1)
Wisconsin Bureau of Aeronautics
94.6.04(3)(a)
61.35, 62.23, 87.30
94.7.02
FIRM, FIS
94.7.05(1)
FIRM
55073C0411F,
55073C0412F
55073C0413F
55073C0416F
55073C0417F
55073C0418F
55073C0419F
55073C0438F
55073C0652F
55073C0660F
55073C0700F
Panel # 550323
Volume #55073CVOOOA
94.7.05(2)(a)1.
13.48(13), 30.2022
94.7.05(7)
61.35, 87.30
94.7.05(8)(a)
NR 116
94.7.05(9)
NR 116, 44 CFR, 59-72 NFIP
94.7.05(12)
Chapter 30, 404 Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amend 1972 33 U.S.C. 1344
94.7.07(3)(d)
SPS 383
94.7.07(4)(d)
NR 811 and NR 812
94.7.07(4)(e)
NR 110.15(3)(b)
94.7.07(4)(g)
SPS 383
94.7.08(3)(g)
NR 811, NR 812
94.7.08(3)(h)
FIRM Flood Insurance Rate Map
94.7.09(3)(a)3.
FIRM
94.7.09(4)(a)
62.23(7)(h)
94.7.10(1)(a)
State Law Reference Table Page 12
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
SPS 383
94.7.10(2)(b)
NR 811, NR 812
94.7.10(2)(c)
SPS 383
94.7.10(3)(c)
NR 811, NR 812
94.7.10(3)(d)
59.69, 59.629, 62.23(7)
94.7.11
National Geodetic Vertical Datum
94.7.11(1)(b)2.g.
North American Vertical Datum
94.7.11(1)(b)2.h.
NR 116.07(3)
94.7.11(1)(b)3.a.i.
NR 116.07(4)
94.7.11(1)(b)3.a.ii.
HEC_RAS
94.7.11(1)(b)3.a.ii.5.
NR 116.07(3)
94.7.11(1)(b)3.b.i.
NR 116.07(4)
94.7.11(1)(b)3.b.ii.
HEC_RAS
94.7.11(1)(b)3.b.ii.2.
FIRM/F8FM
94.7.11(1)(b)3.b.iii.1
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amend 1972 33 U.S.C. 1344
94.7.11(1)(d)
62.23(7)(e)
94.7.11(3)
FEMA Flood-Proofing Certificate
94.7.11(5)
NR 116.05
94.7.12(2)(f)
62.23
94.7.12(3)
62.23
94.7.12(3)(a)
87.30(2)
94.7.13
30.11
94.7.14(10)
Chapter 985
94.7.14(38)
44 CFR 60.3
94.7.14(45)
236.02(12)
94.7.14(74)
61.35, 61.353
94.8.01
13.48(13), 30.12
94.8.05
59.692
94.8.10(1)
59.692
94.8.10(2)
61.353, 62.233
94.8.10(2)(a)4.
66.0119
94.8.11(7)
NR 812
94.8.12(5)
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
Uniform Dwelling Code,
Electrical Code,
Fire Prevention Code,
Plumbing Code,
94.8.13(3)
Chapter 30,
Section 404 Clean Water Act
94.8.16
30.11, 30.12, 30.19, 30.195, 30.20
94.8.19(3)
30.18, Chapter 281 Subchapter II
94.8.19(6)
59.692(1), (2)
94.8.19(9)
59.692(1)(bn)
94.8.19(10)
61.35, 61.351, 87.30, 281. 31
94.9.01
13.48(13), 30.12(4)(a)
94.9.03(2)
61.35, 87.30
94.9.03(3)(a)
NR 117
94.9.03
FIRM
55073C0411F,
55073C0412F
55073C0413F
55073C0416F
55073C0417F
55073C0418F
55073C0419F
55073C0438F
55073C0652F
55073C0660F
55073C0700F
Panel # 550323
Volume #55073CVOOOA
94.9.04(1)(b)
30.11
94.9.04(3)
61,351, 62.23(7)(h)
94.9.04(6)(a)
61.351, 62.231
94.9.04(6)(c)
30.121
94.9.04(6)(d)
62.23(7)(d)2.
NR 117
94.9.04(7)(a)
62.23(7)(d)2.
94.9.04(7)(c)
281.31
94.9.04(7)(d)
62.231(6), 61.351(6)
94.9.04(7)(g)
State Law Reference Table Page 13
Wis. Stats. Section
Section this Code
ANSI Standard S1, 4-1983
94.12.13(2)
94.65
94.12.20(1)(a)
94.67(25)
94.12.20(1)(b)
95.39
94.12.20(1)(c)
100.37(1)(c)
94.12.20(1)(d)
101.58(2)(j)
94.12.20(1)(e)
101.58(2)(f)
94.12.20(1)(f)
Chapter 12
94.13.08(8)
62.23(7)(d)
94.16.02(5)
62.23(7)(d)
94.16.03(5)
62.23(7)(d)
94.16.06(4)
62.23(7)(d)
94.16.11(6)(a)
66.1001(4)
94.16.14(2)
66.0119(2)
94.16.15(2)(c)
125.295
94.17.04
62.23
66.1001
ATCP 51
101.91(10)
SPS 383
Village of Weston Municipal Code Index
Page 1
Subject
Section Number
A
Adoption of state statutes
1.116
Adult Entertainment Establishments, Definitions
6.109
Adult Entertainment Establishments, Findings of fact
6.107
Adult Entertainment Establishments, Intent
6.108
Adult Entertainment Establishments, Legislative authorization
6.106
Adult Entertainment Establishments, Prohibited acts
6.110
Adult-Oriented Establishments, Generally, Definitions
18.104
Adult-Oriented Establishments, Generally, Penalty
18.105
Adult-Oriented Establishments, Generally, Physical layout of premises
18.106
Adult-Oriented Establishments, Generally, Prohibitions
18.107
Adult-Oriented Establishments, Generally, Purpose
18.103
Adult-Oriented Establishments, License, Application
18.109
Adult-Oriented Establishments, License, Display
18.112
Adult-Oriented Establishments, License, Fee
18.111
Adult-Oriented Establishments, License, Required
18.108
Adult-Oriented Establishments, License, Revocation or suspension
18.114
Adult-Oriented Establishments, License, Standards for issuance
18.110
Adult-Oriented Establishments, License, Term
18.113
Alcohol Beverages, Fermented malt beverages; closing hours and restricting hours of sale
6.105
Alcohol Beverages, Issuance of operator's licenses
6.104
Alcohol Beverages, License restrictions; delinquent taxes, assessments, other claims
6.102
Alcohol Beverages, Penalties
6.101
Alcohol Beverages, Provisions of state law adopted by reference
6.100
Alcohol Beverages, Retail liquor and beer license fees
6.103
Animals, Abandonment of domestic animals
10.119
Animals, Animal control agency
10.136
Animals, Animal Fanciers
10.123
Animals, Animals on owners property
10.130
Animals, Animals on property of others
10.128
Animals, Care of dogs and domesticated animals
10.105
Animals, Claiming impounded dog or cat
10.132
Animals, Commercial animal establishment
10.124
Animals, Construction and application
10.102
Animals, Definitions
10.103
Animals, Disturbance prohibited
10.127
Animals, Dogs and cats not to run at large
10.126
Animals, Female animals in season
10.133
Animals, Habitual Animal Offender
10.140
Animals, Impounding of animals
10.131
Animals, Injured animals
10.135
Animals, Instigating fights between animals
10.111
Animals, Kennels
10.122
Animals, Leading animal from motor vehicle
10.107
Animals, Liability
10.138
Village of Weston Municipal Code Index
Page 2
Animals, Licenses required
10.121
Animals, Mistreating animals
10.104
Animals, Number of dogs and cats limited
10.115
Animals, Partition or line fences
10.137
Animals, Penalty
10.139
Animals, Providing proper food and drink
10.117
Animals, Providing proper shelter
10.118
Animals, Purpose and intent
10.100
Animals, Required removal of animal excreta
10.129
Animals, Requirements for horses and horse-drawn vehicles
10.134
Animals, Restriction on animals other than dogs and cats
10.116
Animals, Restrictions on keeping of dogs and cats
10.125
Animals, Sale of artificially colored animals
10.114
Animals, Sale of baby rabbits, chicks and other fowl
10.113
Animals, Severability
10.141
Animals, Shooting at caged or staked animals
10.112
Animals, State code adopted
10.101
Animals, Taking without owner’s consent
10.106
Animals, Transportation of Animals
10.108
Animals, Use of certain devices prohibited
10.110
Animals, Use of poisonous and controlled substances
10.109
Animals, Vaccination (Rabies control)
10.120
B
Board of Review, Adoption of statutes
2.400
Board of Review, Clerk
2.402
Board of Review, Compensation
2.403
Board of Review, Confidentiality of Income and Expense Records
2.405
Board of Review, How constituted
2.401
Board of Review, Time and place of meeting
2.404
Building and Building Regulations, Administration and Enforcement, Inspections and Orders, Certificate of occupancy
14.320
Building and Building Regulations, Administration and Enforcement, Inspections and Orders, Inspections
14.319
Building and Building Regulations, Administration and Enforcement, Inspector, Access to premises
14.303
Building and Building Regulations, Administration and Enforcement, Inspector, Appointment
14.300
Building and Building Regulations, Administration and Enforcement, Inspector, Change
14.305
Building and Building Regulations, Administration and Enforcement, Inspector, Compensation
14.301
Building and Building Regulations, Administration and Enforcement, Inspector, Duties
14.302
Building and Building Regulations, Administration and Enforcement, Inspector, Open excavations prohibited
14.306
Building and Building Regulations, Administration and Enforcement, Inspector, Records
14.304
Building and Building Regulations, Administration and Enforcement, Permits and Fees, Application for permits
14.309
Building and Building Regulations, Administration and Enforcement, Permits and Fees, Conditions for the issuance of a permit
14.312
Village of Weston Municipal Code Index
Page 3
Building and Building Regulations, Administration and Enforcement, Permits and Fees, Furnishing of grade level
14.315
Building and Building Regulations, Administration and Enforcement, Permits and Fees, Inspector may revoke permit
14.314
Building and Building Regulations, Administration and Enforcement, Permits and Fees, License and fee
14.307
Building and Building Regulations, Administration and Enforcement, Permits and Fees, Moving permits
14.318
Building and Building Regulations, Administration and Enforcement, Permits and Fees, Plumbing; roof trusses; electrical work
14.316
Building and Building Regulations, Administration and Enforcement, Permits and Fees, Required
14.308
Building and Building Regulations, Administration and Enforcement, Permits and Fees, Street dedication required
14.311
Building and Building Regulations, Administration and Enforcement, Permits and Fees, Survey
14.313
Building and Building Regulations, Administration and Enforcement, Permits and Fees, Time limitations
14.317
Building and Building Regulations, Administration and Enforcement, Permits and Fees, Waiver of certain requirements
14.310
Building and Building Regulations, Building and Construction Codes, Building code and regulations
14.200
Building and Building Regulations, Commercial Electric Codes and Regulations, Applications
14.204
Building and Building Regulations, Commercial Electric Codes and Regulations, Certificate of License
14.208
Building and Building Regulations, Commercial Electric Codes and Regulations, Certified Master Electrician
14.205
Building and Building Regulations, Commercial Electric Codes and Regulations, Class of License
14.203
Building and Building Regulations, Commercial Electric Codes and Regulations, Commercial Electrical Code and Regulations
14.201
Building and Building Regulations, Commercial Electric Codes and Regulations, Fees
14.212
Building and Building Regulations, Commercial Electric Codes and Regulations, License Fees
14.209
Building and Building Regulations, Commercial Electric Codes and Regulations, License Renewal
14.207
Building and Building Regulations, Commercial Electric Codes and Regulations, Licenses
14.202
Building and Building Regulations, Commercial Electric Codes and Regulations, New Applications
14.206
Building and Building Regulations, Commercial Electric Codes and Regulations, Penalties
14.213
Building and Building Regulations, Commercial Electric Codes and Regulations, Permits Required
14.211
Building and Building Regulations, Commercial Electric Codes and Regulations, Revocation and Suspension
14.210
Building and Building Regulations, Demolition/Razing of Buildings, Demolition/razing regulations; purpose
14.400
Building and Building Regulations, Demolition/Razing of Buildings, Demoltion/razing of building, permit fee
14.403
Village of Weston Municipal Code Index
Page 4
Building and Building Regulations, Demolition/Razing of Buildings, Liability of independent contractors
14.402
Building and Building Regulations, Demolition/Razing of Buildings, Permit required
14.401
Building and Building Regulations, Demolition/Razing of Buildings, Public safety
14.404
Building and Building Regulations, Demolition/Razing of Buildings, Removal of rubble, rubbish and other requirements
14.405
Building and Building Regulations, House and Building Numbering, Intent
14.500
Building and Building Regulations, House and Building Numbering, Numbers required
14.502
Building and Building Regulations, House and Building Numbering, Penalties
14.503
Building and Building Regulations, House and Building Numbering, Specifications
14.501
Building and Building Regulations, In General, No liabilty
14.100
Businesses in General, Licenses and fees
18.100
Businesses in General, Penalties
18.102
Businesses in General, Revocation of license
18.101
C
Catchlines of sections
1.103
Charter Ordinance
100
Civil Emergencies, County ordinance adopted
22.101
Civil Emergencies, County/municipal emergency legislation
22.100
Civil Emergencies, Emergency service coordinator
22.102
Clerk/treasurer to file documents incorporated by reference
1.115
Code does not affect prior offenses, penalties, rights
1.107
Committee of the Whole
2.215
Committee, Revolving Loan Fund
2.216
Committees, Special
2.217
Committees, Standing committees
2.214
Committees, Standing committees, Community Life & Public Safety
2.214(4)
Committees, Standing committees, Finance
2.214(1)
Committees, Standing committees, Parks & Recreation
2.214(5)
Committees, Standing committees, Personnel
2.214(2)
Committees, Standing committees, Property and Infrastructure
2.214(3)
Committees, Standing committess, Community Development Authority
2.214(6)
Costs to be included in forfeiture
1.113
Court, Schofield and Weston Joint Municipal Court
26.100
D
Dangerous Animals, Appeal Process for Dangerous and Prohibited Dangerous Animal
10.205
Dangerous Animals, Dangerous Animals Prohibited
10.200
Dangerous Animals, Definitions
10.201
Dangerous Animals, Destruction
10.208
Dangerous Animals, Duration of Dangerous Animal Status
10.209
Dangerous Animals, Exemptions
10.211
Dangerous Animals, Impoundment
10.207
Dangerous Animals, Notification
10.206
Dangerous Animals, Penalties for Violations
10.210
Dangerous Animals, Procedure for Declaring a Dangerous Animal
10.202
Dangerous Animals, Procedure for Declaring a Prohibited Dangerous Animal
10.204
Dangerous Animals, Restrictions
10.203
Village of Weston Municipal Code Index
Page 5
Dangerous Animals, Severability
10.212
Definitions and rules of construction
1.101
Direct sales, Appeals
18.125
Direct sales, Definitions
18.121
Direct sales, Exemptions
18.122
Direct sales, Investigation
18.124
Direct sales, Prohibited practices; disclosure requirements
18.126
Direct sales, Records
18.127
Direct sales, Registration and permit proceedure
18.123
Direct sales, Registration required
18.120
Direct sales, Revocation of registration
18.128
Direct sales, Violations and penalties
18.129
E
Elections, Campaign signs removal
30.104
Elections, Election poll hours
30.105
Elections, Election procedures
30.102
Elections, Penalty
30.100
Elections, Statutes adopted
30.101
Elections, Voter registration
30.103
Emergency Alarm Systems, Applicability
18.116
Emergency Alarm Systems, Definitions
18.117
Emergency Alarm Systems, False alarm fees
18.118
Emergency Alarm Systems, Purpose
18.115
Emergency Alarm Systems, Response to emergency services alarms
18.119
F
Fees and charges
2.100
Fire Prevention and Protection, Fire Prevention, Adoption of Wisconsin Administrative Code
34.203
Fire Prevention and Protection, Fire Prevention, Burning, heating and lighting
34.209
Fire Prevention and Protection, Fire Prevention, Combustible Materials
34.210
Fire Prevention and Protection, Fire Prevention, Definitions
34.206
Fire Prevention and Protection, Fire Prevention, Enforcement
34.212
Fire Prevention and Protection, Fire Prevention, Exceptions
34.202
Fire Prevention and Protection, Fire Prevention, Fire Chief
34.207
Fire Prevention and Protection, Fire Prevention, Fire hazards
34.211
Fire Prevention and Protection, Fire Prevention, General fire safety requirements
34.214
Fire Prevention and Protection, Fire Prevention, Inspection fees designated
34.204
Fire Prevention and Protection, Fire Prevention, Permits
34.208
Fire Prevention and Protection, Fire Prevention, Permits required
34.205
Fire Prevention and Protection, Fire Prevention, Places of assembly
34.213
Fire Prevention and Protection, Fire Prevention, Possession of ignition devices prohibited
34.215
Fire Prevention and Protection, Fire Prevention, Purpose
34.200
Fire Prevention and Protection, Fire Prevention, Scope
34.201
G
General penalty
1.111
H
Village of Weston Municipal Code Index
Page 6
Health and Sanitation, Exposure prohibited
38.100
Health and Sanitation, Rat control and elimination
38.102
Health and Sanitation, Solid waste disposal
38.103
Health and Sanitation, Vehicles giving off offensive odor, or noise, or spilling loads
38.101
History notes
1.105
Hunting, Definitions
10.300
Hunting, Enforcement and penalties
10.302
Hunting, Permitted activity zones
10.301
J
Jurisdiction over children who are 12 years of age and older
1.112
L
Law Enforcement, Commencement of Action and Form of Citation in Municipal Ordinance Violation Cases, Amended Citation
42.103
Law Enforcement, Commencement of Action and Form of Citation in Municipal Ordinance Violation Cases, Commencement of action
42.101
Law Enforcement, Commencement of Action and Form of Citation in Municipal Ordinance Violation Cases, Form of Citation
42.102
Law Enforcement, Commencement of Action and Form of Citation in Municipal Ordinance Violation Cases, Plea of No Contest Prior to Intial Appearance
42.104
Law Enforcement, Commencement of Action and Form of Citation in Municipal Ordinance Violation Cases, State Statutes Adopted by Reference
42.105
Law Enforcement, In General, Establishement of joint police department
42.100
M
Massage, Compliance with article required
18.137
Massage, Definitions
18.134
Massage, Establishment license
18.138
Massage, Exceptions
18.135
Massage, Granting of license
18.140
Massage, Operation without a license, a public nuisance
18.136
Massage, Regulations of operations and licenses
18.141
Massage, Revocation or suspension of licenses
18.142
Massage, Technician's and manager's license
18.139
Meetings, Adjournments
2.209
Meetings, Attendance; leave of absence
2.212
Meetings, Call to order
2.211
Meetings, Disturbance, how suppressed
2.213
Meetings, Generally
2.206
Meetings, Meetings shall be public
2.210
Meetings, Regular meetings
2.207
Meetings, Special meetings
2.208
Mobile Food Vendors License
18.148
Manufactured and Mobile Home Communities, In General, Adoption of Standards by Reference
46.100
Manufactured and Mobile Home Communities, Applicability of plumbing, electrical and building codes
46.201
Manufactured and Mobile Home Communities, Community plan, water supply, sewage disposal and related facilities
46.205
Village of Weston Municipal Code Index
Page 7
Manufactured and Mobile Home Communities, In General, Alterations, additions and repairs
46.105
Manufactured and Mobile Home Communities, In General, Definitions
46.101
Manufactured and Mobile Home Communities, In General, Fire Extinguisher Required
46.102
Manufactured and Mobile Home Communities, In General, Location outside manufactured and mobile home communities
46.103
Manufactured and Mobile Home Communities, In General, Occupancy
46.104
Manufactured and Mobile Home Communities, License renewal
46.208
Manufactured and Mobile Home Communities, Licensening requirements
46.203
Manufactured and Mobile Home Communities, Management
46.200
Manufactured and Mobile Home Communities, Monthly parking permit fees
46.206
Manufactured and Mobile Home Communities, Penalties for violation
46.209
Manufactured and Mobile Home Communities, Revocation and suspension
46.207
Manufactured and Mobile Home Communities, Screening of communities
46.202
Manufactured and Mobile Home Communities, Zoning of communities
46.204
N
Nuisances, Accumulation of used vehicles
50.105
Nuisances, Chronic nuisance premises
50.104
Nuisances, Loud, disturbing noises prohibited
50.103
Nuisances, Other prohitited nuisances
50.101
Nuisances, Property maintenance
50.102
Nuisances, Things prohibited
50.100
O
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, In General, Disorderly conduct prohibited
54.105
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, In General, Disorderly conduct with a motor vehicle
54.104
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, In General, Drunkenness
54.109
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, In General, Escorts and escort services
54.116
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, In General, Firearms and weapons restricted where prohibited
54.102
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, In General, Indecent exposure
54.110
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, In General, Loitering
54.112
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, In General, Misuse of 911 emergency services
54.111
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, In General, Offenses against property, state statutes adopted
54.100
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, In General, Public parks, closing hours
54.108
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, In General, Reckless use of weapons
54.103
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, In General, Regulation of sexual offenders
54.115
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, In General, Resisting arrest, refusing to assist and officer, impersonating an officer
54.106
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, In General, Restrictions on use of weapons
54.101
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, In General, Signs and bills on public property
54.107
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, In General, Social host
54.114
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, In General, Unauthorized person on school property
54.113
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, Minors, Curfew
54.200
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, Minors, Harboring, aiding, assisting, and abetting minor runaways
54.201
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, Minors, Truancy
54.202
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, Property, Disposal of abandoned property
54.401
Village of Weston Municipal Code Index
Page 8
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, Property, Right of privacy regarding valuation of property for assessment purposes
54.400
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, Prostitution
54.117
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, Tobacco, Smoking and Prohibited Substances, Prohibition concerning children
54.301
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, Tobacco, Smoking and Prohibited Substances, Restriction on sale or gift
54.302
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, Tobacco, Smoking and Prohibited Substances, Smoking prohibited in certain areas
54.300
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, Tobacco, Smoking and Prohibited Substances, Synthetic Cannabinoid Prohibited
54.303
Officers and Employees, Administrator, Appointment and term of office and removal
2.302
Officers and Employees, Administrator, Compensation
2.305
Officers and Employees, Administrator, Cooperation
2.304
Officers and Employees, Administrator, Functions and duties
2.303
Officers and Employees, Administrator, Residency
2.306
Officers and Employees, Appointed officials
2.300
Officers and Employees, Assessor, Appointment
2.314
Officers and Employees, Assessor, Compensation
2.315
Officers and Employees, Attorney, Appointment
2.316
Officers and Employees, Attorney, Compensation
2.317
Officers and Employees, Clerk, Human Resources Director, Appointment
2.307
Officers and Employees, Clerk, Human Resources Director, Compensation
2.309
Officers and Employees, Clerk, Human Resources Director, Duties
2.308
Officers and Employees, Director of Public Works, Appointment
2.318
Officers and Employees, Director of Public Works, Compensation
2.320
Officers and Employees, Director of Public Works, Qualifications/Duties
2.319
Officers and Employees, Filling of vacancies
2.301
Officers and Employees, Finance Director, Treasurer, Appointment
2.310
Officers and Employees, Finance Director, Treasurer, Compensation
2.312
Officers and Employees, Finance Director, Treasurer, Duties
2.311
Officers and Employees, Finance Director, Treasurer, Receipts and earnings
2.313
Ordinances not repealed
1.109
P
Parks and Recreation, Public Parks, closing hours
58.100
Parks and Recreation, Public Parks, Damage (Vandalism) to Village Parkland and Recreational Property
58.103
Parks and Recreation, Public Parks, Prohibiting Dogs in Certain Public Parks
58.102
Parks and Recreation, Public Parks, Sportsmanship, Village parks, fields, diamonds or rinks
58.101
Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers, Pawnbrokers
18.143
Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers, Provisions of state law adopted by reference
18.144
Planning Commission, Composition
62.101
Planning Commission, Employment of experts and staff and payment of expenses
62.103
Planning Commission, Functions
62.104
Planning Commission, Statutes adopted
62.100
Planning Commission, Terms of office and appointment
62.102
Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances
1.106
Village of Weston Municipal Code Index
Page 9
Public Records, Access Procedures
2.504
Public Records, Definitions
2.500
Public Records, Destruction of Records
2.506
Public Records, Duty to Maintain Records
2.501
Public Records, Legal Custodian(s)
2.502
Public Records, Limitations of Right to Access
2.505
Public Records, Preservation Through Microfilm
2.507
Public Records, Public Access to Records
2.503
Public Records, Records Retention
2.508
R
References and editor's notes
1.104
Regulation of Special Events on Public Property, Applications and permit procedure
67.101
Regulation of Special Events on Public Property, Definitions
67.100
Regulation of Special Events on Public Property, No Discrimination
67.103
Regulation of Special Events on Public Property, Obstruction of Ordinance
67.104
Regulation of Special Events on Public Property, Permit Regulations
67.102
Repeal of ordinances
1.108
Repeal of repealed acts
1.110
S
Severability of provisions
1.117
Shows, circuses, and carnavals, License
18.145
Shows, circuses, and carnavals, Licensing of cabarets and amusement devices
18.147
Shows, circuses, and carnavals, Reserved
18.146
Slaughterhouses, Stockyards, Junkyards, Automobile Graveyards, Definitions.
18.130
Slaughterhouses, Stockyards, Junkyards, Automobile Graveyards, Exception to article provisions
18.133
Slaughterhouses, Stockyards, Junkyards, Automobile Graveyards, Permit required; fee
18.131
Slaughterhouses, Stockyards, Junkyards, Automobile Graveyards, Qualification
18.132
Solid Waste, Care of Separated Recyclable Materials
66.109
Solid Waste, Definitions
66.105
Solid Waste, Disposal of Building Wastes
66.118
Solid Waste, Dumping Garbage, Refuse and Waste
66.117
Solid Waste, Enforcement
66.122
Solid Waste, Exterior Storage Standards for Multiple-Family Dwellings and Non-Residential Facilities and Properties
66.115
Solid Waste, Interpretation
66.102
Solid Waste, Management of Lead Acid, Nickel Cadmium, Lithium-ion Batteries, Major Appliances, Waste Oil, Used Oil Filters, Oil Absorbent Materials with Visible Free-Flowing Oil, Electronics and Yard Waste
66.110
Solid Waste, Prohitions on Disposal of Recyclable Materials Separated for Recycling
66.116
Solid Waste, Purpose
66.101
Solid Waste, Residential Composting
66.121
Solid Waste, Responsibilities of Occupants of Multiple-Family Dwellings and Non-Residential Facilities and Properties
66.114
Solid Waste, Responsibilities of Owners or Designated Agents of Multiple-Family Dwellings
66.112
Solid Waste, Responsibilities of Owners or Designated Agents of Non-Residential Facilities and Properties
66.113
Village of Weston Municipal Code Index
Page 10
Solid Waste, Responsibilities of Residential Unit Owners and Occupants
66.111
Solid Waste, Right to Reject Materials
66.119
Solid Waste, Scavengers Proibited
66.120
Solid Waste, Separation of Recyclable Materials
66.107
Solid Waste, Separation Requirements Exempted
66.108
Solid Waste, Severability
66.103
Solid Waste, StatutoryAuthority, Application and Admission
66.104
Solid Waste, Storage of Solid Waste
66.106
Solid Waste, Title
66.100
Street Access Control, Access Control Standards for Driveways, Driveway Access Control
71.3.01
Street Access Control, Access Design Standards and Specifications for Driveways
71.5.01
Street Access Control, Access Design Standards and Specifications for Streets
71.6.01
Street Access Control, Administration, Change in use
71.2.07
Street Access Control, Administration, Conformance of subdivision
71.2.10
Street Access Control, Administration, Construction of access
71.2.04
Street Access Control, Administration, Fees
71.2.02
Street Access Control, Administration, Final inspection
71.2.05
Street Access Control, Administration, Illegal encroachment
71.2.09
Street Access Control, Administration, Location of utilities
71.2.06
Street Access Control, Administration, Obtaining a permit
71.2.01
Street Access Control, Administration, Variance
71.2.03
Street Access Control, Administration,Introduction, Existing access
71.2.08
Street Access Control, Introduction, Authority
71.1.02
Street Access Control, Introduction, Definitions
71.1.04
Street Access Control, Introduction, Implementation
71.1.03
Street Access Control, Introduction, Title
71.1.01
Street Access Control, Spacing Standards for Streets, Street intersection Spacing
71.4.01
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, Excavations, Barricades
70.123
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, Excavations, Bond proceeds
70.122
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, Excavations, Compaction control tests
70.125
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, Excavations, Form of application
70.116
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, Excavations, No opening in frozen ground
70.117
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, Excavations, Notification of excavation
70.118
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, Excavations, Permanent pavement repair costs
70.126
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, Excavations, Permits required
70.115
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, Excavations, Report of utility pipes required
70.120
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, Excavations, Surety bond required
70.121
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, Excavations, Traffic control
70.119
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, Excavations, Trench backfilling
70.124
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, General, Assignment of Road Names
70.107
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, General, Building Material
70.105
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, General, Cleaning of Sidewalks
70.112
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, General, Compulsory repair of sidewalks due to modifications or negligence of abutting property
70.111
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, General, Depositing Snow Removal
70.104
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, General, Driveways
70.113
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, General, Licenses and Fees
70.101
Village of Weston Municipal Code Index
Page 11
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, General, Providing roadways, subdividing acre lots
70.106
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, General, Regulation of rural mailboxes
70.114
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, General, Removal of Obstructions
70.103
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, General, Responsibility for the expense and costs or sidewalk construction, repair, or replacement
70.110
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, General, Rubbish
70.102
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, General, Street and sidewalk grades
70.108
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, General, Streets and Alleys
70.100
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Places, General, Width of highways or streets
70.109
Supplementation of Code
1.114
T
Taxation and Special Assessments, In General, Fees and Charges
78.100
Taxation and Special Assessments, Room Tax, Audit
78.110
Taxation and Special Assessments, Room Tax, Definitions
78.101
Taxation and Special Assessments, Room Tax, Failure to file
78.111
Taxation and Special Assessments, Room Tax, Imposition of tax
78.105
Taxation and Special Assessments, Room Tax, Interest
78.104
Taxation and Special Assessments, Room Tax, Penalty assessment
78.103
Taxation and Special Assessments, Room Tax, Penalty, forfeiture
78.102
Taxation and Special Assessments, Room Tax, Permit
78.107
Taxation and Special Assessments, Room Tax, Records and taxation
78.112
Taxation and Special Assessments, Room Tax, Revocation of permit
78.108
Taxation and Special Assessments, Room Tax, Sale of business
78.109
Taxation and Special Assessments, Room Tax, Tax moneys
78.106
Taxation and Special Assessments, Special Assessments, Access fee for sanitary sewer and water main improvements
78.124
Taxation and Special Assessments, Special Assessments, Alternative procedure/sewer and water assessments
78.118
Taxation and Special Assessments, Special Assessments, Applying the adjusted front footage formula
78.116
Taxation and Special Assessments, Special Assessments, Assessment formula
78.115
Taxation and Special Assessments, Special Assessments, Assessment paid by installments
78.126
Taxation and Special Assessments, Special Assessments, Assessment prior to annexation
78.127
Taxation and Special Assessments, Special Assessments, Determination of assessable front footage
78.117
Taxation and Special Assessments, Special Assessments, Determination of assessment cost for new streets and curb and gutter construction
78.119
Taxation and Special Assessments, Special Assessments, Determination of assessment cost for sanitary sewer, lift station, water main construction and booster stations
78.123
Taxation and Special Assessments, Special Assessments, Determination of assessment cost for street and curb and gutter reconstruction
78.120
Taxation and Special Assessments, Special Assessments, Drive approach construction
78.121
Taxation and Special Assessments, Special Assessments, Purpose
78.113
Taxation and Special Assessments, Special Assessments, Service laterals required
78.125
Taxation and Special Assessments, Special Assessments, Sidewalks, new construction and reconstruction
78.122
Taxation and Special Assessments, Special Assessments, Special assessment options
78.114
Village of Weston Municipal Code Index
Page 12
Title; effective date; citation
1.100
Titles, chapters, sections
1.102
Traffic and Vehicles, Bicycles, Buying or selling bicycles
82.305
Traffic and Vehicles, Bicycles, Display of registration plate
82.303
Traffic and Vehicles, Bicycles, Penalty
82.300
Traffic and Vehicles, Bicycles, Registration required
82.301
Traffic and Vehicles, Bicycles, Registration; fee, inspection
82.302
Traffic and Vehicles, Bicycles, Transfer and cancellation of registration
82.304
Traffic and Vehicles, In General, Accident reports
82.108
Traffic and Vehicles, In General, Enforcement
82.104
Traffic and Vehicles, In General, Offical traffic signs and signals
82.106
Traffic and Vehicles, In General, Other laws adopted
82.101
Traffic and Vehicles, In General, Parking regulations
82.107
Traffic and Vehicles, In General, Penalty
82.102
Traffic and Vehicles, In General, Provisions of state law adopted by reference
82.100
Traffic and Vehicles, In General, Railroad grade crossing stops
82.110
Traffic and Vehicles, In General, Regulation of non-dealership motor vehicle sales
82.111
Traffic and Vehicles, In General, Traffic and parking regulations on school grounds
82.109
Traffic and Vehicles, In General, Traffic devices ratified
82.105
Traffic and Vehicles, In General, Traffic violation and registration program
82.103
Traffic and Vehicles, In General, Truck idling near a school or residence
82.112
Traffic and Vehicles, Minibikes and Self-Propelled Devices, Definitions
82.400
Traffic and Vehicles, Minibikes and Self-Propelled Devices, Liability of parent or guardian
82.403
Traffic and Vehicles, Minibikes and Self-Propelled Devices, Operation
82.402
Traffic and Vehicles, Minibikes and Self-Propelled Devices, Penalty
82.401
Traffic and Vehicles, Snowmobiles, Provisions of state law relating to snowmobiles adopted by reference
82.200
Traffic and Vehicles, Snowmobiles, Snowmobile routes
82.201
Traffic and Vehicles, Speed Limits, Speed limits
82.500
U
Utilities, In General, Penalty
86.100
Utilities, In General, Protection of wells, septic tanks, similar structures
86.101
Utilities, Refuse and Recycling Utility, Administrative Review and Appeals
86.606
Utilities, Refuse and Recycling Utility, Authority of Refuse Utility
86.602
Utilities, Refuse and Recycling Utility, Collection of Refuse Utility Fee
86.604
Utilities, Refuse and Recycling Utility, Declaration of Purpose
86.600
Utilities, Refuse and Recycling Utility, Dedication of Refuse Utility Fee
86.604
Utilities, Refuse and Recycling Utility, Defintions within Ordinance
86.601
Utilities, Refuse and Recycling Utility, Enforcement of Utility Collection Fee
86.605
Utilities, Refuse and Recycling Utility, Establishment of Refuse Utility Fee
86.603
Utilities, Refuse and Recycling Utility, Notice of Decision for Review and Appeals of Utility Fee
86.607
Utilities, Refuse and Recycling Utility, Obstruction
86.609
Utilities, Refuse and Recycling Utility, Severability
86.608
Utilities, Sewerage Utility, Definitions
86.151
Utilities, Sewerage Utility, Hookup charges
86.152
Utilities, Sewerage Utility, Permanently installed in-ground sprinkler systems
86.155
Village of Weston Municipal Code Index
Page 13
Utilities, Sewerage Utility, Sewer service charges
86.153
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Construction Site Erosion, Appeals
86.414
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Construction Site Erosion, Applicabilty and Jurisdiction
86.404
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Construction Site Erosion, Authority
86.401
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Construction Site Erosion, Creation
86.400
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Construction Site Erosion, Defintions
86.405
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Construction Site Erosion, Effective Date
86.416
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Construction Site Erosion, Enforcement
86.413
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Construction Site Erosion, Erosion Sediment Control Plan, Statement and Amendment
86.410
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Construction Site Erosion, Fee Schedule
86.411
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Construction Site Erosion, Findings of Fact
86.402
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Construction Site Erosion, Inspection
86.412
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Construction Site Erosion, Performance Standards for Construction Sites of One Acre or More
86.408
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Construction Site Erosion, Performance Standards for Construction Sites Under an Acre
86.407
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Construction Site Erosion, Permitting Requirments, Procedures and Fees
86.409
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Construction Site Erosion, Purpose and Intent
86.403
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Construction Site Erosion, Severability
86.415
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Construction Site Erosion, Technical Standards
86.406
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Appeal of Notice of Violation
86.514
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Applicability
86.502
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Compensatory Action
86.518
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Cost of Abatement of the Violation
86.516
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Definitions
86.501
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Discharge Prohibitions
86.506
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Effective Date
86.522
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Enforcement
86.513
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Enforcement Measures after Appeal
86.515
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges
86.508
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Injunctive Relief
86.517
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Monitoring of Discharges
86.509
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Notification of Spills
86.512
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Prosecution
86.520
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Purpose and Intent
86.500
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Remedies Not Exclusive
86.521
Village of Weston Municipal Code Index
Page 14
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Requirement to Prevent, Control and Reduce Stormwater Pollutants by the use of Best Management Practices
86.510
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Responsibility for Administration
86.503
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Severability
86.504
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Suspension of MS4 Access
86.507
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Ultimate Responsibility
86.505
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance
86.519
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, Watercourse Protection
86.511
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Post-Construction Stormwater Management, Appeals
86.313
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Post-Construction Stormwater Management, Applicabilty and Jurisdiction
86.303
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Post-Construction Stormwater Management, Creation
86.300
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Post-Construction Stormwater Management, Definitions
86.304
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Post-Construction Stormwater Management, Effective Date
86.315
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Post-Construction Stormwater Management, Enforcement
86.312
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Post-Construction Stormwater Management, Fee Schedule
86.311
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Post-Construction Stormwater Management, Financial Guarantee
86.310
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Post-Construction Stormwater Management, Findings of Fact
86.301
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Post-Construction Stormwater Management, Maintenance Agreement
86.309
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Post-Construction Stormwater Management, Performance Standards
86.306
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Post-Construction Stormwater Management, Permitting Requirements, Proceedures and Fees
86.307
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Post-Construction Stormwater Management, Purpose and Intent
86.302
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Post-Construction Stormwater Management, Severability
86.314
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Post-Construction Stormwater Management, Stormwater Management Plan (SWMP)
86.308
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Post-Construction Stormwater Management, Technical Standards
86.305
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Stormwater Utility, Alternative Method to Collect Stormwater Charges
86.204
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Stormwater Utility, Authority
86.201
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Stormwater Utility, Budget Excess Revenues
86.205
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Stormwater Utility, Creation
86.200
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Stormwater Utility, Definitions
86.202
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Stormwater Utility, Penalty
86.206
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Stormwater Utility, Rates and Charges
86.203
Utilities, Stormwater Utility, Stormwater Utility, Reserved
86.207-86.210
Village of Weston Municipal Code Index
Page 15
Utilities, Water Utility, Connection Fees and Charges, Building and construction water service
86.145
Utilities, Water Utility, Connection Fees and Charges, Consumer's permises with several buildings
86.143
Utilities, Water Utility, Connection Fees and Charges, Definitions
86.139
Utilities, Water Utility, Connection Fees and Charges, Failure to connect
86.141
Utilities, Water Utility, Connection Fees and Charges, Mandatory hookup
86.140
Utilities, Water Utility, Connection Fees and Charges, Private fire protection service
86.146
Utilities, Water Utility, Connection Fees and Charges, Public service
86.144
Utilities, Water Utility, Connection Fees and Charges, Water utilty rates
86.142
Utilities, Water Utility, In General, Adoption of state pluming code
86.102
Utilities, Water Utility, In General, Charges for water used to prevent freezing
86.110
Utilities, Water Utility, In General, Cross connections
86.117
Utilities, Water Utility, In General, Crubs stops
86.119
Utilities, Water Utility, In General, Deposit and guarantee rules
86.120
Utilities, Water Utility, In General, Discontinuance of service for violation of article
86.104
Utilities, Water Utility, In General, Electrical grounding
86.115
Utilities, Water Utility, In General, Failure to repair leaky or broken pipes
86.107
Utilities, Water Utility, In General, Immediate discontinuance of service
86.118
Utilities, Water Utility, In General, Management
86.106
Utilities, Water Utility, In General, Name
86.105
Utilities, Water Utility, In General, Outside hydrants
86.112
Utilities, Water Utility, In General, Refreezing and rethawing
86.109
Utilities, Water Utility, In General, Service piping
86.114
Utilities, Water Utility, In General, Stop boxes
86.111
Utilities, Water Utility, In General, Supplementry nature of article
86.103
Utilities, Water Utility, In General, Thawing frozen services
86.108
Utilities, Water Utility, In General, Turning on water
86.113
Utilities, Water Utility, In General, Water emergency
86.116
Utilities, Water Utility, Meters, Complaint meter tests
86.138
Utilities, Water Utility, Meters, Installation
86.136
Utilities, Water Utility, Meters, Repairs
86.137
Utilities, Water Utility, Operating Rules, Applicability of state rules
86.121
Utilities, Water Utility, Operating Rules, Failure of supply
86.125
Utilities, Water Utility, Operating Rules, Taking water from a consumer's premises
86.124
Utilities, Water Utility, Operating Rules, Tampering with system prohibited
86.122
Utilities, Water Utility, Operating Rules, Vacation of premises
86.126
Utilities, Water Utility, Operating Rules, Water for construction use
86.123
Utilities, Water Utility, Service Rules, Corrections
86.133
Utilities, Water Utility, Service Rules, Handling water mains and service pipes in sewer or other trenches
86.127
Utilities, Water Utility, Service Rules, Laying service
86.134
Utilities, Water Utility, Service Rules, One structure for each connections
86.132
Utilities, Water Utility, Service Rules, Permit
86.130
Utilities, Water Utility, Service Rules, Repair to services
86.135
Utilities, Water Utility, Service Rules, Repairs to mains
86.128
Utilities, Water Utility, Service Rules, Service connections
86.131
Village of Weston Municipal Code Index
Page 16
Utilities, Water Utility, Service Rules, Tapping mains
86.129
Utilities, Wells, Definitions
86.147
Utilities, Wells, Penalties
86.148
Utilities, Wells, Well abandonment
86.150
Utilities, Wells, Well operation permit
86.149
V
Vegetation, Control of weeds, grasses, brush
90.101
Vegetation, Penalties
90.100
Vegetation, Protection of elm trees
90.102
Vegetation, Protection of trees and shrubs
90.103
Video and Cable Television Service Providers, Definitions
4.200
Video and Cable Television Service Providers, General provisions
4.100
Video and Cable Television Service Providers, PEG Channel Requirements
4.400
Video and Cable Television Service Providers, Police Powers, Design and Construction Standards and Rights-of-Ways
4.500
Video and Cable Television Service Providers, Video Service Provider Fee and PEG Channel Monetary Support
4.300
Village Board, Acquisition and disposal of property
2.203
Village Board, Construction of powers
2.205
Village Board, How constituted
2.200
Village Board, Powers
2.202
Village Board, President
2.201
Village Board, Village finances
2.204
W
Weights and Measures
18.149
Z
Zoning Code (See Zoning Code Article 94 Index)