Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Rules of Construction; Documents Incorporated by Reference
[Adopted as §§ 25.01 and 25.03 of the 1998 Code]
§ 1-1. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code, the following rules shall be observed unless
such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
ordinance:
§ 1-2. Clerk to file documents incorporated by reference. [Amended
11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
Whenever in this Code any standard, code, rule, regulation or other written
or printed matter is adopted by reference, it shall be deemed incorporated
in this Code as if fully set forth herein and the Clerk or his designee
shall file, deposit and keep in his office a copy of the code, standard, rule,
regulation or other written or printed matter as adopted. Materials so filed,
deposited and kept shall be public records open for examination with proper
care by any person during the Clerk's office hours, subject to such orders or
regulations which the Clerk may prescribe for their preservation.
A. Wisconsin Statutes. All references to "Wisconsin Statutes" or "Wis.
Stats." shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes as of the adoption of this
Code, as amended or renumbered from time to time. [Amended
1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
B. Gender, singular and plural. Every word in this Code and in any
ordinance imparting the masculine gender may extend and be applied
to females as well as males, and every word imparting the singular
number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as
well as to one person or thing; provided these rules of construction shall
not be applied to any provision which contains any express language
excluding such construction or when the subject matter or context of
such provision may be repugnant thereto.
C. Person. The word "person" extends and applies to natural persons,
firms, corporations, associations, partnerships, limited-liability
companies or other bodies politic and to all entities capable of being
sued, unless plainly inapplicable.
D. Acts of agents. When a provision requires an act to be done which may
by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such
requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an
authorized agent.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3

ARTICLE II
Penalties
[Adopted as § 25.04 of the 1998 Code]
§ 1-3. General penalty. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489;
11-22-2010 by Ord. No. 562; 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 618]
Unless another penalty is specifically provided in a provision of this Code
or in the Schedule of Cash Deposits adopted by the Village, any person who
shall violate any of the provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction of such
violation, be subject to a penalty, which shall be as follows:
A. First offense: penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $5 nor more
than $500, together with all applicable fees, surcharges, costs and
restitution. In default of payment thereof, the person shall be subject to
Subsection C.
B. Second offense: penalty. Any person found guilty of violating any
ordinance or part of an ordinance of this Code who shall previously
have been convicted of a violation of the same ordinance within one
year shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $10 nor more
than $500 for each such offense, together with all applicable fees,
surcharges, costs and restitution. In default of payment thereof, the
person shall be subject to Subsection C.
C. Default of payment. In default of payment of any forfeiture, fee,
surcharge, cost or restitution, the Court may order any one of, or a
combination of, the remedies set forth in Wis. Stats. § 800.095,
including but not limited to:
(1) Suspension of the defendant's operating privileges until the
defendant pays the judgment, but not exceeding two years, if the
judgment is related to the person's operation of a motor vehicle
(including any nonmoving traffic offense) or is authorized under
Wis. Stats. Ch. 938 (the Juvenile Justice Code), as set forth in Wis.
Stats. § 800.095(1)(a). This section shall not apply to restitution
orders or to cases where service of the summons and complaint or
citation is made by mail.
(2) Imprisonment in the County Jail until such forfeiture, fees,
surcharge and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days for any
one judgment. The person shall receive a credit for each day of
imprisonment as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 800.095(1)(b). This
section shall not apply to restitution orders, or to cases where
service of the summons and complaint or citation is made by mail.
(3) Assignment to the Municipal Court of not more than 25% of the
person's commissions, earnings, salaries, wages, pension benefits
unless otherwise exempt, benefits under Wis. Stats. Ch. 102
(Worker's Compensation); and other money due or to be due to the
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:5
§ 1-4. Continued violations.
Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute
a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the Village from
maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any
provision of this Code.
§ 1-5. (Reserved)1
§ 1-6. Juvenile penalties. [Added 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
person, including lottery prizes, for payment of the unpaid
forfeiture, costs, surcharge, fees or restitution, as set forth in Wis.
Stats. § 800.095(1)(c)
(4) An order that the person perform community service work for a
public agency or nonprofit charitable organization approved by the
court and agreed to by the agency or organization; however, if such
community service work is ordered in lieu of restitution, the person
to whom restitution is owed must agree. Credit shall be given as set
forth in Wis. Stats. § 800.095(1)(d).
(5) The Court may employ a collection company to collect the
judgment under Wis. Stats. §§ 800.095(5) and 755.21.
(6) The Court or collection company may obtain payment through a
setoff against the person's tax refund under Wis. Stats.
§§ 800.095(5) and 71.935.
(7) The Court may authorize payment in installment payments, or may
modify, suspend, or permanently stay the monetary judgment, or
order that the judgment be satisfied by community service
pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 800.095(4).
(8) In addition to the procedures under this section, the Village may
enforce the judgment in the same manner as for a judgment in an
ordinary civil action.
(9) In addition to the procedures under this section, the Court may
order the transfer of any of the person's money or property that the
Village is holding and that is unclaimed by the defendant for more
than one year to pay any forfeitures, fees, costs or surcharges that
the defendant failed to pay to the Village.
A. Court authority to impose alternative juvenile dispositions and
sanctions. For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance, the
court is authorized to impose any of the dispositions listed in Wis. Stats.
§§ 938.342, 938.343 and 938.344, in accordance with the provisions of
those statutes.
1. Editor's Note: Former § 1-5, Execution against defendant’s property, was repealed
11-22-2010 by Ord. No. 562.
§ 1-3 WATERFORD CODE § 1-6
1:6
§ 1-7. Restitution. [Added 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; amended
11-22-2010 by Ord. No. 562]
The Court may order the defendant to pay restitution pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 800.093.
§ 1-8. Citations. [Added 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
B. For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance who violates a
condition of a dispositional order of the court under Wis. Stats.
§ 938.342, 938.343 or 938.344, the Municipal Court is authorized to
impose any of the sanctions listed in Wis. Stats. § 938.355(6)(d), in
accordance with the provisions of those statutes.
C. This section is enacted under the authority of Wis. Stats. § 938.17(2).
A. Statutory authority. Pursuant to the authority granted by Wis. Stats.
§ 800.02, the use of a citation to be issued for violations of ordinances,
including those for which a statutory counterpart exists, is hereby
authorized.
B. Officials authorized to issue citation. Citations authorized in Subsection
A above may be issued by law enforcement officers of the Village.
Except as set forth in Chapter 142, where Village officials, with respect
to sections of the Code which are directly related to the official's area of
responsibility, have cause for the issuance of a citation, those officials
shall contact the Police Department, and the Police Department shall
record a complaint and issue a citation upon said complaint. [Amended
9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 621]
C. Form of citation.
(1) The form of the citation to be issued by the law enforcement officer
shall be as provided in Wis. Stats. § 800.02.
(2) In traffic regulation matters, the State of Wisconsin Uniform Traffic
Citation shall be used in lieu of the above, as set forth in Wis. Stats.
§ 800.02(2)(b).
D. Service. Unless otherwise provided by these ordinances or by other law,
service of a citation may be by personal delivery, by leaving a copy of
the citation at the person's place of residence, or by mailing a copy by
first class mail to the person's last known address.
E. Schedule of cash deposits. [Amended 11-22-2010 by Ord. No. 562]
(1) The schedule of cash deposits for the various ordinances for which
a citation may be issued are as established on the deposit schedule
approved by the Municipal Judge and adopted by the Village Board,
a copy of which is on file with the Clerk. In addition to the deposit
amount listed, the deposit must include court costs and all
surcharges, assessments and costs imposed by Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:7
§ 1-9. Receipt of cash deposits. [Added 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489;
amended 11-22-2010 by Ord. No. 562]
Deposits shall be made as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 800.37, and the Clerk of
the Municipal Court of the Village of Waterford and his or her authorized
representatives shall be authorized to receive cash deposits. The person
receiving such cash deposit shall give a receipt.
§ 1-10. Procedures. [Added 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; amended
11-22-2010 by Ord. No. 562]
The Municipal Court Procedures set forth in Wis. Stats. Ch. 800 are adopted
and incorporated herein by reference. See also § 50-12 of this Municipal
Code.
§ 1-11. Remedies not exclusive. [Added 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
The schedule of cash deposits to be used for state traffic law
violations shall be as set forth in § 204-28.
(2) In the event that a deposit amount is not found in the Village
schedule adopted in Subsection E(1), a deposit in the amount set
forth in the Revised Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule and
Alcohol Beverages, Harassment, Safety, Tobacco, U.W. Rule, and
Drug Paraphernalia and Rental Unit Energy Efficiency Violations
Deposit Schedule and Uniform Misdemeanor Bail Schedule and
Trespass to Land Deposit Schedule, adopted by the Wisconsin
Judicial Conference, as may be amended from time to time, in effect
on the date of the violation, including any variations or increases
for subsequent offenses, may be used to establish the cash deposit
allowed.
(3) If the violation is not listed on either of the above schedules, the
cash deposit shall be the maximum allowable forfeiture set forth for
the violation as listed in the specific ordinance or, if no specific
amount is set forth, 50% of the maximum applicable penalty set
forth in § 1-3 of this Municipal Code, to which shall be added all of
the required surcharges, fees, assessments and costs listed above.
See also the penalty sections present in each chapter of this Code.
If the violation is listed in the Village schedule and it is noted that
no deposit is allowed and an appearance is required, the Municipal
Judge shall determine the cash deposit amount.
A. Adoption of this article does not preclude the Village Board from
adopting any other ordinance providing for the enforcement of any
other law or ordinance relating to the same or other matters.
B. The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude the Village or
any authorized officer from proceeding under any other ordinance or
law or by any other enforcement method to enforce any ordinance,
regulation or order.
§ 1-8 WATERFORD CODE § 1-11
1:8
ARTICLE III
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
§ 1-12. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0103, the various chapters and sections of
the 1998 Municipal Code of the Village of Waterford, Wisconsin, and
subsequent ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by
the Village Board of the Village of Waterford, as revised, codified and
consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp.,
and consisting of Chapters 1 through 260, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Village of Waterford," hereinafter
referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-13. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1998 Municipal Code of
the Village of Waterford and all other general and permanent ordinances
enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are
hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or continued in force.
§ 1-14. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of the Code and ordinances in force immediately prior to the
enactment of the Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of
such ordinances and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such
provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinances.
§ 1-15. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, was filed in the office of the Village
Clerk and has remained there for use and examination by the public for at
least two weeks, in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0103, and until final
action is taken on this ordinance, and, if this ordinance shall be adopted,
such copy shall be certified to by the Village Clerk, and such certified copy
shall remain on file in the office of said Village Clerk to be made available
to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is
in effect.
§ 1-16. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Village Board
to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the "Code of the Village of Waterford" shall be
understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments
or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:9
and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said
Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-17. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Village of Waterford, pursuant to law, shall cause to
be published, in the manner required by law, a copy of this Adoption
Ordinance. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office
of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times during regular office
hours. The enactment and publication of this ordinance, coupled with the
availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be
deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-18. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk, or someone authorized and directed
by the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing
the Code required to be filed in the Clerk's office for use by the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-19. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk or an authorized agent of the Clerk upon the payment of a fee to
be set by the Village Board. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures for
the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-20. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village of
Waterford to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not
more than $500, in the discretion of the judge imposing the same.
§ 1-21. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-16 WATERFORD CODE § 1-22
1:10
§ 1-22. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-23. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adoption Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-24. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-23 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to November 28, 2005.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the Village's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
§ 1-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-24
1:11
§ 1-25. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
J. The annexation or dedication of property or approval of preliminary or
final subdivision plats.
K. Ordinances providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or
special assessments therefor.
L. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Official Map or the Zoning
Map.
O. Any legislation establishing a specific fee amount for any license,
permit or service obtained from the Village.
P. The establishment of wards, ward boundaries and election precincts.
Q. Construction of any public works, or the letting of contracts.
R. Release of persons, firms, corporations, limited-liability companies,
partnerships or other entities from liability.
S. Any currently effective legislation affecting water or sewer rates, rules
or regulations or sewer or water main construction.
T. Budget ordinances, resolutions and actions.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code
of the Village of Waterford, no changes in the meaning or intent of such
ordinances have been made, except as provided for in Subsection B
hereof. In addition, certain grammatical changes and other minor
nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of
legislation. It is the intention of the Village Board that all such changes
be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A
attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become
effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter and section
number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)2
2. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-25B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 1-23-2006 by Ord. No.
489." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Village offices.
§ 1-24 WATERFORD CODE § 1-25
1:12
§ 1-26. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect on February 1, 2006, upon public hearing,
passage and publication as required by law.
C. The repeal or amendment of any section of provision shall not, by
implication, be deemed to revive any ordinance not in force or existing
at the time of the adoption of this ordinance.
§ 1-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-26
1:13
Chapter 5
AUTHORITIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 50.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 223.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 235.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
§ 1-26 WATERFORD CODE § 1-26
1:14
ARTICLE I
Specific Boards and Commissions
[Adopted as §§ 1.35 through 1.38, 1.40 and 11.01 of the 1998 Code]
§ 5-1. Board of Review.
§ 5-2. Library Board.
A. Membership. The Board of Review shall consist of the Village President,
the Village Clerk, and two Village Trustees who shall be appointed
annually by the Village President and approved by the Village Board.
Two alternate members, who shall be citizens of the Village and may be
Village Trustees, shall also be appointed annually by the Village
President and approved by the Village Board. One or both of the
alternate members shall serve as replacements for regular Board
members who are absent or who are removed pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 70.47(6m). [Amended 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 434; 11-22-2004 by
Ord. No. 467]
B. Organization. The Board of Review shall be organized in accordance
with Wis. Stats. § 70.46.
C. Compensation. Each member of the Board of Review shall receive such
compensation for attendance at Board of Review meetings as shall be
determined by the Village Board.
D. Powers and duties. The Board of Review shall have the powers and
duties provided by Wis. Stats. § 70.47.
A. Membership. The Library Board shall be composed pursuant to Wis.
Stats. §§ 43.54 and 43.60, as follows: [Amended 5-8-2000 by Ord.
No. 398]
(1) Five members shall be appointed by the Village President, subject
to confirmation by the Village Board, to three-year terms. One of
such members shall be a school district administrator or an
administrator's representative; not more than one member shall be
a Trustee; and the remaining members shall be citizens appointed
at large.
(2) Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 43.60(3), a County Chairperson, with the
approval of the County Board, may appoint an additional
member(s) of the Library Board from among the residents of the
County, as follows: [Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 508]
(a) Whenever the annual sum appropriated by the county to the
Waterford Public Library during the preceding fiscal year:
[1] Is equal to at least 1/6, but less than 1/3, of the annual sum
appropriated to the Waterford Public Library by the Village
of Waterford, one additional member;
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2
1:15
[2] Is equal to at least 1/3, but less than 1/2, of the Village's
appropriation, two additional members;
[3] Is equal to at least 1/2, but less than 2/3, of the Village’s
appropriation, three additional members;
[4] Is equal to at least 2/3, but less than the Village’s
appropriation, four additional members;
[5] Is equal to at least the Village’s appropriation, five
additional members.
(b) The County Chairperson may appoint a County Supervisor to
serve as a member of the Library Board, but no more than one
County Supervisor so appointed may serve on the Library
Board at the same time.
(c) The term of each additional member appointed pursuant to this
subsection shall be three years from the May 1 next
succeeding such appointment and thereafter for a term of
three years.
(d) If an additional member appointed to the Library Board under
this subsection loses the status upon which the appointment
was based, the member ceases to be a member of the Library
Board effective on the following May 1.
B. Duties and powers. See Wis. Stats. § 43.58.
C. Library property.
(1) Unauthorized removals. No person shall remove from the public
library any book, periodical, pamphlet, picture or other article or
property belonging to or in the custody of the public library without
first having the same charged out as provided by rules and
regulations of such library.
(2) Correct name and address required. No person shall register or
furnish a false name or address to the public library.
(3) Registration card. No person shall use any registration card other
than his own to draw any book, periodical, pamphlet, picture or
other article or property without the authorization of the named
registrant to draw the specific item.
(4) Destruction of property. No person shall willfully or maliciously
damage or destroy any book, periodical, pamphlet, picture or other
article or property belonging to or in the custody of the public
library.
(5) Failure to return borrowed articles. No person shall retain or fail to
return any book, periodical, pamphlet, picture or other article of
property borrowed from the public library for more than 15 days
§ 5-2 WATERFORD CODE § 5-2
1:16
§ 5-3. Plan Commission.
§ 5-4. Board of Appeals.
§ 5-5. Fire Commission.3 [Added 1-14-2013 by Ord. No. 600;
amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 631]
from the mailing of a letter of notice of demand for the return
thereof, addressed to such person at the last address furnished to
the library.
A. Membership. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(1), and pursuant to the
power granted to the Village Board to provide by ordinance for the
membership of the Commission by § 62.23(1)(a), the members of the
Village Plan Commission shall be appointed by the Village President,
who shall appoint himself to the Plan Commission and shall also appoint
himself presiding officer. The Village President shall also appoint one
Trustee of the Village Board and five citizen members (electors) to
staggered three-year terms, which shall expire in April. [Amended
7-12-1993 by Ord. No. 289; 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 400; 1-23-2006
by Ord. No. 489]
B. Organization. The Plan Commission shall be organized as provided in
Wis. Stats. § 62.23.
C. Powers and duties. The Village Plan Commission shall have all the
powers and duties granted or assigned to plan commissions by Wis.
Stats. § 62.23, and shall have such additional powers and duties as may
be granted or assigned to such Commission by the Village Board or by
Village ordinances. See also Chapter 235, Subdivision of Land,
particularly § 235-8.
A. Membership. The Board of Appeals shall consist of five members and
two alternate members appointed by the Village President, subject to
confirmation by the Village Board as provided in Wis. Stats.
§ 62.23(7)(e). [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
B. Powers and duties. The Board of Appeals shall have the powers and
duties provided by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e), and such other powers and
duties as may be provided by the Village Board or by Village
ordinances. See also Chapter 245, Zoning, § 245-54.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a Village Fire
Commission and set forth its organization, powers and duties, to further
the health, safety, and welfare and wise use of resources for the benefit
of current and future residents of the Village, with significant citizen
involvement.
3. Editor’s Note: Former § 5-5, Water and Sewer Commission, as amended, was repealed
5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 574.
§ 5-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-5
1:17
§ 5-6. Board of Health. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489;
9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 621]
B. Authority; establishment. The Village Board hereby establishes a fivemember
Fire Commission under Wis. Stats. § 61.65.
C. Membership. The Fire Commission shall consist of five citizens
appointed by the Village President, subject to confirmation by the
Village Board. Three Commissioners shall constitute a quorum, and no
more than three shall belong to the same political party. The
Commission shall keep a record of its proceedings.
D. Terms of office. Each member of the Fire Commission shall be
appointed for a term of five years. The Village President shall annually,
between the last Monday of April and the first Monday of May, appoint
in writing, to be filed with the Secretary of the Commission, one
member for a term of five years, except the initial Commission, which
shall be appointed in its entirety with varying terms.
E. Vacancies. A person who is appointed to fill a vacancy on the Fire
Commission shall serve the remainder of the term.
F. Organization. The Fire Commission shall meet in May of every year to
designate a President and Secretary from among its members and
assign duties to each of them as are common to such offices. The
Commission shall establish reasonable rules of procedure and shall
meet monthly as needed upon proper notice upon the call of the
Commission President. The Commission shall inform the Village
Administrator of its meetings, the topics thereof, and the actions taken,
and may avail itself of the resources of the Administrator and the
Village in performing its statutory duties.
G. Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Fire Commission shall
be those set forth in Wis. Stats. § 61.65 and elsewhere in the statutes;
provided, however, that the Commission shall not have the optional
powers set forth in Wis. Stats. § 62.13(6).
A. The Village may fulfill its duties of enforcement of state laws and
policies and of this Code regarding public health by entering into an
intergovernmental agreement for the provision of services consistent
with § 251.02(3r), Wis. Stats., and may appoint representatives to a
Board of Health established thereunder. In the event that the Village
does not participate in a multiple municipal local health department
pursuant to § 251.02(3r), Wis. Stats., the Village Board shall continue
and establish a local health department as set forth in § 251.02(3m),
Wis. Stats., and shall act as the Board of Health pursuant to
§ 251.03(4m), Wis. Stats., and shall have all the duties and powers
delegated the Board of Health by this Code and state statutes. The
Village Board may enter into all contracts and make such expenditures
as are necessary to fulfill its duties hereunder.
§ 5-5 WATERFORD CODE § 5-6
1:18
§ 5-7. Community Development Authority. [Added 3-13-2000 by Res.
No. 425]
B. Duties. The Board of Health that the Village is a member of, or which is
established hereunder, shall assume the general administration of
health and sanitation laws and regulations in the Village, supervise the
work of the Health Officer and attend to the administration and
enforcement of the health laws of the state and the rules and
regulations prescribed by the State Department of Health and Family
Services and the ordinances of the Village.
C. Powers. Such Board shall take such measures and make such rules and
regulations as are necessary and effectual for preserving and
promoting the public health in the Village.
A. Creation. The Village Board, having found, determined and declared
that the undertaking of programs and projects for blight elimination
and prevention, slum clearance and prevention, urban renewal and
redevelopment, and community development and redevelopment
(collectively, "qualified redevelopment projects") will encourage wellplanned,
integrated, stable, safe and healthful neighborhoods, the
provision of healthful homes, a decent living environment, adequate
places of employment for the people of the Village and an increase in
the general property tax base of the Village, and that there exists within
the Village a need for qualified redevelopment projects, and that
creation of a community development authority in the Village will serve
the public interest, pursuant to Wis. Stat. §§ 66.1335 and 66.1339,
hereby creates a community development authority in the Village,
which authority shall be known as the "Community Development
Authority of the Village of Waterford, Wisconsin."
B. Powers and duties. Said Authority (the "Authority") shall be a separate
body politic for the purpose of carrying out qualified redevelopment
projects, and shall have all powers, duties and functions of community
development authorities contained in Wis. Stat. § 66.1335, as amended
from time to time. The Authority shall also act as the agent of the
Village in planning and carrying out community development programs
and activities approved by the Village Board and the Village President
under the federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974.
C. Bylaws. The Village Board hereby establishes and approves bylaws and
rules of procedure attached to Resolution No. 425.4 The Authority may
amend the bylaws as it shall deem appropriate from time to time;
however, Section No. 2 of the bylaws, entitled "General Powers and
Duties," shall not be amended without the approval of the Village
Board.
D. Membership. The Village President shall appoint seven qualified
resident persons as commissioners of the Authority, which
4. Editor's Note: The bylaws and rules of procedure are on file in the Village offices.
§ 5-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:19
§ 5-7.1. Tourism Commission. [Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 645]
appointments shall be subject to confirmation by the Village Board. Two
of said Commissioners shall be members of the Village Board, and shall
serve on the Authority during their respective terms of office as Village
Board members. The initial appointments of the five non-Village Board
Commissioners shall be for the following terms: two Commissioners for
one year, one Commissioner for two years, one Commissioner for three
years, and one Commissioner for four years. Thereafter, the terms of
the non-Village Board Commissioners shall be four years and until their
successors are appointed and qualified.
E. Compensation. Compensation of the Commissioners shall be on the
same basis as that of other commission members of the Village of
Waterford as provided in Village of Waterford Municipal Code § 50-6,
and Commissioners shall be reimbursed for their actual and necessary
expenses as provided in Wis. Stat. § 66.1335(2)(d).
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a Village Tourism
Commission and set forth its organization, powers and duties, to further
tourism promotion and tourism development in the Village, including
marketing projects and transient tourist informational services that are
significantly used by transient tourists and reasonably likely to
generate paid overnight stays at establishments upon which room taxes
are imposed.
B. Authority; establishment. The Village Board hereby establishes a sixmember
Tourism Commission under Wis. Stats. § 66.0615(1m)(c).
C. Membership. The Tourism Commission shall consist of five Village
residents and one person, who may or may not be a resident, who shall
represent the Wisconsin hotel and motel industry. The Commissioners
shall be appointed by the Village President and confirmed by a majority
vote of the members of the Village Board who are present when the vote
is taken. At least two trustees shall be appointed to the Commission.
Four Commissioners shall constitute a quorum. The Commission shall
keep a record of its proceedings.
D. Terms of office. Each member of the Tourism Commission shall be
appointed for a term of one year, shall serve at the pleasure of the
Village President, and may be reappointed.
E. Vacancies. A person who is appointed to fill a vacancy on the Tourism
Commission shall serve the remainder of the term.
F. Organization. The Tourism Commission shall, at its first meeting, and
subsequently in May of every year, designate a Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson, and Secretary from among its members and assign duties
to each of them as are common to such offices. The Commission shall
meet quarterly and/or as needed upon proper notice upon the call of the
Commission Chair. The Commission shall inform the Village
§ 5-7 WATERFORD CODE § 5-7.1
1:20
Administrator of its meetings, the topics thereof, and the actions taken
and may avail itself of the resources of the Administrator and the
Village in performing its statutory duties.
G. Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Tourism Commission
shall be those set forth in Wis. Stats. § 66.0615. The Commission shall
report annually to the Village the purposes for which the revenues
received were spent and shall report any delinquencies or inaccurate
reporting to the Village.
§ 5-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7.1
1:21

ARTICLE II
Deliberations
[Adopted 6-11-2001 by Ord. No. 412]
§ 5-8. Voting requirements; conflicts of interest; majority vote
required.
Any member of a board, committee or commission of the Village may
demand an "aye" or "nay" vote on any matter, and such vote shall be entered
in the proceedings. Every member shall vote when a question is put unless
the member has a conflict of interest, in which case the member shall make
a statement on the record which explains the conflict to the satisfaction
of the presiding officer, who may then excuse the member from voting. If
the presiding officer has a conflict of interest, the presiding officer shall
make such a statement on the record to the satisfaction of the members,
who may then, by majority vote, excuse the presiding officer for the conflict
of interest. A majority vote of all members of the board, committee or
commission in favor of any proposed resolution shall be necessary for
passage or approval, unless a larger number is required by statute. Except
as otherwise provided, a majority vote of those present shall prevail in other
cases.
§ 5-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-8
1:23
Chapter 17
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 17-1. Declaration of policy.
To prepare the Village to cope with emergencies resulting from enemy
action and natural or man-made disaster, it is declared to be necessary
to establish an organization of emergency management for the Village by
conferring upon the President of the Village and others specified duties and
powers, consistent with Wis. Stats. Chapter 323, which is hereby adopted.
§ 17-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISASTER — A severe or prolonged, natural or human-caused, occurrence
that threatens or negatively impacts life, health, property, infrastructure,
the environment, the security of the Village, or critical systems, including
computer, telecommunications, or agricultural systems.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT — All measures undertaken by or
undertaken by or on behalf of the Village:
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Has the meaning set forth in Wis. Stats.
§ 299.01.
INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM — A functional management system
established to control, direct, and manage the roles, responsibilities, and
operations of all the agencies involved in a multiagency or
multijurisdictional emergency response.
§ 17-3. Emergency Management Committee.
To prepare for and minimize the effect of a disaster or the imminent
threat of a disaster.
A.
Make repairs to or restore infrastructure or critical systems that are
destroyed or damaged by a disaster.
B.
A. How constituted. The Village Board shall be the Emergency
Management Committee, whose President shall be the President of the
Village Board.
B. Duties. The Emergency Management Committee shall be an advisory
and planning group and shall advise the Emergency Management
Director on all emergency matters. It shall annually prepare and adopt
a budget for emergency management.
C. Succession. In the event of an emergency, those members of the Village
Board who are available shall have authority to conduct the activities of
the Village with no requirement of a quorum. In the event the President
§ 5-8 WATERFORD CODE § 17-3
1:24
§ 17-4. Emergency Management Director, deputies, powers/duties.
is unavailable, the Trustee holding the longest continuous seniority as
trustee at the time of the emergency and who is available shall be the
President of the Emergency Management Committee.
A. Director. There is created the office of Director of Emergency
Management.
B. Appointment. The Director and any deputies shall be appointed by the
Village Board President and confirmed by the Village Board.
C. Term. The term of office of the Director shall be until a successor is
appointed and qualified.
D. Powers and duties. The Director, subject to the control and direction of
the Village Board, shall:
(1) Develop and promulgate emergency plans for the Village consistent
with state and county plans.
(2) Be in compliance with all federal and state training requirements
pertaining to this position.
(3) Direct the emergency management program for the Village as
required by the Village Board.
(4) Direct the Village emergency training programs and exercises.
(5) Provide assistance to Village emergency departments during such
emergencies requiring a major response or additional resources to
support their efforts.
(6) During a state of emergency declared by the Governor, the
Emergency Management Director, on behalf of the Village, may
contract with any person to provide equipment and services on a
cost basis to be used to respond to a disaster or the imminent
threat of a disaster.
(7) Be the National Incident Management System (NIMS) point of
contact for the Village and track all NIMS and ICS training to
assure compliance with federal and state guidelines.
(8) Aid, assist, and guide all Village officials and departments in the
completion of forms relating to emergencies including, but not
limited to, ICS forms, emergency orders and declarations of
disaster.
(9) Advise the Racine County Emergency Management Coordinator on
all local programs and submit any required reports.
(10) Deputy Emergency Management Directors shall function at the
direction of the Village Board and the Director of Emergency
§ 17-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-4
1:25
§ 17-5. Utilization of existing services and facilities.
§ 17-6. Duties and powers of Village.
Management and shall in the Director's absence act on the
Director's behalf in all emergency matters.
A. Policy. In preparing and executing the Emergency Management
Program, the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of the existing
departments and agencies of the Village shall be utilized to the
maximum extent practicable; and the heads and personnel of all such
departments and agencies are directed to cooperate and extend such
services and facilities as are required of them.
B. Responsibility. In order to assure that in an emergency all the facilities
of the existing Village government are expanded to the fullest to meet
such emergency, department and agency heads assigned to specific
responsibilities under the Village emergency operations plan will fulfill
emergency and nonemergency duties as prescribed in the plan.
A. Declaration of emergency. The Village President and Board of Trustees
may declare an emergency existing within the Village whenever
conditions arise by reason of a riot or civil commotion, a disaster, or
imminent threat of a disaster that impairs transportation, food or fuel
supplies, medical care, fire, health or police protection, or other critical
systems of the Village. In the absence of the Village President, the
Trustee holding the longest continuous seniority as trustee at the time
of the emergency and who is available may declare an emergency based
on the above criteria. The period of the emergency shall be limited by
this chapter to the time during which the emergency conditions exist or
are likely to exist.
(1) In the absence of the Village President or any Trustees and based
on the above criteria and an issue of expedience exists, any two of
the following Village officials may declare an emergency: the
Village Administrator, the Director of Public Works, the Fire Chief,
an Assistant Fire Chief, the Emergency Management Director and
the Deputy Emergency Management Director.
(2) Ratification. With the exception of a declaration by the Village
Board, any other declarations shall be subject to ratification,
alteration, modification, or repeal by the Village Board as soon as
they can meet. Any subsequent action taken shall not affect the
validity of the declaration.
B. Powers during an emergency. The emergency power conferred upon the
Village Board by this chapter and Wis. Stats. §§ 323.11 and 323.14
includes the general authority to order whatever is necessary and
expedient for the health, safety, protection and welfare of persons and
property within the Village in the emergency and includes the power to
bar, restrict, or remove all unnecessary traffic, both vehicular and
§ 17-4 WATERFORD CODE § 17-6
1:26
§ 17-7. Emergency use of vehicles.
§ 17-8. Responsibility for worker's compensation.
pedestrian, from the roadway and limit or restrict the operation of
watercraft upon any waterway within the Village. The period of the
proclamation is limited to the time during which emergency conditions
exist or are likely to exist.
(1) Proclamation. If, because of the emergency conditions, the Village
Board is unable to meet properly, the Village President or the
Trustee holding the longest continuous seniority as trustee at the
time of the emergency and who is available shall exercise by
proclamation all the powers hereby conferred on the Board.
(2) In the absence of the Village President or any Trustees and based
on the above criteria and an issue of expedience exists, any two of
the following Village officials may declare an emergency: the
Village Administrator, the Director of Public Works, the Fire Chief,
an Assistant Fire Chief, the Emergency Management Director and
the Deputy Emergency Management Director.
(3) Ratification. With the exception of a proclamation by the Village
Board any other emergency proclamations shall be subject to
ratification, alteration, modification, or repeal by the Village Board
as soon as they can meet, but subsequent action taken shall not
affect the validity of the proclamation.
A. In responding to an official request for help during any declared state of
emergency, any person may operate a boat or any motor vehicle,
including a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle that is not registered in
this state.
B. Emergency management personnel, in accordance with Wis. Stats.
§ 340.01(3)(e), are authorized to use any vehicle of the Village and/or
their private vehicles as an emergency vehicle in the event of a bona
fide emergency.
A. A member of the Village's Emergency Management Program is
considered an employee of the Village when providing his or her labor
during a disaster, an imminent threat of a disaster or a related training
exercise or equipment maintenance.
B. A volunteer who registers in writing with the Village emergency
management to provide his or her own labor without compensation,
other than reimbursement for travel, lodging, or meals during a
disaster, an imminent threat of a disaster or a related training exercise
is considered an employee of the Village for worker's compensation
under Wis. Stats. Ch. 102 for purposes of any claim relating to labor
provided.
§ 17-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-9
1:27
§ 17-9. Temporary location of Village government.
§ 17-10. National Incident Management System Incident Command
System.
The Village of Waterford adopts the National Incident Management System
(NIMS), and its component Incident Command System (ICS), as the
standard for all incident management in the Village and shall endeavor to
remain compliant with all standards and requests of the state and federal
officials.
§ 17-11. Hazardous substances.
A. Whenever during a state of emergency it becomes imprudent,
inexpedient, or impossible to conduct the affairs of the Village at the
Village Hall, the Village Board of Trustees may meet at any place within
or without the territorial limits of the Village of Waterford by call of the
Village President or his/her successor, and shall proceed to establish
and designate by ordinance, resolution, or other manner, alternate or
substitute places as temporary locations of the government where all,
or any part of, the public business may be transacted and conducted
during the emergency situation.
B. Exercise of governmental authority. While the public business is being
conducted at a temporary location, the Village Board and other officers
of the Village government shall possess and exercise all the executive,
legislative, administrative and judicial powers and functions conferred
on the body and officers under state law. Those powers and functions,
except judicial, may be exercised in the light of the exigencies of the
emergency situation without regard to or compliance with timeconsuming
procedures and formalities prescribed by law. All acts of the
Village Board and Village officers shall be as valid and binding as if
performed within the territorial limits of the Village of Waterford.
A. Prohibited discharge. No person may discharge or release a hazardous
substance in violation of state or federal law in the Village of Waterford.
B. Emergency response. A declaration of emergency is not required for
the immediate emergency response to a hazardous substance discharge
or potential discharge under this section, provided that, if appropriate,
a declaration of emergency shall be made as soon as possible.
(1) A person who possesses or controls a hazardous substance that is
released, or who causes the release of a hazardous substance, shall
take the actions necessary to protect public health and safety and
prevent damage to property.
(2) The Village's emergency response to a discharge or potential
discharge of a hazardous substance shall be made pursuant to the
provisions of Wis. Stats. Ch. 323, Subchapter VII, and the
applicable state, county and Village emergency plans. The Fire
§ 17-9 WATERFORD CODE § 17-11
1:28
§ 17-12. Violations and penalties; civil liability.
Chapter 23
FINANCE AND TAXATION
§ 23-1. Preparation of tax roll and tax bills; collection of taxes.
[Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
The Clerk, in cooperation with the Village Treasurer, shall prepare the tax
roll in accordance with Wis. Stat. § 70.65, and, in cooperation with the
Chief and/or the Emergency Management Director may make
orders in accordance with said provisions.
(3) If no emergency procedure for the response to a reportable
hazardous substance discharge, or a potential discharge, is
included in the emergency plans, the Fire Chief and/or the
Emergency Management Director shall have the authority to
develop an emergency procedure tailored to the specific type of
discharge and issue orders in accordance with that procedure.
(4) In the event of a hazardous substance discharge that is not
required to be reported under state or federal law, the Fire Chief
shall have the authority to develop a plan and issue orders for the
remediation of the discharge.
C. Recovery of costs. A person who possessed or controlled a hazardous
substance involved in a release or potential release, and/or the person
who caused a hazardous substance release or potential release, shall
reimburse the Village for actual, reasonable and necessary expenses
incurred in responding to the release or potential release.
D. Site access. Access to any site, public or private, where a hazardous
substance discharge is indicated or suspected shall be provided to the
Fire Department, the Emergency Management Director, law
enforcement and any other emergency personnel required for the
purpose of evaluating the threat to the public and monitoring
containment, cleanup, and restoration activities.
A. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter or who refuses or intentionally fails to comply with the
directives of emergency management authorities promulgated under
this chapter during an emergency or during any training program or
exercise shall be subject to a penalty as provided by Chapter 1, Article
II, of this Code.
B. Civil liability. Any person in violation of this chapter shall be liable to the
Village of Waterford for any expenses incurred by the Village or for any
loss or damage sustained by the Village by reason of any violation of
this chapter.
§ 17-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-1
1:29
County Treasurer and Village Treasurer, shall prepare and mail real and
personal property tax bills and collect taxes in conformance with Wis. Stat.
ch. 74.
§ 23-2. Fiscal year.
The calendar year shall be the fiscal year.
§ 23-3. Budget.
A. Departmental estimates. Annually, when requested by the Finance
Committee, each officer, department and committee shall file with the
Treasurer an itemized statement of disbursements made to carry out
the powers and duties of such officer, department or committee during
the preceding fiscal year; a detailed statement of the receipts and
disbursements on account of any special fund under the supervision of
such officer, department or committee during such year and of the
conditions and management of such fund; and detailed estimates of the
same matters for the current and ensuing fiscal years. Such statements,
which shall be designated as "Departmental Estimates," shall be
presented in the form prescribed by the Treasurer, such form to be as
nearly uniform as possible for the main division of all departments.
[Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
B. Proposed budget.
(1) Each year, the Treasurer, at the direction of the Finance
Committee, shall prepare a proposed budget, and the Finance
Committee shall submit to the Board said proposed budget
presenting a financial plan for conducting the affairs of the Village
for the ensuing fiscal year. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No.
489]
(2) Information required. The budget shall include the following
information:
(a) The expense of conducting each department and activity of the
Village for the ensuing fiscal year, and corresponding items for
the current year and last preceding fiscal year, with reasons for
any increase or decrease recommended as compared with
appropriations for the current year.
(b) An itemization of all anticipated income of the Village from
sources other than general property taxes and bonds issued,
with a statement comparing the amounts received by the
Village from each of the same or similar sources for the last
preceding and current fiscal year.
(c) An itemization of the amount of money to be raised from
general property taxes which, with income from other sources,
will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures.
§ 23-1 WATERFORD CODE § 23-3
1:30
§ 23-4. Changes in budget.
The amount of the tax to be levied or certified and the amounts of the
various appropriations, and the purposes thereof, shall not be changed after
approval of the budget except by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership
of the Village Board. Notice of such change shall be given by publication
within 15 days thereafter in the official Village newspaper.
§ 23-5. Village funds to be spent in accordance with appropriations.
No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the Village, nor shall any
obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance
of the annual appropriation in the adopted budget or when changed as
authorized by § 23-4 of this chapter. At the close of each fiscal year, any
unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general fund,
and shall be subject to reappropriation; but appropriations may be made by
the Board, to be paid out of the income of the current year, in furtherance
of improvements or other objects or works which will not be completed
within such year, and any such appropriation shall continue in force until
the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned.
§ 23-6. Claims procedure. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467;
1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 5-23-2016 by Ord. No. 636; 3-12-2018 by
Ord. No. 660]
(d) Such other information as may be required by the Board and by
state law.
(3) Copies required. The Village shall provide a reasonable number of
copies of the budget thus prepared for distribution to citizens.
C. Hearing. The Board shall hold a public hearing on the budget as
required by law.
D. Action by Board. Following the public hearing, the proposed budget
may be changed or amended and shall take the same course in the
Board as ordinances.
A. Purpose. It is the declared intent of this section that the Village Board
delegate to the Village Clerk the power to authorize routine payments
of certain claims, without prior Village Board approval, under the
circumstances described in this section, while retaining the Village
Board's authority to approve claims.
B. Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to
Village Boards under Wis. Stats. § 66.0609 to adopt an alternative claim
procedure for approving financial claims against the Village that are in
the nature of bills and vouchers.
C. Claims.
§ 23-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-6
1:31
(1) All bills due and claims against the Village, other than those claims
subject to Wis. Stats. § 893.80, shall be paid from the Village
Treasury after the Clerk audits and approves each such claim as a
proper charge against the treasury and endorses his or her
approval thereon in accordance with Subsection D, in time for
payment prior to the due date of the claim.
(2) The Village Clerk may refer claims for approval or denial to the
Village Board, prior to payment being made, and the Village Board
may designate certain claims requiring its approval to the Clerk.
D. Procedure.
(1) Payment of the types of claims described in Subsection C(1) may be
made from the Village treasury in the manner described in Wis.
Stats. § 66.0607 without prior Village Board approval. The Village
Clerk's approval shall not be granted unless the Village Clerk first
determines that:
(a) Funds are available under the Village budget to pay the bill or
voucher.
(b) The item or service covered by the bill or voucher has been
duly authorized by the proper official, department head, board
or commission.
(c) The item or service covered by the bill or voucher has been
supplied or rendered in conformity with the authorization.
(d) The claim appears to be a valid claim against the Village.
(2) The Village Clerk may choose to require the claimant to submit
proof, to aid the Clerk in determining whether the claimant has
complied with these conditions, prior to payment of the claim.
(3) The Village Clerk shall file with the Village Board at least monthly a
list of the claims showing the date the claim was paid; the name of
the claimant; the purpose of the claim; and the amount of the claim.
E. Annual audit. As required by Wis. Stats. § 66.0609(3), the Village Board
shall obtain an annual detailed audit of its financial transactions and
accounts by a certified public account licensed or certified under Wis.
Stats. Ch. 442 and designated by the Village Board.
F. Bond. As required by Wis. Stats. § 66.0609(4), the Village Clerk shall be
covered by a dishonesty insurance policy of not less than $5,000.
[Amended 5-14-2018 by Ord. No. 663]
G. Payment. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0607(3), the Village President
and the Village Treasurer shall countersign all drafts, checks and
transfer orders of the Village of Waterford, and in the case of a
temporary vacancy, extended absence, or physical or mental disability
of the President or Treasurer, the Village Administrator may
§ 23-6 WATERFORD CODE § 23-6
1:32
§ 23-7. Letting of contracts.
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 61.56, as a complete alternative to the
requirements established by Wis. Stats. §§ 61.54 and 61.55, Wis. Stats.
§ 62.15 shall apply to Village contracts. The authority vested in the Board of
Public Works by Wis. Stats. § 62.15 shall be exercised by the Village Board
or as delegated by the Village Board.
§ 23-8. Duplicate Treasurer's bonds. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord.
No. 467]
§ 23-9. Temporary investment of Village funds. [Amended
11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
The Treasurer may invest any Village funds not immediately needed
pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0603(1m).
§ 23-10. Room tax. [Added 10-8-2001 by Ord. No. 415; amended
11-22-2014 by Ord. No. 467; 5-24-2010 by Ord. No. 552; 12-12-2016
by Ord. No. 645]
The Village shall impose a room tax as set forth herein.
countersign said documents on behalf of either office. In the case that
two officers are temporarily absent at the same time, the Village Board
may designate an alternate signatory by resolution. In lieu of a required
signature, the facsimile signature adopted by the person and approved
by the Village Board may be affixed to the draft, check or transfer
order. The use of the facsimile signature does not relieve an official
from liability to which the official is otherwise subject, including the
unauthorized use of the facsimile signature. [Amended 5-14-2018 by
Ord. No. 663]
A. Eliminated. The Village elects not to give the bond on the Treasurer
provided for by Wis. Stats. § 70.67(1).
B. Village liable for default of Treasurer. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.67(2),
the Village shall pay, if the Treasurer fails to do so, all state and county
taxes required by law to be paid by such Treasurer to the County
Treasurer.
A. Definitions. Certain words and terms used in this section are defined as
follows; the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory, and any words
not defined herein shall be construed as defined by Wisconsin Statutes
and the Wisconsin Administrative Code:
GROSS RECEIPTS — Defined in Wis. Stats. § 77.51(4)5 and Wis. Admin.
Code ch. Tax 11.
5. Editor's Note: said subsection was repealed by 2009 Act 2.
§ 23-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-10
1:33
HOTEL or MOTEL — A building or group of buildings in which the
public may obtain accommodations for a consideration, including,
without limitation, such establishments as inns, motels, hotels, bedand-
breakfast establishments, tourist homes, tourist houses or courts,
lodging houses, rooming houses, summer camps, apartment hotels,
resort lodges and cabins and any other building or group of buildings
in which accommodations are available to the public, except
accommodations, including mobile homes as defined in Wis. Stats.
§ 66.0435(1)(d), rented for a continuous period of more than one month
and accommodations furnished by any hospital, sanatorium or nursing
home or by corporations or associations organized and operated
exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, provided
that no part of the net earnings of such corporations and associations
inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
ONE MONTH — A calendar month or 30 days, whichever is less,
counting the first day of the rental and not counting the last day of the
rental.
TRANSIENT — Any person residing for a continuous period of less than
one month in a hotel or motel as defined herein.
B. Room tax imposed.
(1) Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0615, a tax is hereby imposed on the
privilege of furnishing, at retail, except sales for resale, rooms or
lodging to transients by hotel keepers, motel operators and other
persons furnishing accommodations that are available to the
public, irrespective of whether membership is required for the use
of the accommodations. This tax shall not be imposed on sales to
the federal government or persons listed under Wis. Stats.
§ 77.54(9a).
(2) Such tax shall be at the rate of 8% of the gross receipts from such
retail furnishing of hotel or motel rooms.
(3) Imposition of this tax shall commence effective January 1, 2003.
C. Use of revenue. The room tax revenue collected shall be apportioned
70% to the Village of Waterford Tourism Commission for use as set forth
in Wis. Stats. § 66.0615, and the remaining 30% shall be apportioned to
the Village for general administration expenses.
D. Administration.
(1) Returns and payment. Each person furnishing rooms or lodging
subject to the tax imposed herein shall report room occupancy,
gross receipts for room rentals, and the tax due hereunder to the
Village Treasurer on a monthly basis, no later than 60 days after
the last day of the month the tax was incurred, with the tax due
payable by that date. All monthly reports shall be signed by the
person required to file a return or his authorized agent. A copy of
the current state sales tax report for the month shall be attached to
§ 23-10 WATERFORD CODE § 23-10
1:34
the report. The Village shall have the right to enforce the collection
of the room tax pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0615(2).
(2) Collection and disbursement of the room tax shall be administered
by the Village Treasurer, who shall also file the reports with the
Wisconsin Department of Revenue required under Wis. Stats.
§ 66.0615(4).
E. Interest on late taxes. All late taxes under this section shall bear
interest at a rate of 1% per month from the due date of the tax until the
day the tax is paid or deposited with the Village Treasurer.
F. Tax liability on transfer of business. If any person liable for any amount
of tax under this section sells the business or stock of goods or quits the
business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the
purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a
receipt from the Village Treasurer that it has been paid or a certificate
stating that no amount is due. If a person subject to the tax imposed by
this section fails to withhold such amount of tax from the purchase price
as required, the purchaser shall become personally liable for payment
of the amount required to be withheld to the extent of the purchase
price of the accommodations valued in money.
G. Records. Every person liable for collecting and/or paying the tax
imposed herein shall maintain written or electronic records used to
calculate and determine said tax, and said records shall be maintained
for not less than two years after the tax is due. Such records, receipts,
invoices and other pertinent papers or electronic records shall be made
available for inspection by the Village Treasurer upon reasonable
notice.
H. Audit. As a means of enforcing the collection of the room tax, the Village
may exchange audit and other information with the Department of
Revenue and may do any of the following:
(1) Whenever the Village Treasurer has probable cause to believe that
the correct amount of room tax has not been assessed or that the
tax return is not correct, the Village Treasurer may inspect and
audit the financial records of any person or entity subject to the
imposition of room tax pertaining to the furnishing of
accommodations to determine whether the correct amount of room
tax is assessed and whether any room tax return is correct.
(2) Any person subject to Subsection H(1) who fails to comply with a
request to inspect and audit the person's financial records shall be
required to forfeit not more than 5% of the tax due hereunder, as
determined by the Treasurer based upon the Treasurer's best
judgment and the information available.
(3) The Village Treasurer may make a determination using his or her
best judgment of the tax due hereunder if a person required to
make a return fails, neglects or refuses to do so for the amount
§ 23-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-10
1:35
§ 23-11. Special assessments. [Added 2-14-2005 by Ord. No. 473]
required and in the manner and form as set forth herein. When
such determination is made, the person shall be required to pay
the determined amount plus interest at the rate of 1% per month
on the unpaid balance. No refund or modification of the payment
determined may be made until the person files a correct room tax
return and permits the Treasurer to inspect and audit the person's
financial records pursuant to Subsection H(1).
I. Confidentiality of information. All tax returns, schedules, exhibits,
writings, electronic records or audit reports relating to the returns
required herein are deemed to be confidential, except the information
may be disclosed to or used by persons using the information in the
discharge of duties imposed by federal or state law or local ordinance
or of the duties of their office or by order of a court. Any persons
violating the confidentiality requirements of this subsection may be
required to forfeit not less than $100 nor more than $500.
J. Penalty.
(1) Any person who is subject to the tax imposed by this section who
fails or refuses to pay such tax, fails or refuses to allow the
inspection of his state sales tax records by the Village Treasurer
after such inspection has been requested by the Village Treasurer,
fails to file a return as provided in this section, fails to remit the
taxes due within 60 days of the tax due date or who violates any
other provision of this section may be required to pay forfeitures as
provided in this section, together with the cost of prosecution. Each
day or portion thereof that such violation continues is hereby
deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(2) Delinquent taxes.
(a) Forfeiture. Any person who fails to pay the tax due shall be
subject to a forfeiture equal to 25% of the tax due for the
previous year or $5,000, whichever is less.
(b) Revocation of conditional use permits. A conditional use permit
granted to any person or for any premises pursuant to § 245-16
of this Municipal Code shall be revoked if the room taxes
imposed herein are delinquent and unpaid for the previous
year. If a conditional use permit is revoked for nonpayment of
taxes or charges, the Village Treasurer shall notify the person
in writing that the permit is revoked for nonpayment of taxes
or charges. The permit holder may appeal the decision to the
Village Board, and upon such appeal the revocation shall be
held in abeyance until such time as a hearing may be held
before the Village Board. The Board may reverse or uphold the
revocation of the conditional use permit after affording the
permit holder a hearing.
§ 23-10 WATERFORD CODE § 23-11
1:36
A. Authority. This section is enacted pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.0701,
which specifies that the Village may enact an ordinance which provides
that the cost of installing or constructing any public work or
improvement shall be charged in whole or in part to the property
benefited, and make an assessment against the property benefited in
the manner that the Village Board determines.
B. Levy of assessments.
(1) Special assessments for the installation or construction of any
public work or municipal work or improvement may be levied and
collected pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes or pursuant to this
section.
(2) Except as provided in Wis. Stat. § 66.0721, the Village may, by
resolution, levy and collect special assessments upon property in a
limited and determinable area for special benefits conferred upon
the property by any public work or improvement; and may provide
for the payment of all or any part of the cost of the work or
improvement out of the proceeds of the special assessments, as an
exercise of the Village's police power. A "public work," as used
herein, includes the construction or installation of an improvement
that the Village requires a property owner or developer to perform
as a condition of approval of a development or pursuant to a
developer's agreement, which will be dedicated to the public, and
which benefits property not owned by the developer or property
owner. The assessment shall be calculated on a reasonable basis as
determined by the Village Board.
(3) The cost of any work or improvement to be paid in whole or in part
by special assessment on property under this section may include
the direct and indirect cost, the cost of any architectural or
engineering services, and any other item of direct or indirect cost
that may reasonably be attributed to the proposed work or
improvement. The amount to be assessed against all property for
the proposed work or improvement shall be apportioned among the
individual parcels in the manner designated by the Village Board.
(4) A parcel of land against which a special assessment has been levied
for the sanitary sewer or water main laid in one of the streets that
the parcel abuts is entitled to a deduction or exemption that the
Board determines to be reasonable and just under the
circumstances of each case, when a special assessment is levied for
the sanitary sewer or water main laid in the other street that the
corner lot abuts. The Board may allow a similar deduction or
exemption from special assessments levied for any other public
improvement.
C. Procedure. Before the exercise of any powers conferred by this section,
the Village Board shall declare by preliminary resolution its intention to
exercise the powers for a stated municipal purpose. The resolution shall
§ 23-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-11
1:37
describe generally the contemplated purpose, the limits of the proposed
assessment district, the number of installments in which the special
assessments may be paid, whether the assessment may be deferred
under the terms and conditions set forth by the Village Board, and
direct the proper municipal officer or employee to make or review
and approve a report on the proposal. The resolution may limit the
proportion of the cost to be assessed.
(1) The report shall consist of:
(a) Preliminary or final plans and specifications.
(b) An estimate of the entire cost of the proposed work or
improvement.
(c) A statement that the property against which the assessments
are proposed is benefited.
(d) A schedule of the proposed assessments.
(2) A copy of the report, when completed, shall be filed with the Village
Clerk for public inspection.
(3) Upon the completion and filing of the report, the Village Clerk shall
prepare a notice stating the nature of the proposed work or
improvement, the general boundary lines of the proposed
assessment district, including, in the discretion of the Village
Board, a small map, the place and time at which the report may be
inspected, and the place and time at which all interested persons,
or their agents or attorneys, may appear before the Village Board
and be heard concerning the matters contained in the preliminary
resolution and the report. The notice shall be published as a Class 1
notice, under Ch. 985, and a copy of the notice shall be mailed, at
least 10 days before the hearing, to every interested person whose
post-office address is known, or can be ascertained with reasonable
diligence. The hearing shall commence not less than 10 nor more
than 40 days after publication.
(4) The notice and hearing requirements under Subsection C(3) do not
apply if they are waived, in writing, by all the owners of property
affected by the special assessment.
(5) After the hearing upon any proposed work or improvement, the
Village Board may approve, disapprove or modify, or it may rerefer
the report to the designated officer or employee with directions to
change the plans and specifications or to accomplish a fair and
equitable assessment.
(6) When the Village Board is satisfied with the report, it shall adopt a
resolution directing that the special assessment be levied in
accordance with the report as finally approved and shall specify the
terms of the assessment within the final resolution. In no case may
§ 23-11 WATERFORD CODE § 23-11
1:38
§ 23-12. Fees and costs. [Added 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 510]
the special assessment levied exceed the amount which the Village
is contractually obligated to pay to the developer who incurred the
expense.
(7) The Village Clerk shall publish the final resolution as a Class 1
notice, under Ch. 985, in the assessment district and a copy of the
resolution shall be mailed to every interested person whose postoffice
address is known, or can be ascertained with reasonable
diligence.
(8) When the final resolution is published, all awards, compensations
and assessments arising from the resolution are then authorized
and made, subject to the right of appeal under Wis. Stat.
§ 66.0703(12).
D. Amendment of assessment.
(1) If the actual cost of any project, upon completion or after the
receipt of bids, is found to vary materially from the estimates, if any
assessment is void or invalid, or if the Village Board decides to
reconsider and reopen any assessment, it may, after giving notice
as provided in herein and after a public hearing, amend, cancel or
confirm the prior assessment. A notice of the resolution amending,
canceling or confirming the prior assessment shall be given by the
Clerk as provided in Subsection C(3).
(2) If the cost of the project is less than the special assessments levied,
the Village Board, without notice or hearing, shall reduce each
special assessment proportionately.
E. Every special assessment levied under this section is a lien on the
property against which it is levied on behalf of the Village. The Village
Board shall provide for the collection of the assessments, may provide
refunds of costs to developers or property owners, may establish
penalties for payment after the due date, and may provide that all
assessments or installments that are not paid by the date specified shall
be extended upon the tax roll as a delinquent tax against the property
and all proceedings in relation to the collection, return and sale of
property for delinquent real estate taxes apply to the special
assessment, except as otherwise provided by statute. The Village Board
may withhold approval of any development of an assessed property for
failure to pay a special assessment.
F. If a special assessment levied under this section is held invalid because
this section is found to be unconstitutional, the Village Board may
reassess the special assessment under any applicable law and/or may
withhold approval of any development of a benefited property in equity,
as the failure to contribute to the cost of improvements constitutes
unjust enrichment.
§ 23-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-12
1:39
A. Permit fees. All persons, firms or corporations performing work which
by this Code requires the issuance of a permit shall pay a permit
application fee for such permit to the Village Clerk to defray the cost of
administration, investigation, advertising and processing of permits.
The fee for permit applications shall be nonrefundable, unless
specifically set forth in the appropriate section of the Code, and shall be
set by the Village Board from time to time. No permit shall be issued if
the applicant is in arrears for any amount due and owing to the Village.
B. License fees. All persons, firms or corporations performing work for
which this Code requires the issuance of a license shall pay a license
application fee for such license to the Village Clerk to defray the cost of
administration, investigation, advertising and processing of licenses.
The fee for license applications shall be nonrefundable, unless
specifically set forth in the appropriate section of the Code, and shall be
set by the Village Board from time to time. No license shall be issued if
the applicant is in arrears for any amount due and owing to the Village.
C. Review; other costs and fees.
(1) Any person or applicant presenting a proposal, petition or project,
whether or not a permit or license is required, will be charged costs
and fees equivalent to the cost to the Village for reviews and/or
other work performed by the consulting Village Engineer, Village
Attorney, Village Planner or any other consultants engaged by the
Village.
(2) Such persons or applicants shall be required to pay fees equivalent
to the cost to the Village for any work associated with the drafting
of agreements or other documents associated with any project,
proposal, petition, permit, license, review or approval required,
including but not limited to engineering, design and/or inspection
fees for public improvements that are associated with the review.
(3) The Village may require a person or applicant to sign an agreement
for payment and to make a deposit toward such costs and fees. The
deposit shall be in an amount reasonably estimated by the Village
Administrator to cover the anticipated costs and fees; however, the
person or applicant shall be liable for the full amount of the
Village's costs and fees regardless of the amount of the deposit. If
the deposited amount falls below the amount reasonably estimated
to complete the work, the Administrator may require an additional
deposit. If the payments made hereunder are insufficient, the
Village may proceed under Subsection D. Any portion of the deposit
that is not used by the Village for costs and fees shall be returned to
the applicant.
(4) No approvals shall be granted if the applicant is in arrears for any
amount due and owing to the Village.
D. Special charge for Village professionals' contract fees.
§ 23-12 WATERFORD CODE § 23-12
1:40
(1) Whenever the offices of the Village Attorney, Village Engineer or
any other of the Village's contract professional staff are contacted
for current services regarding a specific person's property,
development or other special matter concerning the Village of
Waterford by: (a) the Village President, Village Administrator or the
agent of either; or (b) a property owner or any person or entity or a
respective representative, if said contact results in a charge to the
Village of Waterford for that professional's time and services and
said service is not a service provided to the Village of Waterford as
a whole, then the Village Treasurer shall be authorized to charge
said person or entity for the current service provided and/or
pursuant to the provision of Wis. Stat. § 66.0627, to impose a
special charge for that current service to the benefited property
owner for the fees incurred by the Village.
(2) This section shall be enforced on the basis of the policy as
established by the Village upon a recommendation of the Village
Board Finance and Taxes Committee, by resolution enacted by the
Village Board and revised from time to time.
(3) The Village Treasurer is authorized to invoice each person or entity
for special charges, allowing a period of time not more than 30 days
to pay for provided current services. The invoice shall include an
itemized statement of the professional service fees provided. If
unpaid, ongoing reviews may be halted until payment is made.
(4) The Village Treasurer shall give each property owner, invoiced for
current services, notice that a hearing may be requested before the
Village Board Finance and Taxes Committee regarding the charges
against the property. If a hearing is timely requested in writing
within 20 calendar days of the mailing of the invoice for current
services, the matter shall be heard in accordance with this § 23-12
on the issue of the cost of professional fees incurred to benefit a
specific landowner.
(5) If any amount remains unpaid after the 30 days allowed for
payment where no hearing has been timely requested, the Village
Treasurer shall automatically charge that delinquent amount, plus
any applicable penalty and/or interest, against the current or next
tax roll as a delinquent tax against the property pursuant to Wis.
Stat. § 66.0627. In the event the invoice rendered to a property
owner or the time allowing for payment precludes placement on
the current year's tax roll, any such delinquent charge shall be
extended to the following year's tax roll.
(6) Upon receipt of a timely request for a hearing on the invoice for
special charges, the Village Finance and Taxes Committee shall
hold a hearing regarding same at its next regular meeting or, at its
discretion, at a special meeting. Such hearing shall be preceded by
posted public notice and written notice to the property owner.
§ 23-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-12
1:41
(7) When a timely hearing has been requested, no current charges for
special services shall be placed on the tax roll until a hearing has
been held and a decision has been rendered and reduced to
writing. A copy shall be sent via first class mail, postage prepaid, to
the property owner. Only that part of the charges for special
services approved by the Village Finance and Taxes Committee may
be placed on the tax roll after the property owner has been given 30
days to pay from the date of the Village Finance and Taxes
Committee decision.
(8) The Village, in addition to or instead of the above, may follow any
other legal means to collect the amounts due. No approvals may be
granted if the applicant is in arrears in any amount owed to the
Village.
E. Fee schedules shall be approved and periodically updated by the Village
Board.
F. The Village may, in its discretion, proceed under any or all of the
provisions of this section. The Village may waive any of the provisions of
this section for good cause shown.
G. Administrative fees and costs. [Added 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 535]
(1) Miscellaneous services. Any person presenting a request to the
Village that requires services over and above those customarily
provided to Village residents, whether or not a permit or license is
required, will be charged costs and fees equivalent to the cost to
the Village for reviews and/or other work performed by Village
staff, if those services are approved by the Village Administrator.
(2) Special assessment letters. The Village Treasurer or his or her
designee may prepare a special assessment letter to be used to
provide information requested for transfers of real property, such
as the amount of outstanding special assessments, deferred
assessments, changes in assessments, amount of taxes,
outstanding sewer and/or water bills, current sewer and/or water
bills, contemplated improvements, outstanding citations for
Building Code violations, and similar information. Any such
information sought shall be provided to the person requesting it on
the form that person provides. Requests for special assessment
letters shall be made to the Village Treasurer a minimum of five
business days in advance. There shall be a fee as designated in the
Village Fee Schedule for the research required for, and completion
of, the letter.
(3) Interest and collection fees. [Added 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 618]
(a) Unless prohibited by law, the Village may charge interest on
debts owed to the Village that have not been paid by their due
dates. The interest rate, if not specified by statute, shall be
§ 23-12 WATERFORD CODE § 23-12
1:42
Chapter 28
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Commission — See Ch. 5.
Emergency management — See Ch. 17.
Burning — See Ch. 100.
Firearms and explosives — See Ch. 131.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 137.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 235.
§ 28-1. Fire Department authorized. [Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord.
No. 631]
The Village of Waterford, pursuant to its powers to act for the good order
and the health, safety and welfare of the public under §§ 61.34, 61.64,
61.65, 62.13, and 101.14, hereby authorizes and organizes the Waterford
Fire and Rescue Department as the Fire Department of the Village; and
the duties of firefighting, fire prevention and fire inspection, as well as
operation and regulation of the rescue squad, and training therefor, and
the operation and maintenance of firefighting and rescue squad equipment,
are delegated to such Department. Its organization and regulation shall be
governed by the provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes, Wis. Admin. Code
ch. SPS 330, Fire Department Safety and Health Standards, this chapter,
and by the guidelines adopted by the Village Board, except as otherwise
provided by law or ordinance. The Chief shall have control of the
Department as set forth in § 28-6. The Fire Commission shall have the
authority to hire, promote and discipline the members of the Department as
set forth in § 5-5 of this Municipal Code.
§ 28-2. Fire prevention.
The Village of Waterford, pursuant to its power to act for the health and
welfare of the public, and in order to protect the public, employees,
firefighters and property from the hazards of fire and explosion, hereby
adopts Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 314, Fire Prevention, in its entirety.
Except as provided therein, ch. SPS 314 applies to the use and operation
of all public buildings and places of employment and adopts a National Fire
Prevention Code, with modifications. The Fire Chief and fire inspectors shall
be responsible for enforcement as provided herein.
§ 28-2.1. Rapid-entry key boxes.
determined by the Village Board and set forth in the Fee
Schedule.
(b) The Village may send any unpaid debt to collections, or use any
other legal remedy to collect the debt, and, unless prohibited
by law, shall charge the cost of collection to the debtor.
§ 23-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-2.1
1:43
A. Definitions. "Rapid-entry key boxes" are hereby defined as access
boxes, as rapid-entry lock box devices or material lock boxes such as
those provided by the Knox Box Company currently in use by this
Department.
B. Rapid-entry key boxes required. Pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS
314 and the National Fire Prevention Code adopted therein, the Village
of Waterford Fire Department elects to require the use of rapid-entry
key boxes as set forth in this section.
(1) Where required. Rapid-entry key boxes shall be required on all
multifamily dwellings of four families or more that have a common
entrance or share a common area accessible by all occupants.
Rapid-entry key boxes shall be required on all assisted senior
housing and community-based residential facilities, industrial and
commercial facilities as designated by this Department and any
location where entry to the property is secured in whole or part by
a fence, gate, wall, or connected buildings, or as otherwise directed
by this Department. Entry key override switches shall be required
on any exit door at any location which uses a card reader entry
system and/or magnetic door lock security system.
(2) Location. The Fire Chief shall approve the location prior to
installation of any rapid-entry key box. Rapid-entry key boxes shall
be located on the front of a building near the main entrance at
grade level, unless otherwise directed by the Chief.
(3) Contents. The owner, agent or on-site manager shall provide the
appropriate keys to the building to be placed in the rapid-entry key
box. New keys shall be provided when any locks are changed.
Examples of keys to be provided are:
(a) A master key or keys to locked points of egress, whether
interior or exterior.
(b) Keys to locked mechanical rooms.
(c) Keys to locked elevator rooms.
(d) Keys to elevator controls.
(e) Keys to fire alarm panels or equipment.
(4) Compliance. This section applies to all buildings and businesses set
forth in Subsection B(1) that are new construction, currently under
construction, or, because of a change of use, an addition, or
remodeling must apply for a certificate of occupancy. Compliance
with this section is required prior to the grant of an occupancy
permit.
(5) Costs and ordering. Property owners shall be responsible for all
costs of purchase and installation of any rapid-entry key box, key
override switch or other material required by this section. The
§ 28-2.1 WATERFORD CODE § 28-2.1
1:44
§ 28-3. Department finances.
§ 28-4. Organization.
Village of Waterford Fire Department shall supply forms for
ordering any rapid-entry key box, key override switch or material
required by this section.
A. Appropriations. The Village Board shall annually appropriate funds to
provide for Department operations and for such apparatus and
equipment for the use of the Fire Department as it may deem expedient
and necessary to maintain efficiency, to provide rescue squad service,
and to properly protect life and property from fire.
B. Gifts and other contributions. The Fire Department shall submit gifts,
donations, contributions or gratuities received by such Department or
any branch thereof from any source to the Village Treasurer to be used
for the benefit of the Department as designated by the Village Board.
C. Compensation. The officers and members of the Fire Department shall
receive such compensation from the Village as may be authorized by
the Village Board.
D. Cost recovery.
(1) Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 61.64, the Village may charge reasonable
fees for rescue services.
(2) Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 61.34, the Village may charge reasonable
fees for Fire Department responses on streets and highways to
nonresidents, provided that Town of Waterford residents may not
be billed if the response occurs in the service area of the Town that
the Village Fire Department covers by contract and the Town is
billed for the call under the contract. When Wis. Stats. § 61.65(8) is
applicable, the Village may apply to the State of Wisconsin
Department of Transportation for reimbursement of unpaid
response fees on state highways.
(3) Fees charged pursuant to this section shall be in an amount
approved by the Village Board and set forth in the Fee Schedule.6
A. Composition. The Fire Department shall consist of Village employees,
paid on-premises and paid on-call volunteers, and unpaid volunteers,
and shall have one Chief, two Assistant Chiefs, one Assistant Chief-
EMS, and such other members as are authorized by the Village Board.
B. Appointment of officers and members. The Chief shall be appointed by
the Fire Commission. The officers and members of the Department shall
be appointed by the Chief, subject to confirmation by the Fire
Commission, pursuant to the Standard Operating Guidelines of the
6. Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 28-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-4
1:45
§ 28-5. Members.
§ 28-6. Fire Chief.
Department and the Rules of the Commission. The appointments shall
be forwarded to the Village Board for its information. [Amended
9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 631]
A. Application. Any person desiring to be a member of the Department
shall file an application with the Village, which shall forward it to the
Fire Commission. [Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 631]
B. Examinations. No person may be appointed to the Department unless
the person passes all examinations and drug tests required by the
Village and the Fire Commission. [Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. No.
631]
C. Qualifications. No person shall be eligible for membership in the
Department unless the person meets the requirements set forth in the
Standard Operating Guidelines of the Department and the job
description for the position.
A. Qualifications. To be eligible for the office of Chief, a person must meet
the requirements set forth in the Standard Operating Guidelines of the
Department and the job description for the position.
B. Appointment. The Chief shall be appointed by the Fire Commission and
shall hold office for a term of two years unless his or her services be
sooner terminated for cause as described in Wis. Stats. § 62.13(5)(em)
by the Fire Commission, or by resignation or death. [Amended
9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 631]
C. Powers and duties.
(1) General supervision. The Chief shall be the highest ranking officer
and shall have general supervision of the Department, which
supervision shall be subject to and not conflict with this chapter.
The Chief shall be responsible for the personnel, recruitment and
general efficiency of the Department.
(2) Presiding officer. The Chief shall preside at all meetings of the
Department, call special meetings, preserve order, decide all points
of order that may arise and enforce a rigid observance of this
chapter. The Chief shall be directly responsible to the Village
Board.
(3) Disciplinary actions. See § 28-7.
(4) Department budget. When requested by the Finance Committee,
the Chief shall file with the Village Treasurer a detailed estimate of
the appropriations needed for the conduct of the Department
during the ensuing fiscal year.
§ 28-4 WATERFORD CODE § 28-6
1:46
(5) Reports.
(a) Annual. The Chief shall submit a written report to the Village
Board not later than October 1 of each year, and at such other
times as the Chief deems desirable, relating to the condition of
each piece of apparatus and equipment, the number of
members of the Fire Department and the Rescue Squad, the
total number of active members in the Department and
resignations and expulsions from the Department. The Chief
shall also report upon the drill and training program of the
Department, together with other pertinent information,
including recommendations for such improvements as the
Chief deems proper and necessary for the operation of the
Department.
(b) Monthly. The Chief shall keep an accurate and complete record
of all of the fire alarm activity and the loss occasioned thereby,
together with such other data as may be prescribed from time
to time by the Village Board. Such report shall be collated
monthly, and a written report shall be presented to the Village
Board quarterly, or more frequently if required by the Village
Board. The Chief shall also present the quarterly reports
submitted by the Assistant Fire Chief-EMS regarding the
rescue activity and the fire inspectors' quarterly report
regarding the fire inspection activity.
(6) Enforcement of fire prevention ordinances. The Chief shall enforce
all fire prevention ordinances of the Village and all state laws and
regulations pertaining to fire prevention and fire inspection, shall
keep citizens informed of fire prevention methods and of the
activities of the Department, and shall provide fire education
services pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 101.14(2)(cm). The Chief shall
provide for the duties of fire inspection imposed by § 101.14(2).
(7) Alarm records. The Chief shall keep a record of every fire to which
the Department was called and shall record the location of the fire,
the time the alarm was received, the cause of the fire, where the
fire started, the cause of delay (if any) in responding, the method of
extinguishment and equipment used, the names of the members
responding and general remarks. The Chief shall require the
Assistant Chief-EMS to keep a record of all of the rescue alarms,
noting the date, time, location, patient age, address, treatment and
care rendered, disposition and members responding.
(8) Apparatus inventory. The Chief shall keep an inventory of all
apparatus and equipment and an inventory of all hose, showing
dates and results of tests on each length, which shall be
individually numbered, and shall participate in new item
purchases.
§ 28-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-6
1:47
§ 28-7. Disciplinary action. [Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 631]
§ 28-8. Control and care of apparatus.
(9) Duties of commanding officer. The Chief shall perform the duties
required of his position by state law and the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, shall appoint committees regarding fire
matters, and shall perform such other duties as are usually
incumbent on the commanding officer of the Fire Department.
(10) Reporting. As the department head, the Fire Chief reports to the
Village Administrator. The Fire Chief shall provide that an Assistant
Chief or other designee report to the Village Administrator in his or
her absence.
A. Grounds for disciplinary action. The Fire Commission may take
disciplinary action against, pursuant to the provisions of Subsection B,
any member of the Department who has violated any rule or regulation
of the Village, as set forth in the Personnel Manual, the Standard
Operating Guidelines, or in other rules or regulations. The Village
Administrator shall be informed of such action.
B. Procedure. Upon complaint or information and belief that any member
of the Department has violated any provision of this section, charges
may be filed with the Fire Commission by the Chief, a member of the
Commission, the Commission as a body, or any aggrieved person. Such
charges shall be in writing and shall be filed pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 62.13(5). The Chief or the Commission may suspend a Department
member pending the disposition of the charges. The Commission shall
act pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.13(5) and Commission rules and
regulations.
A. Control. The Chief shall have control of all equipment used by the
Department and shall be responsible for its proper maintenance.
Emergency repairs may be authorized by the Chief, report thereon to be
given to the Village Board.
B. Use. No equipment shall be used for any purpose except for firefighting
and rescue within the Village limits, or in training therefor, except
pursuant to an agreement approved by the Village Board. With the
approval of the Chief or his or her designee, or, if neither is available,
the highest ranking officer available, such apparatus may be used for
emergency or training purposes other than firefighting and rescue
within the Village and the areas covered by fire protection agreements.
Said use is specifically allowed pursuant to the terms of a mutual aid
agreement approved by the Village Board.
C. Applicability of state emergency vehicles regulations. The provisions of
Wis. Stats. §§ 346.03 and 346.19, relating to the operation and control
of emergency vehicles, and Wis. Stats. §§ 347.38(4) and 347.25(1),
relating to equipment on emergency vehicles, are adopted by reference
§ 28-6 WATERFORD CODE § 28-8
1:48
§ 28-9. Authority of Department at fires.
§ 28-10. Fire inspectors.
and made a part of this section as though set forth in full. The drivers
of emergency vehicles shall use extreme caution and drive according to
the existing conditions.
D. Injury to equipment. No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected
hose of the Fire Department when laid down on any street, private
driveway or other place without the consent of the officer in command
at the scene. No person shall willfully injure any hose, hydrant or fire
apparatus belonging to the Village.
A. Police powers at fires. The Chief and assistants or officers in command
at any fire are hereby vested with full and complete police authority at
fires. Any officer of the Department may cause the arrest of any person
failing to give the right-of-way to the Fire Department in responding to
a fire.
B. Control of fires. The Fire Chief may prescribe certain limits in the
vicinity of any fire within which no persons, excepting firefighters,
rescue personnel and police officers and those admitted by order of any
officer of the Police or Fire Department, may come. The Chief may
cause the removal of any property whenever it becomes necessary for
the preservation of such property from fire or to prevent the spreading
of fire or to protect the adjoining property; and during the progress of
any fire, he may order the removal or destruction of any property
necessary to prevent the further spread of the fire. The Chief may also
cause the removal of all wires or other facilities and the turning off of all
electricity or other services where the same impede the work of the
Department during the progress of a fire.
C. Firefighters may enter property. Any firefighter acting under the
direction of the Fire Chief or other officer in command may enter upon
premises in the vicinity of any building or other property then on fire for
the purpose of extinguishing such fire; and if any person hinders,
resists or obstructs any firefighter in the discharge of his duty as herein
provided, the person so offending shall be deemed guilty of resisting
firefighters in the discharge of their duties.
A. Appointment and compensation.
(1) Appointment. The Fire Chief shall provide for fire inspections
required by Wis. Stats. § 101.14 by appointing fire inspectors,
subject to confirmation by the Fire Commission. Each inspector
shall become state-certified within his or her first two-year term.
[Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 631]
(2) Compensation. The compensation of the fire inspectors and other
conditions of employment shall be established by the Village Board.
§ 28-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-10
1:49
(3) The fire inspectors shall be under the authority of and report to the
Fire Chief.
B. Inspections.
(1) The Chief shall require that the fire inspectors perform inspections
as required by Wis. Stats. § 101.14 to determine and cause to be
eliminated any fire hazard or any violation of any law relating to
fire hazards or to the prevention of fires.
(2) The inspections required under Subsection B(1) shall be made at
least one in each nonoverlapping six-month period in every
calendar year.
(3) The inspectors shall also investigate the storage and handling of
explosives and flammable liquids within the Village.
(4) Fire inspection fees.
(a) Fire inspection fees shall be charged to the property owner of
record for each public building and place of employment for
and/or within which fire inspection is required by state law,
code or regulation, including but not limited to all commercial
and industrial buildings, all buildings containing a commercial
or industrial use, all residential structures containing a
common area, all residential structures having a fire alarm
system, and any other building for which inspection is
mandated, at an annual rate per separate business space or
other applicable use located within a building, in an amount set
by the Village Board. These fees shall apply to taxable property
and tax-exempt property alike.
[1] "Public building" and "place of employment" are defined as
set forth in Wis. Stats. § 101.01. A residential structure is
defined as a public building when it is a structure for use
by three or more tenants. A common area in a residential
structure includes, but is not limited to, a common
corridor, hallway, stairway, basement, cellar, vestibule,
atrium, community room, laundry room, swimming pool
room, or entry area.
[2] All buildings, structures, and premises owned by the
Village government, the town government, the state
government, the public school districts, and the United
States government shall be exempt from the annual fire
inspection fee.
(b) The annual fire inspection fee shall constitute a special charge
for current services against the property pursuant to Wis.
Stats. § 66.0627. The special charges shall be shown in the Fee
Schedule and the fee for each property shall be included on the
property tax bill and collected as set forth in Wis. Stats. §
§ 28-10 WATERFORD CODE § 28-10
1:50
§ 28-11. (Reserved)
§ 28-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any order, rule
or regulation made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code and/or as provided in the Fire
Prevention Code adopted in this chapter.
66.0627 and Wis. Stats. ch. 74. No administrative fee shall be
charged. [Amended 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 664]
C. Record of inspections. The fire inspectors shall make and keep records
of each property inspected in the manner and form required by the
State Department of Safety and Professional Services under Wis. Stats.
§ 101.14. Monthly and quarterly reports of inspections conducted and
citations issued shall be submitted to the Fire Chief for presentation to
the Village Board.
D. Correction of fire hazards. When any inspection by a fire inspector
reveals a fire hazard, the inspector may serve a notice, in writing, upon
the owner of the property, giving such owner a reasonable time in which
to remove the hazard, and may require the removal of explosives,
flammable liquids or similar hazards within 24 hours. Repairs or
alterations necessary to remove the hazardous condition shall be made
within the time allowed at the expense of the owner. If the fire hazard is
not removed within the time allowed, the fire inspector shall issue a
citation. The hazard shall be deemed a nuisance, and the fire inspector
may have the same removed by the Village; and the cost of such
removal shall be recovered in an action by the Village against the owner
of the property and may also be entered in the tax roll as a special
charge against the property.
E. Entering on premises. The fire inspectors shall be allowed to enter
property for the purpose of inspection pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 101.14(1)(b) and (bm). No person shall deny an inspector free access
to any property within the Fire Department's jurisdiction at any
reasonable time for the purpose of making fire inspections. No person
shall hinder or obstruct a fire inspector in the performance of duty or
refuse to observe any lawful direction given by the inspector.
§ 28-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-12
1:51
Chapter 50
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Authorities, boards and commissions — See
Ch. 5.
Emergency Management Committee — See
Ch. 17.
Fire Department — See Ch. 28.
Police protective services — See Ch. 59.
Village Board — See Ch. 76.
§ 28-12 WATERFORD CODE § 28-12
1:52
ARTICLE I
General Provisions as to Officers; Poll Hours
§ 50-1. Elected officials; terms. [Amended 11-22-2010 by Ord. No.
562]
The elected officials of the Village shall be the following:
Official When Elected Term
Village President Odd-numbered years 2 years
6 Trustees 3 each year 2 years
Municipal Judge Odd-numbered years 4 years
§ 50-2. Appointed officials; terms. [Amended 6-26-2000 by Ord. No.
401; 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489;
1-14-2013 by Ord. No. 600; 9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 621; 9-28-2015 by
Ord. No. 631; 8-28-2017 by Ord. No. 654]
The appointed officials of the Village shall be the following:
Official How Appointed Term
Attorney Village President, subject
to confirmation by
Village Board
Indefinite
Building Inspector See § 98-10A
Plumbing Inspector See § 98-10A
Clerk Village President, subject
to confirmation by
Village Board
Indefinite
Treasurer Village President, subject
to confirmation by
Village Board
Indefinite
Director of Emergency
Management
Village President, subject
to confirmation by
Village Board
Indefinite
Electrical Inspector See § 98-10A
Engineer Village President, subject
to confirmation by
Village Board
Indefinite
Fire Chief Fire Commission 2 years
Health Officer Board of Health See § 50-18A
Zoning Administrator Village President, subject
to confirmation by
Village Board
See § 245-59
Assessor Village Board 2 years
§ 50-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-2
1:53
Official How Appointed Term
Village Administrator See § 50-23A
§ 50-3. Oath.7
Village officials, whether elected or appointed, shall take and file the official
oath as required by Wis. Stats. § 19.01.
§ 50-4. Removals. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
§ 50-5. Vacancies.
§ 50-6. Salaries.
Salaries of all elected and appointed officials, including members of boards
and commissions, shall be as determined by the Village Board from time to
time, provided the salary of the President and members of the Board shall
not be increased during their terms of office. (See Wis. Stats. § 66.0505.)
§ 50-7. Poll hours.
The hours for all polling places within the Village shall be 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m.
§ 50-7.1. Election inspectors. [Added 10-13-2008 by Ord. No. 533]
A. Elected officers. Elected officers may be removed by the Village Board
as provided in Wis. Stats. § 17.13(2), or by the Judge of the Circuit
Court, for cause, pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 17.13(3) and 17.16.
B. Appointed officers and officials. Unless otherwise specified in this Code,
appointed officers and officials may be removed by the Village Board at
pleasure by a majority vote of all the members thereof, pursuant to Wis.
Stats. § 17.13(1).
C. How filled. Vacancies in elective and appointive offices shall be filled as
provided in § 50-5B.
A. How occurring. Vacancies in elective or appointive positions are caused
as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 17.03, 17.035 and 61.27.
B. How filled. Vacancies in elective and appointive offices shall be filled as
provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 17.24 and 61.27.
A. Number, appointment and term of election inspectors. Except as may
be provided by a resolution adopted pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 7.32, the
Village Board shall appoint seven election inspectors for each polling
7. Editor's Note: Former § 1.025, Village Administrator, which immediately preceded this
section, was repealed 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489. See now § 50-23, Village Administrator.
§ 50-2 WATERFORD CODE § 50-7.1
1:54
§ 50-7.2. Repayment agreements. [Added 8-22-2011 by Ord. No.
577]
Whenever the Village determines that it will pay the cost of the initial
training and/or certification of an employee for a skill that is required for
the position and that the person could continue to use after termination of
employment with the Village, the cost of the training and/or certification
shall be considered a loan to the employee, to be forgiven if the employee
completes a service obligation for a predetermined number of years of
employment with the Village, as determined by the department head.
place pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 7.30. Each election
inspector shall serve a term as provided in Wis. Stats. § 7.30.
B. Additional election inspector. The Village Board may appoint an
additional election inspector to serve as a greeter and substitute for
election inspectors who must leave the room during the voting process,
as provided in Wis. Stats. § 7.30(1)(b).
C. Alternate election inspectors. The Village Board may appoint alternate
election inspectors.
D. Clerk may establish hours of work. The Clerk may establish different
working hours for different officials assigned to the same polling place.
In the event that different working hours are established, the Village
Board shall appoint alternate officials in a number sufficient to maintain
adequate staffing at each polling place.
E. There shall be at least one trained chief election inspector available at
each polling place. The chief election inspector is in charge of the
activities of the polling place on Election Day.
A. The Village shall require an applicant for such a position to be notified
of the requirement, and upon selection, to enter into a repayment
agreement with the Village as a condition of employment in that
position.
B. The repayment agreement will require the person to pay all or a
prorated amount of the cost of the training and/or certification if the
person leaves Village employment within the predetermined number of
years after beginning the training and/or certification, together with
collection costs and reasonable attorney fees. The department head
may forgive the cost of the training and/or certification in the case of
the employee’s death, in the case of the employee’s disability that
renders the employee no longer able to perform the duties required,
and in circumstances of extreme hardship where the repayment
requirement would be unconscionable upon a request therefor. A
decision by the department head may be appealed to the Village Board.
C. The cost of the training and/or certification will be deducted from the
person's final paycheck, provided that the amount of the deduction may
not reduce that paycheck to an amount less than the minimum wage
§ 50-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-7.2
1:55
required to be paid for all regular and overtime hours worked pursuant
to federal and Wisconsin law.
D. In the event that the person completes the service obligation set forth
in the repayment agreement, the cost of the training and/or
certification shall be forgiven by the Village.
§ 50-7.2 WATERFORD CODE § 50-7.2
1:56
ARTICLE II
Officers
§ 50-8. Village President and Trustees.
§ 50-9. Clerk. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
A. Election and term. See § 50-1.
B. Duties and powers.
(1) Village President. See Wis. Stat. § 61.24.
(2) As Village Board. The Village President and Trustees shall
constitute the Village Board and shall have such duties and powers
as are enumerated in Wis. Stat. Ch. 61, elsewhere in the statutes,
and as set forth in this Municipal Code.
C. Authority. The Village Board shall have all powers of the Village not
specifically given to some other body or officer. Except as otherwise
provided by law, the Village Board shall have the management and
control of the Village property, finances, highways, streets, utilities and
public services and may act for the government and good order of the
Village, for its commercial benefit and for the health, safety, welfare and
convenience of the public and may carry its powers into effect by
license, regulation, suppression, borrowing, taxation, special
assessment, appropriation, imposition of forfeitures and other
necessary or convenient means. The Village Board may appoint such
officers from time to time as may be deemed necessary for the benefit of
the community. In addition, the Village Board shall have the powers
enumerated in Wis. Stat. § 61.34. The powers hereby conferred shall be
in addition to all other grants and shall be limited only by express
language.
A. Appointment and term. See § 50-2.
B. Duties.
(1) The Village Clerk's principal duties are those defined in Wis. Stat.
§ 61.25.
(2) Other duties. The Village Clerk shall also:
(a) Be responsible for the preparation, maintenance and
custodianship of the official documents and records of the
Village and the Village Board as required by Village ordinances
and state statutes.
(b) Be responsible for the issuance of licenses and permits, except
as otherwise provided in this Municipal Code, as required by
Village ordinances and state statutes.
§ 50-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-9
1:57
§ 50-10. Treasurer. [Added 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
(c) Be responsible for the proper supervision of Village election
activities as required by Village ordinances and state statutes.
(d) Be responsible for other duties as may be assigned or
described by the Village.
C. Assistants.
(1) The Clerk, subject to approval of a majority all of the members of
the Village Board, may, in writing, filed in the office of the Clerk,
appoint a Deputy who shall act under the Clerk's direction and
who, during the temporary absence or disability of the Clerk or
during a vacancy in such office, shall perform the duties of Clerk.
The Deputy shall receive such compensation as the Village Board
shall determine. The positions of Deputy Clerk and Deputy
Treasurer may be held by the same person. The Deputy Clerk shall
not be required to file an official bond. [Amended 5-14-2012 by
Ord. No. 587]
(2) The Clerk shall have such clerical and other assistants as are
necessary and made available by the Village Board at its pleasure
and upon terms and conditions set by the Board.
A. Appointment and term. See § 50-2.
B. Duties.
(1) The Village Treasurer's principal duties are those defined in Wis.
Stats. § 61.26.
(2) Other duties.
(a) Collection and disbursement of funds. The Village Treasurer
shall be responsible for the collection and disbursement of all
Village money in accordance with Village ordinances and state
statutes.
(b) Records and reports. The Village Treasurer shall be
responsible for the preparation, maintenance and
custodianship of financial forms, records and reports required
by Village ordinances and state statutes and by the Village
Board. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
(c) The Treasurer shall be responsible for other duties as may be
assigned or described by the Village.
C. Assistants.
(1) The Treasurer, subject to approval of a majority all of the members
of the Village Board, may, in writing, filed in the office of the Clerk,
appoint a Deputy who shall act under the Treasurer's direction and
§ 50-9 WATERFORD CODE § 50-10
1:58
§ 50-11. Assessor.
§ 50-12. Municipal Judge; Municipal Court. [Amended 1-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 489; 11-22-2010 by Ord. No. 562]
who, during the temporary absence or disability of the Treasurer
or during a vacancy in such office, shall perform the duties of
Treasurer. The Deputy shall receive such compensation as the
Village Board shall determine. The positions of Deputy Clerk and
Deputy Treasurer may be held by the same person. The Deputy
Treasurer shall not be required to file an official bond. [Amended
5-14-2012 by Ord. No. 587]
A. Election and term. See § 50-2.
B. Duties. The Village Assessor's duties are those defined in Wis. Stats.
§ 61.27.
C. Assistants. The Village Assessor shall have such clerical and other
assistants as are deemed necessary and made available by the Village
Board at its pleasure and upon terms and conditions set by the Board.
D. Confidentiality of income and expense information. Whenever the
Assessor, in the performance of his or her duties, requests and obtains
income and expense information pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.47(7)(af),
or any successor statute thereto, then such income and expense
information that is provided to the Assessor shall be held by the
Assessor on a confidential basis; except, however, that said information
may be revealed to and used by persons: in the discharge of duties
imposed by law; in the discharge of duties imposed by office, including,
but not limited to, use by the Assessor in performance of official duties
of the Assessor's office and use by the Board of Review in performance
of its official duties; or pursuant to order of a court. Income and
expense information provided to an Assessor under Wis. Stats.
§ 70.47(7)(af), unless a court determines that it is inaccurate, is not
subject to the right of inspection and copying under Wis. Stats.
§ 19.35(1). [Added 2-28-2000 by Ord. No. 390]
A. Election and term. The Municipal Judge shall be elected at large at the
spring election in odd-numbered years for a term of four years
commencing on May 1 succeeding his election.
B. Salary. The Municipal Judge shall receive a salary as determined from
time to time by the Village Board, which shall be in lieu of fees and
costs. No salary shall be paid to the Municipal Judge for time during his
term for which he has not executed and filed his official oath as
required by Subsection C. [Amended 4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 661]
C. Oath; bond. The Municipal Judge shall execute and file with the Village
Clerk and the Director of State Courts the oath prescribed by Wis.
Stats. §§ 755.03 and 757.02(1). In lieu of a bond, the Village shall obtain
§ 50-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-12
1:59
dishonesty insurance coverage as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 755.03(1).
[Amended 4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 661]
D. Jurisdiction. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 755.045, the Municipal Judge
shall have exclusive jurisdiction over actions in which the Village seeks
to impose forfeitures for violations of Village ordinances, may issue civil
warrants to enforce matters under the jurisdiction of the Municipal
Court as set forth in Wis. Stats. Ch. 800, may issue inspection warrants
under Wis. Stats. § 66.0119, and may order the payment of restitution
pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 800.093. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 755.05, the
Judge has statewide jurisdiction.
E. Procedure.
(1) The Court of the Municipal Judge shall be called the "Municipal
Court for the Village of Waterford, Wisconsin," and shall be open as
determined by the Judge and approved by the Village Board.
(2) The Municipal Judge shall keep his office and hold Court in the
Village Hall.
(3) The procedure in Municipal Court shall be as provided in Wis.
Stats. Chs. 66, 755 and 800, and as otherwise provided by law.
(4) The Judge shall, in writing, appoint the personnel that are
authorized by the Village Board. The Village Board shall authorize
at least one Clerk. The hiring, termination, hours of employment
and work responsibilities of the Court personnel, while working
during hours assigned to the Court, shall be under the Judge's
authority. Their salaries shall be fixed by the Village Board. The
Clerk shall, before entering the duties of his or her office, take the
oath provided by Wis. Stats. § 19.01, and file the oath with the
Village Clerk. No bond shall be required.
(5) The Judge shall file and keep together all records in an action
separate from all other records. The Judge shall store all records in
the office of the Court Clerk or in another appropriate facility
designated by the Village Board. Access to the records shall be
restricted to Court personnel except as authorized by the Judge or
by law. Nothing in this section is intended to restrict the ability of
counsel or parties to read the records. The purchase or
implementation of any electronic records management system used
by the Court shall be approved by the Judge.
(6) All forfeitures, fees, surcharges and costs paid to the Municipal
Court under a judgment before the Judge shall be reported and
paid to the Village Treasurer within 30 days after receipt of the
money by the Municipal Court. The Treasurer shall disburse the
fees as provided in Wis. Stats. Ch. 814.
F. Contempt of Court.
§ 50-12 WATERFORD CODE § 50-12
1:60
§ 50-13. Engineer.
(1) In this section, "contempt of Court" means any of the following
intentional acts:
(a) Misconduct in the presence of the Court that interferes with
the Court proceeding or with the administration of justice, or
that impairs the respect due the Court.
(b) Refusal of a witness to appear without reasonable excuse.
(2) The Municipal Judge may impose a forfeiture in an amount not to
exceed $200 for a contempt of Court.
(3) For a contempt of Court described in Subsection F(1)(a), the Judge
may impose imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than
seven days and impose a forfeiture. These penalties shall be
imposed immediately after the contempt of Court has occurred and
only under the following conditions:
(a) For the purpose of preserving order in the Court and
protecting the authority and dignity of the Court.
(b) After allowing the person who committed the contempt of
Court an opportunity to address the Court.
(4) For a contempt of Court described in Subsection F(1)(b), the Judge
may do any of the following:
(a) Issue a warrant to bring the witness before the Court for the
contempt and to testify.
(b) In addition to ordering the witness to pay a forfeiture under
Subsection F(2), the Judge may order the witness to pay all
costs of the witness's apprehension.
G. Liaison with Village Board. In an effort to keep the Village Board
informed as to the workings of the Municipal Court, it is suggested the
Municipal Judge report quarterly to the Board on Village cases
prosecuted before him and receipts and disbursements.
A. Appointment and term. See § 50-2.
B. Duties.
(1) The Village Engineer shall be responsible for the preparation of
plans and specifications for Village public improvements and for
such field survey and construction inspection work as may be
required during the course of Village public improvement projects.
(2) The Village Engineer shall advise the Village Board and Village
Department of Public Works in engineering and financial planning
for public improvement programs. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 489]
§ 50-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-13
1:61
§ 50-14. (Reserved)8
§ 50-15. Fire Chief.
§ 50-16. Zoning Administrator.
§ 50-17. Attorney.
§ 50-18. Health Officer. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489;
9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 621]
(3) The Village Engineer shall be responsible for the preparation and
maintenance of all official Village maps and engineering records.
C. Assistants.
(1) Professional. The Village Engineer may engage professional help to
facilitate the completion of assigned projects within the Village,
subject to Board approval.
(2) Others. The Village Engineer shall have such other assistants as
may be made available to him by the Village Board.
A. Appointment and term. See § 50-2.
B. Powers and duties. See Chapter 28, particularly § 28-7. [Amended
1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
A. Appointment and term. See §§ 50-2 and 245-59. [Amended 1-23-2006
by Ord. No. 489]
B. Powers and duties. See Chapter 245, Zoning, particularly § 245-56.
A. Appointment and term. See § 50-2.
B. Compensation. The salary of the Village Attorney, fringe benefits and
other conditions of his employment shall be established by the Village
Board.
C. Duties. The Village Attorney shall be the chief legal advisor to the
Village Board and shall be responsible for preparing and drafting legal
opinions, ordinances, rules and regulations as may be required for
expediting Village matters. The Village Attorney shall also serve as
prosecuting attorney for the Village and shall represent the Village in
courts and commission hearings as may be required.
A. Appointment. The Health Officer shall be appointed by the Board of
Health pursuant to § 251.06(4)(c), Wis. Stats. The Health Officer shall
meet the requirements of § 251.06, Wis. Stats.
8. Editor's Note: Former § 50-14, Chief of Police, was repealed 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 631.
§ 50-13 WATERFORD CODE § 50-18
1:62
§ 50-19. Director of Emergency Management. [Amended 1-23-2006
by Ord. No. 489; 8-28-2017 by Ord. No. 654]
§ 50-20. Plumbing Inspector. [Amended 8-22-2005 by Ord. No. 480]
§ 50-21. Building Inspector. [Amended 6-10-2000 by Ord. No. 424;
8-22-2005 by Ord. No. 480]
§ 50-22. Electrical Inspector. [Amended 8-22-2005 by Ord. No. 480]
§ 50-23. Village Administrator. [Amended 12-14-2000 by Ord. No.
408; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
B. Duties. The Health Officer shall perform the duties required by
§ 251.06(3), Wis. Stats., the provisions of this Municipal Code, and the
provisions of any Intermunicipal Agreement for health services entered
into by the Village.
A. Appointment and term. See § 50-2.
B. Powers and duties. See Chapter 17, particularly § 17-4D.
A. Appointment and term. See §§ 50-2 and 98-10A.
B. Powers and duties. See Chapter 98.
A. Appointment and term. See §§ 50-2 and 98-10A.
B. Powers and duties. See Chapter 98.
A. Appointment and term. See §§ 50-2 and 98-10A.
B. Powers and duties. See Chapter 98.
A. Appointment; compensation; residency. [Amended 3-27-2006 by Ord.
No. 495]
(1) Appointment and term. The Village may employ a person in the
position of Village Administrator, to be recommended by the
Personnel Committee and appointed by the Village President,
subject to confirmation by the Village Board, with due regard to
training, experience, administrative ability and general fitness for
the position. The term of such appointment shall be for two years,
but such term may be automatically renewed on an annual basis.
The Village Administrator is subject to removal from the position
for cause at any time by a three-fourths vote of the Village Board.
The position of Village Administrator is not mandated, but is
discretionary within the purview of the Village Board, so that
appointments thereto and vacancies therein are determined by the
Village Board from time to time, giving consideration to the needs
of the Village in its management and operation.
§ 50-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-23
1:63
(2) Contract required. The Village Administrator shall contract with
the Village, and the contract shall require fulfillment of the duties
outlined herein and shall set forth terms and conditions of
remuneration and employment.
(3) Residency. The Village Administrator shall be required to be a
resident of the Village or to become a resident of the Village within
a time period specified within the contract required in Subsection
A(2). Said time period shall not exceed 12 months from the date of
appointment unless waived or modified by the Village Board.
[Amended 4-23-2007 by Ord. No. 514]
B. Powers and duties. The Village Administrator shall be accountable to
the Village President and the Village Board, and shall be responsible for
the proper administration of the business affairs of the Village of
Waterford pursuant to the Wisconsin Statutes, the Village of Waterford
Municipal Code and Village ordinances and resolutions, subject to the
limitations contained therein. The Village Administrator shall have the
powers, duties and responsibilities set forth below:
(1) Financial. The Village Administrator, in coordination with the
Finance Committee when appropriate, shall:
(a) Report to the Village Board on a regular basis relative to
Village operations and finance.
(b) Assist in the preparation of the Village budget, in accordance
with guidelines provided by the Village Board in coordination
with department heads, providing guidance in efforts to
achieve Village program implementation and long-term
objectives.
(c) Consult the Village Board on issues involving insurance
procurement and other services the Village must obtain from
outside sources, and obtain information and rate quotes as
directed.
(d) Prepare and maintain procedures for inventory and asset
management.
(e) Stay informed concerning the availability of federal, state and
county funds for local programs, submit appropriate
recommendations to the Board and oversee grant applications
and all other efforts to secure funds from all sources available.
(f) In cases where the Administrator's time is chargeable to an
outside source (e.g., pursuant to a developer's agreement),
keep detailed records as to the amount of time spent and for
what purpose and submit such records to the Village Clerk
prior to the monthly Finance Committee meeting.
§ 50-23 WATERFORD CODE § 50-23
1:64
(g) Promote the economic well-being and growth of the Village
through public and private sector cooperation, including
assisting in the negotiation and implementation of developer's
agreements.
(2) Personnel. The Village Administrator, in cooperation with the
Personnel Committee when appropriate, shall serve as Personnel
Officer for the Village and implement the Personnel Policy, and
shall:
(a) Act as the central clearing agent for all personnel activities and
aid all departments in effectively carrying out their
responsibilities in personnel-related matters.
(b) Maintain complete personnel records, including applications,
date of hire, wage rates, classifications, insurance forms,
changes of status of employees, notices of verbal and written
reprimands, discipline, suspensions and discharges and all
other records that do now or may pertain to employees in the
future.
(c) Perform annual performance reviews of department heads.
(d) Assist in the negotiation of labor contracts and personnel
contracts, administer and annually review the wage plan for
non-bargaining unit employees, administer Village fringe
benefit programs, and advise the Personnel Committee, Village
Board, department heads and employees on personnel matters
as required.
(e) Cultivate sources of employee supply, recruit and advertise for
all personnel openings, assist in the development and
maintenance of job descriptions and perform position analyses
and evaluations.
(f) Serve as the Affirmative Action Officer for the Village.
(g) Maintain standards and procedures to ensure uniformity in the
application of discipline and the processing of employee
grievances, prepare and implement the procedures necessary
to carry out personnel policies and submit reports requested
by the Village Board, commissions, or committees.
(h) Conduct exit interviews, and conduct second-step grievance
procedures and participate in third- and fourth-step grievance
procedures as necessary.
(3) Public information. The Village Administrator shall:
(a) Act as public information liaison for the Village, ensuring that
the news media is kept informed regarding Village operations
and that open meeting rules and regulations are followed.
§ 50-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-23
1:65
(b) Facilitate communications between citizens and Village
government so as to efficiently and expeditiously handle
recommendations, complaints and other matters.
(4) Community Development Authority. The Village Administrator shall
act as the Executive Director of the Village of Waterford
Community Development Authority and perform all such duties
therefor as assigned or as required.
(5) General. The Village Administrator shall:
(a) Establish methods of implementation of Village Board or
Village committee or commission directives or actions where
and when required and report relative to their operation.
(b) Be responsible for the daily operations of the Village and
provide guidance and a conduit for information between
individuals, departments and officials in any combination, and
promulgate, subject to Village Board approval, administrative
policies and procedures for Village operation.
(c) Monitor the operation of Village departments and develop and
recommend administrative procedures in the interest of
increased effectiveness or efficiency to the Village President,
Village Board, respective committee heads and/or department
heads, and assist in the implementation and operation of such
procedures where necessary.
(d) Advise the Village Board and Village President regarding
interdepartmental activities affecting the smooth operation of
Village management and service.
(e) Oversee the preparation of information and reports to assist
the Village Board and its committees and commissions.
(f) Ensure that the Village is apprised of activities of
extraterritorial governmental agencies affecting the Village,
and represent the Village or ensure Village representation
when needed in such regards and in matters involving
legislative and intergovernmental affairs as authorized and
directed by the Village Board.
(g) Advise and inform the Board concerning current federal, state
and county legislation and administrative rules, making
appropriate reports and recommendations to the Board.
(h) Attend board, commission, and committee meetings and other
meetings as required.
(i) Do all other things required to fulfill these objectives and as
otherwise set forth by the Municipal Code, ordinance or
resolution, or as directed by the Village Board.
§ 50-23 WATERFORD CODE § 50-23
1:66
Chapter 54
OFFICIAL MAP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 235.
§ 54-1. Purpose.
The Official Map is established in order to provide for orderly, safe and
economical expansion of the community by designating the location and
extent of existing and proposed streets, highways and parks on an official
map; to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of land; to
facilitate adequate provision for transportation, parks, playgrounds and
stormwater drainage; and to facilitate further subdivision of larger tracts
into smaller parcels of land.
§ 54-2. Interpretation; changes and additions.
The Official Map is intended to be final and conclusive with respect to the
location and extent of streets, highways and parks shown on the map. The
Village Board may change or add to the map if it is determined to be in
the public interest. Changes and additions shall be made in accordance
with procedures in Wis. Stat. § 62.23. The placing of proposed streets,
highways or parks upon the Official Map shall not constitute or be deemed
to constitute the opening or establishment of such streets, highways or
parks, or the taking or acceptance of any land for such purposes.
§ 54-3. Subdivision plats and building permits.9
The Plan Commission shall require that all subdivision plats and certified
survey maps conform to the Official Map. All streets within recorded
subdivisions and certified survey maps approved by the Plan Commission
and Village Board shall become a part of the Official Map. No building
permit shall be issued for any structure in the bed of any street or highway
shown on the Official Map and no permit for the erection of any structure
shall be issued unless a street or highway giving access to the structure
has been duly placed on such map, except as provided in Wis. Stat. § 62.23.
The Building Inspector shall require each applicant to submit a plot plan
(unless the site is a lot in a recorded subdivision plat or certified survey
map), certified by a registered surveyor, showing accurately the location of
any proposed building with reference to the adjacent streets, highways or
parks shown on the Official Map.
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 50-23 OFFICIAL MAP § 54-4
54:67
§ 54-4. Appeals.
The Board of Appeals shall have the power to grant relief from the
requirements of this chapter in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stat.
§ 62.23(6)(d), (e) and (g).
§ 54-5. Amendments.
The Official Map shall be amended by specific reference, pursuant to Wis.
Stat. § 62.23(6)(c), or by provision of law, pursuant to Wis. Stat.
§ 62.23(6)(d), such as annexation ordinances and actions taken pursuant to
Chapter 235 of this Code.
§ 54-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person failing to comply with this chapter shall be subject to a penalty
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code.
Chapter 59
POLICE PROTECTIVE SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Commission — See Ch. 5.
Emergency management — See Ch. 17.
Fire Department — See Ch. 28.
Records — See Ch. 65.
Traffic and parking — See Ch. 207.
§ 59-1. Contract for Services.
§ 59-2. Assisting officers.
A. The Village of Waterford, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 61.65(1), in lieu of
having its own police department, shall contract for police protective
services with a city, town, another village, or with a county. The contract
shall provide for regular reports by the contracting law enforcement
agency to the Village Board.
B. The contracting agency's law enforcement officers, while on duty in the
Village, will enforce Village ordinances and state and other laws.
Citations issued by said officers, and all deposits taken, shall meet the
requirements of state law, and ordinance violations shall be prosecuted
in the Village of Waterford Municipal Court.
C. Wherever the term "Police Chief" or "Chief of Police" is used in this
Municipal Code, it shall mean the chief law enforcement officer of the
agency with which the Village contracts, or his or her designee.
§ 54-4 WATERFORD CODE § 59-2
54:68
§ 59-3. Disposal of property.
A. Required. In an emergency, at the request of any police or peace officer,
any person in the Village shall aid and assist such officer in the
execution of his duties, and whoever refuses or neglects to render such
assistance shall be in violation of this section.
B. Compensation. Every person who is ordered by an officer to assist in
maintaining order, enforcing laws and ordinances, removing or
guarding property or other necessary and proper police work or duties
shall be paid for such services by the Village at the minimum wage rate
prescribed by federal law, per hour or fraction thereof, for all time
actually devoted by such person to such duties.
A. Disposal of abandoned, lost or unclaimed property.
(1) Found property valued at $25 or more.
(a) Pursuant to Wis. Stats., § 170.105, if a Village official,
employee or agent finds $25 or more or any goods having a
value of at least $25 while acting within the scope of his or her
official duties, he or she shall transfer custody of the found
money or goods to the Police Department. The Police
Department shall post a notice of the found money or goods
valued at $25 or more at the Village Hall and at the Village
Library.
(b) If the owner of lost money or goods appears within 90 days
after the notice is posted under Subsection A(1)(a) and makes
out his or her right to the found money or goods, he or she shall
have restitution of the money or goods or the value of the
money or goods upon paying all of the costs and charges on the
money or goods. If no owner of lost money or goods appears
within 90 days after the notice is posted under Subsection
A(1)(a), the found money or goods become the property of the
Village.
(c) This subsection shall not apply to abandoned vehicles, which
are covered under the provisions of Chapter 218 of this
Municipal Code.
(2) Methods of disposal. Except as otherwise provided in this section,
personal property, other than motor vehicles, that has been
abandoned or remained unclaimed for a period of 90 days after the
Village has taken possession of the property may be disposed of in
any of the following ways:
(a) In a sale open to the public.
(b) Upon the prior approval of the chief law enforcement officer,
such property may be disposed of in a sale not open to the
public.
§ 59-2 OFFICIAL MAP § 59-3
54:69
(c) In trade for other property to be acquired by the Village.
(d) Retained for the Village's own use.
(e) Donated to a charitable entity.
(f) Deposited in an appropriate waste or recycling receptacle for
disposal as refuse or recycling.
(g) Upon prior approval of the chief law enforcement officer, in any
other manner, consistent with the laws of the State of
Wisconsin, that the chief law enforcement officer shall deem
the most efficacious method of disposal.
(3) Proceeds from sale. If the property is sold, all proceeds from the
sale of property under this section shall be placed into an account
administered and supervised by the Village Board of the Village of
Waterford. Monies from this account shall be dispensed by the
chief law enforcement officer, with approval of the Village Board if
there is an expense exceeding $500, for the purpose of providing
training and equipment for Village employees.
(4) Inventory required. The chief law enforcement officer shall
maintain an inventory of property disposed of by the Village under
this section. The inventory shall include a description of the
property, the date the Village took possession of the property, the
date and method of the Village's disposal of the property, the
consideration, if any, the Village received for the property, and the
name and address of the person who took possession of the
property from the Village.
B. Unclaimed, abandoned or seized dangerous weapons and ammunition.
Unclaimed, abandoned or seized dangerous weapons, as defined in Wis.
Stats. § 939.22(10), and ammunition shall be retained or disposed of in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Wis. Stats. § 968.20.
C. Seized property.
(1) Criminal and/or municipal actions or proceedings. Property not
required for evidence or further investigation in a criminal and/or
municipal action or proceeding shall be returned or disposed of in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Wis. Stats. § 968.20.
(2) Forfeiture actions. Property not required for evidence or further
investigation in a criminal or municipal action or proceeding and
which is not subject to Subsection B of this section may be disposed
of by the Village official, or his or her designee, into whose custody
the property has been committed.
D. Hazardous or dangerous property. Any property seized, other than
property covered under Wis. Stats. § 968.205, that poses a danger to
life or to other property in storage, transportation or use and that is not
required for evidence or further investigation shall be safely disposed of
§ 59-3 WATERFORD CODE § 59-3
54:70
§ 59-4. through § 59-9. (Reserved)
§ 59-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code.
Chapter 65
RECORDS
§ 65-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — Any of the following Village entities having custody of
a Village record: an office, elected official, agency, board, commission,
committee, council, department or public body corporate and politic
created by constitution, law, ordinance, rule or order; or a formally
constituted subunit of the foregoing.
CUSTODIAN — That officer, department head, division head, or employee of
the Village designated under § 65-3 or otherwise responsible by law to keep
and preserve any Village records or file, deposit or keep such records in his
or her office, or is lawfully in possession or entitled to possession of such
public records and who is required by this chapter to respond to requests
for access to such records.
RECORD — Any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual
or electromagnetic information is recorded or preserved, regardless of
physical form or characteristics, which has been created or is being kept
by an authority. "Record" includes, but is not limited to, handwritten, typed
or printed pages, maps, charts, photographs, films, recordings, tapes
(including computer tapes), and computer printouts and optical discs.
"Record" does not include drafts, notes, preliminary computations and like
materials prepared for the originator's personal use or prepared by the
originator in the name of a person for whom the originator is working;
materials which are purely the personal property of the custodian and have
no relation to his or her office; materials to which access is limited by
copyright, patent or bequest; and published materials in the possession of
an authority other than a public library which are available for sale, or
which are available for inspection at a public library.10
§ 65-2. Duty to maintain records.
upon command of the chief law enforcement officer, or his or her
designee, in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 968.20(4). A method of safe
disposal of such property which takes due consideration of the hazards
posed by the items being disposed of shall be approved by the chief law
enforcement officer.
§ 59-3 RECORDS § 65-2
65:71
§ 65-3. Legal custodians.
§ 65-4. Public access to records.
A. Except as provided under § 65-7, each officer and employee of the
Village shall safely keep and preserve all records received from his or
her predecessor or other persons and required by law to be filed,
deposited or kept in his or her office or which are in the lawful
possession or control of the officer or employee or his or her deputies,
or to the possession or control of which he or she or they may be
lawfully entitled as such officers or employees.
B. Upon the expiration of an officer's term of office or an employee's term
of employment, or whenever the office or position of employment
becomes vacant, each such officer or employee shall deliver to his or
her successor all records then in his or her custody and the successor
shall issue a receipt therefor to the officer or employee, who shall file
such receipt with the Village Clerk. If a vacancy occurs before a
successor is selected or qualifies, such records shall be delivered to and
receipted for by the Clerk, on behalf of the successor, to be delivered to
such successor upon the latter's receipt.
A. Each elected official is the legal custodian of his or her records and the
records of his or her office, but the official may designate an employee
of his or her staff to act as the legal custodian.
B. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the Village Clerk or the Clerk's
designee shall act as legal custodian for the Village Board and for any
committees, commissions, boards or other authorities created by
ordinance or resolution of the Village Board.
C. For every authority not specified in Subsection A or B, the authority's
chief administrative officer is the legal custodian for the authority, but
the officer may designate an employee of his or her staff to act as the
legal custodian.
D. Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in his
or her absence or the absence of his or her designee.
E. The legal custodian shall have full legal power to render decisions and
to carry out the duties of an authority under Wis. Stat. ch. 19, Subch. II,
and this section. The designation of a legal custodian does not affect the
powers and duties of an authority under this section.
A. Except as provided in § 65-6, any person has a right to inspect a record
and to make or receive a copy of any record as provided in Wis. Stat.
§ 19.35(1).
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 65-2 WATERFORD CODE § 65-4
65:72
B. Records will be available for inspection and copying during all regular
office hours.
C. If regular office hours are not maintained at the location where records
are kept, the records will be available for inspection and copying upon
at least 48 hours' advance notice of intent to inspect or copy.
D. A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those
available to Village employees to inspect, copy or abstract a record.
E. The legal custodian may require supervision of the requester during
inspection or may impose other reasonable restrictions on the manner
of access to an original record if the record is irreplaceable or easily
damaged.11
F. A requester shall be charged a fee in an amount set by the Village Board
to defray the cost of locating and copying records as follows:
(1) The cost of photocopying, which shall be calculated not to exceed
the actual, necessary and direct cost of reproduction.12
(2) If the form or volume of a written record does not permit copying
by Village staff on Village equipment, the actual and necessary cost
of copying by other means or at other sites shall be charged.13
(3) The cost of providing a copy of other records not in printed form on
paper, such as films, computer printouts and tapes or other
electronic records, shall be charged in an amount set by the Village
Board, which shall be calculated not to exceed the actual,
necessary and direct cost of reproduction.14
(4) If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost thereof shall also
be charged.
(5) There shall be no charge for locating a record unless the actual cost
therefor exceeds $10, in which case the actual cost shall be
determined by the legal custodian and billed to the requester.
(6) The legal custodian shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees and
may require a cash deposit adequate to assure payment, if such
estimate exceeds $5.
(7) Elected and appointed officials of the Village shall not be required
to pay for public records they may reasonably require for the
proper performance of their official duties.
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 65-4 RECORDS § 65-4
65:73
§ 65-5. Access procedures.
(8) The legal custodian may provide copies of a record without charge
or at a reduced charge where he or she determines that waiver or
reduction of the fee is in the public interest.
G. Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 19.34 and the guidelines therein listed, each
authority shall adopt, prominently display and make available for
inspection and copying at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a
notice containing a description of its organization and the established
times and places at which, the legal custodian from whom, and the
methods whereby the public may obtain information and access to
records in its custody, make requests for records, or obtain copies of
records, and the costs thereof. Each authority shall also prominently
display at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a copy of §§ 65-4
through 65-6 of this chapter. This subsection does not apply to members
of the Village Board.
A. A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal
custodian. A request shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably
describes the requested record or the information requested. However,
a request for a record without a reasonable limitation as to subject
matter or length of time represented by the record does not constitute a
sufficient request. A request may be made orally, but a request must be
in writing before an action to enforce the request is commenced under
Wis. Stat. § 19.37. Except as provided below, no request may be refused
because the person making the request is unwilling to be identified or
to state the purpose of the request. No request may be refused because
the request is received by mail, unless prepayment of a fee is required
under § 65-4F(6). A requester may be required to show acceptable
identification whenever the requested record is kept at a private
residence or whenever security reasons or federal law or regulations so
require.
B. Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as
practicable and without delay, either fill the request or notify the
requester of the authority's determination to deny the request in whole
or in part and the reasons therefor. If the legal custodian, after
conferring with the Village Attorney, determines that a written request
is so general as to be unduly time consuming, the party making the
request may first be required to itemize his or her request in a manner
which would permit reasonable compliance.
C. A request for a record may be denied as provided in § 65-6. If a request
is made orally, the request may be denied orally unless a demand for a
written statement of the reasons denying the request is made by the
requester within five business days of the oral denial. If a written
request is denied in whole or in part, the requester shall receive a
written statement of the reasons for denying the request. Every written
denial of a request shall inform the requester that if request for the
record was made in writing, then the determination is subject to review
§ 65-4 WATERFORD CODE § 65-5
65:74
§ 65-6. Limitations on right to access.
upon petition for a writ of mandamus under Wis. Stat. § 19.37(1), or
upon application to the Attorney General or a district attorney.
A. As provided by Wis. Stat. § 19.36, the following records are exempt
from inspection under this chapter:
(1) Records specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal
law or authorized to be exempted from disclosure by state law.
(2) Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law
enforcement purposes if federal law or regulations require
exemption from disclosure or if exemption from disclosure is a
condition to receipt of aids by the state.
(3) Computer programs, although the material used as input for a
computer program or the material produced as a product of the
computer program is subject to inspection.
(4) A record or any portion of a record containing information
qualifying as a common law trade secret.
(5) Certain records of the Assessor obtained pursuant to § 70.47(7)(af);
see § 50-11D of this Municipal Code. [Added 2-28-2000 by Ord.
No. 390]
B. As provided by Wis. Stat. § 43.30, public library circulation records are
exempt from inspection under this section.
C. In responding to a request for inspection or copying of a record which is
not specifically exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after
conferring with the Village Attorney, may deny the request, in whole or
in part, only if he or she determines that the harm to the public interest
resulting from disclosure would outweigh the public interest in full
access to the requested record. Examples of matters for which
disclosure may be refused include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Records obtained under official pledges of confidentiality which
were necessary and given in order to obtain the information
contained in them. See Wis. Stat. § 19.36(8).15
(2) Records concerning a case that was the subject of any judicial or
quasi-judicial trial or hearing before that authority.16
(3) Records of current deliberations concerning employment,
dismissal, promotion, demotion, compensation, performance or
discipline of any Village officer or employee, or the investigation of
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 65-5 RECORDS § 65-6
65:75
charges against a Village officer or employee, unless such officer or
employee consents to such disclosure.
(4) Records concerning current strategy for crime detection or
prevention.
(5) Records of deliberations or negotiations on the purchase of Village
property, investing of Village funds or other Village business
whenever competitive or bargaining reasons require
nondisclosure.17
(6) Financial, medical, social or personal histories or disciplinary data
of specific persons which, if disclosed, would be likely to have a
substantial adverse effect upon the reputation of any person
referred to in such history or data.
(7) Communications between legal counsel for the Village and any
officer, agent or employee of the Village, when advice is being
rendered concerning strategy with respect to litigation in which
the Village or any of its officers, agents or employees is or is likely
to become involved, or communications which are privileged under
Wis. Stat. § 905.03.18
(8) Records related to the licensing, dismissal, demotion, or discipline
of any public employee or person licensed by the Village or the
investigation of charges against such person, unless that person
requests that the records be open.19
(9) That portion of employee personnel records as specified in Wis.
Stat. § 19.36(10).20
(10) That portion of records containing personally identifiable
information as set forth in Wis. Stat. § 19.35(1)(am).21
(11) Records requiring notice to a record subject prior to, or in violation
of, compliance with Wis. Stat. § 19.356.22
D. If a record contains information that may be made public and
information that may not be made public, the custodian of the record
shall provide the information that may be made public and delete the
information that may not be made public from the record before
release. The custodian shall confer with the Village Attorney prior to
releasing any such record and shall follow the guidance of the Village
Attorney when separating out the exempt material. If, in the judgment
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
19.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
20.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
21.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
22.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 65-6 WATERFORD CODE § 65-6
65:76
§ 65-7. Destruction of records.
of the custodian and the Village Attorney, there is no feasible way to
separate the exempt material from the nonexempt material without
unreasonably jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt material, the
entire record shall be withheld from disclosure.
A. Village officers may destroy the following nonutility financial records of
which they are the legal custodians and which are considered obsolete,
after completion of any required audit by the State of Wisconsin or an
auditor licensed under Wis. Stat. ch. 442, but not less than seven years
after payment or receipt of any sum involved in the particular
transaction, unless a shorter period has been fixed by the State Public
Records Board pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 16.61(3)(e), and then after such
shorter period:23
(1) Bank statements.
(2) Canceled checks.
(3) Receipt forms.
(4) Vouchers.
B. Village officers may destroy the following utility records of which they
are the legal custodians and which are considered obsolete after
completion of any required audit by the State of Wisconsin or an auditor
licensed under Wis. Stat. ch. 442, subject to State Public Service
Commission regulations, but not less than seven years after the record
was effective unless a shorter period has been fixed by the State Public
Records Board pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 16.61(3)(e), and then after such
a shorter period, except that water stubs, receipts of current billings
and customers' ledgers may be destroyed after two years:24
(1) Contracts.
(2) Excavation permits.
(3) Inspection records.
C. Village officers may destroy the following records of which they are the
legal custodian and which are considered obsolete, but not less than
seven years after the record was effective unless another period has
been set by statute, and then after such a period, or unless a shorter
period has been fixed by the State Public Records Board pursuant to
Wis. Stat. § 16.61(3)(e), and then after such a shorter period:
(1) Old insurance policies.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 65-6 RECORDS § 65-7
65:77
§ 65-8. Preservation through microfilm or other methods.25
Any Village officer or the director of any department or division of Village
government may, subject to the approval of the Village Board, keep and
preserve public records in his or her possession through the use of
microfilm or another reproductive device, optical imaging or electronic
formatting. Such records shall meet the standards for photographic
reproduction set forth in Wis. Stat. § 16.61(7) and shall be considered
original records for all purposes. Such records shall be preserved along
with other files of the department or division and shall be open to public
inspection and copying according to the provisions of state law and of
§§ 65-4 through 65-6 of this chapter.
Chapter 76
VILLAGE BOARD
§ 76-1. Composition; term; elections.
The Village Board shall consist of the Village President and six Trustees,
who shall be elected for two-year terms, the President and three Trustees to
be elected in odd-numbered years and three Trustees to be elected in evennumbered
years.
§ 76-2. Meetings. [Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 444;
11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 3-12-2018
by Ord. No. 660]
(2) Election notices.
(3) Canceled registration cards.
D. Unless notice is waived by the State Historical Society, at least 60 days'
notice shall be given the State Historical Society prior to the
destruction of any record as provided by Wis. Stat. § 19.21(4)(a).
E. Any tape recordings of a governmental meeting of the Village may be
destroyed, erased or reused no sooner than 90 days after the minutes of
the meeting have been approved and published, if the purpose of the
recording was to make minutes of the meeting.
A. Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the Village Board shall be held
at least once during each calendar month, on such day and at such hour
as the Board designates. Any regular meeting falling on a legal holiday
shall be held on the next following scheduled workday, at the same hour
and place, or as may be determined by the Village Board. All meetings
of the Board shall be held in the Village Hall, including special and
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 65-7 WATERFORD CODE § 76-2
65:78
§ 76-3. Presiding officer.
§ 76-4. Roll call; quorum.
§ 76-5. Order of business; Clerk pro tem.
adjourned meetings, unless specific notice of another meeting place is
provided.
B. Special meetings. Special meetings of the Village Board may be called
by the Village President or any two Trustees in writing, filed with the
Clerk at least 24 hours prior to the time specified for such meeting. The
Clerk shall immediately notify each Trustee by telephone and email of
the time and purpose of such meeting. Special meetings, for good cause
shown, may be held upon two hours’ notice. Any special meeting
attended by a quorum of Trustees shall be a regular meeting for the
transaction of any business that may come before such meeting.
C. Adjournments. The Board may by a majority vote of those present, but
not less than three affirmative votes, adjourn from time to time to a
specific date and hour.
D. Public notice. Public notice of meetings shall be made as set forth in
Wis. Stats. § 19.84(3).
A. The Village President shall preside over all meetings of the Village
Board. In the absence of the President, the Clerk shall call the meeting
to order, and the Trustees present shall elect one of their number
President pro tem. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467;
1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
B. Duties. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, decide
all questions of order and conduct the proceedings of the meeting in
accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in the most current
edition of Robert's Rules of Order, unless otherwise provided by statute
or by these rules. Any member may appeal from a decision of the
presiding officer. An appeal shall be sustained by a two-thirds vote of
the members, excluding the President.
A. Roll call; procedure when quorum not in attendance. As soon as the
Board is called to order, the Clerk shall proceed to call the names of the
members in alphabetical order, noting who is present and who is
absent, and shall record the same in the proceedings of the Board. If
there is not a quorum present, such fact shall be entered on the journal;
and the Board may adjourn, or the presiding officer or, in his absence,
the Clerk may issue a process to any policeman commanding him
forthwith to summon the absentees. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord.
No. 467; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
B. Quorum. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. The
President shall be counted in computing a quorum.
§ 76-2 RECORDS § 76-5
65:79
§ 76-6. Conduct of deliberations.
The deliberations of the Village Board shall be conducted in the following
manner:
A. The business of the Board shall be conducted in the following order:
(1) Call to order by presiding officer.
(2) Roll call. If a quorum is not present, the meeting may thereupon
adjourn, which may be to a specific date and hour pursuant to
§ 76-2C of this chapter, or the absentees may be summoned
pursuant to § 76-4A.
(3) Public appearances.
(4) Reading the minutes of the preceding meeting, approving the same
if correct and rectifying mistakes if any exist.
(5) Unfinished business from previous meeting.
(6) New business, including the introduction of ordinances and
resolutions.
(7) Reports of Village officers.
(8) Communications and miscellaneous business.
B. In the absence of the Clerk, the Deputy Clerk shall act as Clerk pro tem.
[Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
A. When two or more members simultaneously seek recognition, the
presiding officer shall name the member who is to speak first.
B. Except under § 76-5A(3), no person other than a member shall address
the Board, except by vote of a majority of the members present.
C. No motion shall be discussed or acted upon until it has been seconded,
unless the rules permit one Trustee to initiate action. No motion shall
be withdrawn without the consent of the person making the same and
the person seconding it.
D. Discussion.
(1) When a question is under discussion, no action shall be in order
except:
(a) To adjourn;
(b) To lay on the table;
(c) To move the previous question;
(d) To postpone to a certain day;
§ 76-5 WATERFORD CODE § 76-6
65:80
§ 76-7. Reconsideration of question.
Any member voting in the majority may move for a reconsideration of the
vote on any question at that meeting or at the next succeeding regular
meeting. A motion to reconsider being put and lost shall not be renewed.
No Trustee shall change his vote on any question after the result has been
announced.
§ 76-8. Call of the Board.
A call of the Board may be requested at any time by two or more members,
and absent members shall be sent for; provided a call shall not be made
after voting has commenced. When a call of the Board has been requested
and ordered, the door shall be closed until the report of the policeman has
been received and acted upon or until further proceedings under the call
are dispensed with by a majority of the entire Board.
(e) To refer to a committee;
(f) To amend; or
(g) To postpone indefinitely.
(2) These motions shall have precedence in the order listed.
E. Any member desiring to terminate debate may move the previous
question, in which event the President shall announce the question as,
"Shall the main question now be put?" If a majority of the members
present vote in the affirmative, the main question shall be taken without
further debate, its effect being to end all debate and bring the Board to
a direct vote, first upon any pending amendments and then upon the
main question.
F. Any Trustee may demand an "aye" or "nay" vote on any matter, and such
vote shall be entered in the proceedings. Every member shall vote when
a question is put unless the member has a conflict of interest, in which
case the member shall make a statement on the record which explains
the conflict to the satisfaction of the presiding officer, who may then
excuse the member from voting. If the presiding officer has a conflict of
interest, the presiding officer shall make such a statement on the
record to the satisfaction of the members, who may then by majority
vote excuse the presiding officer for the conflict of interest. A majority
vote of all members of the Board in favor of any proposed ordinance,
resolution or appointment shall be necessary for passage or approval,
unless a larger number is required by statute. Except as otherwise
provided, a majority vote of those present shall prevail in other cases.
[Amended 6-11-2001 by Ord. No. 412]
G. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, and a motion to adjourn or
to lay on the table and a call for the previous question shall be decided
without debate.
§ 76-6 RECORDS § 76-9
65:81
§ 76-9. Disturbances and disorderly conduct.
Whenever any disturbance or disorderly conduct occurs in any meeting of
the Board, the President may cause the room to be cleared of all persons
guilty of such disorderly conduct except the Trustees. If any Trustee is
guilty of disorderly conduct, the President or presiding officer may order
the police to take him into custody for the time being or until the meeting
adjourns. Such member may appeal from such order to the Board as in other
cases.
§ 76-10. Appropriations and accounts. [Amended 3-12-2018 by Ord.
No. 660]
All demands or accounts shall be paid as set forth in § 23-6 of this Municipal
Code.
§ 76-11. Standing committees.
A. Appointment. The following committees shall be appointed to one-year
terms by the Village President, subject to the approval of a majority of
the members of the Village Board, at the first meeting in May of each
year:
(1) Finance and Taxes. This Committee shall perform preparatory work
and recommend to the Village Board regarding taxes, expenses of
the Village, revenues of the Village, budgetary analysis and
preparation and Village fund investment.
(2) Public Works and Utilities. This Committee shall do analysis of and
make recommendations to the Village Board regarding streets,
sidewalks, buildings, parks, lighting facilities, the Water Uutility
and the Sewer Utility, and related contracting requirements for
maintenance and improvement of the same. In addition, this
Committee shall: [Amended 5-14-2001 by Ord. No. 410;
10-11-2004 by Ord. No. 461; 6-23-2008 by Ord. No. 530;
5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 574]
(a) Make recommendations to the Village Board regarding the
implementation of design standards for infrastructure projects
within the Village in the areas of aesthetics and furtherance of
a unified theme. This Committee shall further make
recommendations to the Village Board regarding the
designation of and promotion of a Village Theme, intended to
further the image of the Village of Waterford and promote its
development in accordance therewith.
(b) Do preparatory work and make recommendations to the
Village Board regarding the Water Utility and the Sewer Utility
and on any repairs, additions and improvements it may deem
necessary to the water system and the sanitary sewer system.
§ 76-9 WATERFORD CODE § 76-11
65:82
It shall hear appeals of certain utility decisions pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 223, including §§ 223-6 and 223-25.
(c) Do preparatory work and make recommendations to the
Village Board regarding garbage collection procedures and
contracting, recycling regulation and contracting, and leaf and
yard refuse cleanup.
(3) (Reserved)26
(4) Personnel Administration and Insurance. This Committee shall do
preparatory work and make recommendations to the Village Board
regarding personnel policy, personnel review, wage rates for
Village employees, contract negotiation in the areas of wage rates
and Village employee working conditions, collective bargaining,
insurance contracting and Village personnel organization.
(a) Additional duties. In addition to duties assigned elsewhere, the
Personnel Committee shall be in charge of all duties arising
under Wis. Stat. Ch. 111, and shall be responsible for the
direction of all personnel matters involving employees of the
Village. The Committee shall consist of two Trustees and three
citizens appointed by the Board.
(b) Election, certification, decertification, fact finding, mediation
and arbitration. The Personnel Committee shall conduct on
behalf of the Village all proceedings involving the Wisconsin
Employment Relations Commission relative to the election,
certification and decertification of collective bargaining.
(c) Collective bargaining. Collective bargaining with certified
bargaining units shall be carried on by the Personnel
Committee, which shall adopt and thereafter may amend rules
and procedures governing the conduct of such bargaining not
in conflict with any other existing ordinances of the Village.
Department heads and supervisory personnel shall not
distribute to any Village employees any written communication
the subject matter or program of which relates to such
collective bargaining or other employment relations matters,
unless such communications shall have the prior approval of
the Village Attorney or labor negotiator designated by the
Village Board.
(d) Agreement. The agreements reached at the conclusion of such
collective bargaining shall be reduced to writing by the
Committee and submitted in the form of a proposed ordinance
or resolution to the Village Board for its approval or rejection.
26.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(3), Health and sanitation, as amended, was repealed
6-23-2008 by Ord. No. 530.
§ 76-11 RECORDS § 76-11
65:83
§ 76-12. Publication and effective date of ordinances.
(e) Enforcement. The Village Attorney or labor negotiator is
authorized to institute legal proceedings to prevent employees
from continuing to engage in practices prohibited by or in
violation of Wis. Stat. Ch. 111, and to enforce any ordinance or
resolution by the Village Board relative to agreements reached
at the conclusion of collective bargaining procedures as
provided for in this subsection.
(f) Public hearing. Recognized Village employees' organizations
shall submit their requests to the Village Board, which shall
refer these matters to the Personnel Committee. The Personnel
Committee may then conduct a public hearing on the requests,
and all interested persons may appear and state their views
thereon.
(g) Employees excluded from recognized bargaining units. The
Personnel Committee shall annually review the wages, hours
and conditions of employment of all employees not represented
by recognized Village employee organizations and submit its
recommendations to the Village Board each year for the
following year.27
(5) Heritage District Design. This Committee shall be comprised and
have the powers and duties set forth in § 245-27 of this Municipal
Code. [Added 6-11-2012 by Ord. No. 589]
B. Composition of committees. Each committee shall consist of not less
than three members, at least one of whom shall be a Trustee, except
that the Personnel Administration and Insurance Committee shall have
at least two Trustees in their membership. The Chairman of the
committees shall be designated by the Village President. Each member
shall serve as appointed, unless excused by a majority of the members
of the Board.
A. All general ordinances of the Village and all regulations imposing any
penalty shall be published in the official paper of the Village once,
pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 61.50, and shall be immediately recorded with
the affidavit of publication by the Village Clerk in a book kept for that
purpose. A printed copy of such ordinance or resolution in any book,
pamphlet or newspaper and published or purporting to be published
therein by direction of the Village Board shall be prima facie proof of
due passage, publication and recording thereof.
B. All ordinances shall take effect and be in force the day after passage
and publication unless otherwise provided, pursuant to Wis. Stat.
27.Editor's Note: Former Subsection (1)(e), Industrial Park and Business Promotion; and (f),
Revitalization Committee, as amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No. 328; which immediately
followed this subsection, were repealed 10-11-2004 by Ord. No. 461.
§ 76-11 WATERFORD CODE § 76-12
65:84
§ 76-13. Amendment of rules.
These rules shall not be rescinded or amended unless the proposed
amendment or motion to rescind has laid over from a regular meeting, and
then it shall require a vote of two-thirds of all the members of the Board.
§ 76-14. Suspension of rules.
These rules or any part thereof may be temporarily suspended in connection
with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of two-thirds of the
members present.
§ 76-15. Receipt of gifts and gratuities prohibited.
§ 76-16. Costs of special meetings of authorities, boards,
committees and commissions. [Amended 6-10-2002 by Ord. No.
423; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
§ 61.50; and published copies thereof shall have appended the date of
first publication.
A. No employee or official shall receive or offer to receive, either directly
or indirectly, any gift, gratuity or other thing of value which he is not
authorized to receive from any person if such person:
(1) Has or is seeking to obtain contractual or other business or
financial relationships with the Village or Village Board;
(2) Conducts operations or activities which are regulated by the
Village or Village Board; or
(3) Has interests which may be substantially affected by the Village or
Village Board.
B. The receipt of any gift, gratuity or other thing of value as denoted above
is contrary to the public policy of the Village and shall be punishable as
provided in Wis. Stat. § 946.12. Such conduct shall also be punishable
under Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code.
A. In every instance where any Village authority, board, committee or
commission is requested by a petitioner to meet in special session for
the purpose of considering requests and considerations from such
petitioner at a time or day other than what would otherwise be a
regularly scheduled meeting of such authority, board, committee or
commission, and where the authority, board, committee or commission
does so meet at the request of such petitioner, then the actual cost of
such a meeting shall be the responsibility of the petitioning party and
shall be paid in advance by the petitioning party.
B. The cost shall consist of: the total of all payments to authority, board,
committee or commission members, the Village Clerk, and any other
Village employee receiving pay due to a requirement for attendance,
§ 76-12 RECORDS § 76-16
65:85
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 82
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 82-1. Definitions.28
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE —
along with the FICA/Medicare payment made by the Village for such
payments; the fees paid to the Village Attorney, the Village Engineer,
any inspector and/or the Planner when their attendance is required;
and the cost of publication, postage/copies/envelopes, service of
process, or other notice expenses incurred by the Village.
C. The petitioner shall file a request for the special meeting with the
Village Clerk not less than seven days prior to the date for which the
meeting is requested, and shall submit all required documents and
exhibits at that time.
D. The petitioner shall prepay to the Village Clerk the sum of $400 at the
time of the request for the special meeting, and if the deposit is not paid
the meeting shall not be scheduled. The Clerk shall determine the
actual cost of the meeting within 10 days after the conclusion of the
meeting and shall refund to the petitioner any balance remaining on
deposit, or shall bill the petitioner for the balance over and above the
amount of the deposit, in a timely manner. The petitioner shall be
responsible for the cost of the meeting regardless of the outcome
thereof. If the meeting is not held, the petitioner shall be refunded any
costs not incurred.
E. The cost of such special meeting shall be in addition to the fee set forth
for any application required by this Municipal Code; provided, however,
that if the special meeting is called for the purpose of holding a public
hearing for a conditional use permit, a credit of $60 shall be granted
against the cost of the special meeting, at the time the Clerk calculates
the final cost of the meeting, for publication, notice to abutting owners
and attorney fees included in the fee for such permit.
Each machine which, upon the insertion of money, operates or may
be operated as a game or contest of skill or amusement of any kind
or description, and which contains no automatic payoff device for the
return of money or which makes no provision whatever for the return
of money to the player.
A.
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 76-16 WATERFORD CODE § 82-1
82:86
MONEY — Any debit or credit card, paper money, coin, trade-token or slug.
§ 82-2. License required; fee.
§ 82-3. Issuance of license. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
No license shall be issued except to a person of good character, approved
by the Village Board. Upon approval of the applicant and the payment of
the license fee, the Clerk shall issue a stamp bearing a notation, "Village of
Waterford license for the calendar year of _____." One license shall be issued
for each device licensed, and it shall be placed in a conspicuous place and
so affixed that it cannot be transferred from one machine to another.
§ 82-4. Devices to be kept in plain view; gambling devices
prohibited.
§ 82-5. Inspection.
The Police Department shall inspect or cause the inspection of any place
or building in which any such device or devices are operated or set up for
operation and inspect, investigate and test such devices, at least twice each
year.
Any machine, apparatus, or contrivance which is used or which may be
used as a game of skill and amusement wherein or whereby the player
initiates, employs or directs any force generated by the machine.
B.
The term "mechanical amusement device" is also hereby defined to be
and shall include each machine vending recorded music or a period of
radio or television entertainment in return for the insertion or deposit
therein of money; provided, however, that this does not include moneyoperated
radios or television sets in private quarters.
C.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install,
operate or maintain any such mechanical amusement or music device
without having first obtained a license therefor. Applications shall be
made to the Clerk. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
B. The fee for such license shall be in an amount set by the Village Board.
The license period shall be from July 1 through and including June 30 of
each year. 29
A. All such devices shall at all times be kept in plain view of any person or
persons who may frequent or be in any place of business where such
devices are kept or used.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize, permit or
license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 82-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 82-6
82:87
§ 82-6. Revocation.
In addition to any penalty imposed, the Village Board may revoke such
license for any violation of these provisions or of any ordinance pertaining
to the conduct of such business.
§ 82-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any regulation,
rule or order made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided by
Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code.
Chapter 87
ANIMALS
§ 82-6 WATERFORD CODE § 82-7
82:88
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted as §§ 9.04 through 9.06 of the 1998 Code]
§ 87-1. Dogs not allowed in public parks.30 [Amended 9-24-2001 by
Ord. No. 416]
§ 87-2. Injuring birds prohibited.
§ 87-3. Feeding of animals and birds. [Added 11-24-2003 by Ord.
No. 441; amended 12-27-2016 by Ord. No. 646; 10-9-2017 by Ord.
No. 656]
A. No person shall permit any dog owned or kept by such person, nor shall
any person permit any dog under such person's management and
control, to enter upon the grounds of any public park within the Village
of Waterford, except as provided in Subsection B.
B. Dogs which are properly leashed and under the management and
control of a person shall be permitted upon the grounds of the
Cornerstone Crossing Nature Conservancy, provided that the person
abides by the waste collection provisions of § 87-16. [Amended
1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
A. Generally. No person shall injure or kill any bird in the Village, nor shall
any person throw stones or use any implement with the intent of killing
or injuring any bird.
B. Water fowl. No person shall take, catch, kill, pursue or molest aquatic
fowl, or their nests, upon the lakes, rivers and ponds within the Village.
A. Feeding of wildlife in public areas prohibited. No person shall feed or
spread food for any wildlife in any public park or on any other property
owned or occupied by the Village of Waterford. "Wildlife" as used herein
includes mammals or birds that are neither human nor domesticated.
B. Feeding of outdoor or feral cats prohibited. No person shall feed or
leave food for any outdoor or feral cat.
C. No person shall place, deposit, or allow the placement of any material
to feed or attract wildlife on any non-Village-owned property in the
Village, unless specifically authorized under Wis. Admin. Code s. NR
19.60 or except as follows:
(1) The material is placed solely for the purpose of attracting and
feeding wild birds and small mammals and is placed in bird feeding
devices and structures at sufficient height or design to prevent
access by deer, and the device is no further than 50 yards from a
dwelling devoted to human occupancy; or
30.Editor's Note: Former § 9.04, Animals not to run at large, which immediately preceded this
section, was deleted 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489. See now § 87-12.
§ 87-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 87-3
82:89
§ 87-4. Horseback riding prohibited.
No person shall ride any horse, pony or donkey within the Village limits.
§ 87-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No.
489]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, or any regulation,
rule or order made hereunder, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code.
(2) The food is placed not more than 30 feet away from the person
feeding and the person feeding makes all reasonable attempts to
clean up the unconsumed feed before moving a distance greater
than 30 feet from the deposited feed; or
(3) The feed is deposited by natural vegetation or found solely as a
result of normal gardening practices.
§ 87-3 WATERFORD CODE § 87-5
82:90
ARTICLE II
Licensing and Control
[Adopted as § 12.03 of the 1998 Code; amended in its entirety
7-13-1998 by Ord. No. 364]
§ 87-6. Definitions.
In the interpretation and enforcement of this article, the following
definitions shall apply:
ANIMAL — A reptile, an amphibian, or any warm-blooded creature, except
a human being.
AT LARGE — Any animal off the premises of the owner or not under the
control of the owner.
CAT — Any feline over five months of age, regardless of sex.
CAT, FERAL OR OUTDOOR — Any feline that is found outdoors, whether
stray, nondomesticated, or domesticated but allowed by its owners to roam
at least 100 feet from its owner or agent. A cat that has been determined
to be feral and returned to the field is ear-tipped to make the cat readily
identifiable as having been spayed or neutered.[Added 12-27-2016 by
Ord. No. 646]
CRUEL — Causing unnecessary neglect and excessive pain, suffering or
unjustifiable death; causing unnecessary neglect and excessive pain,
suffering or unjustifiable death.
DOG — Any canine over five months of age, regardless of sex.
DOMESTICATED ANIMAL — Any dog, puppy, cat, kitten, or ferret.
FERRET — A domesticated polecat (mustela putorius) weasel-like mammal.
HYBRID CAT — Any cat bred with the intent of having lynx, pumas or other
wildlife mixed into the bloodline.
HYBRID DOG — Any dog bred with the intent of having wolf, coyote or other
wildlife mixed into the bloodline.
KITTEN — Any feline under the age of five months.
NEUTERED — An animal rendered sterile by surgical means.
OFFICER — A peace officer, local health officer, humane officer, warden,
designated employee of the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade
and Consumer Protection or designee of the Village Board.
OWNER — Any person who keeps, harbors or controls animals, or
knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied
by that person.
PUPPY — Any canine under the age of five months.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING — One residential dwelling, whether that
dwelling is located in a single-family house or is a dwelling unit located
within a two-family or multiple-family building. All of the occupants of the
§ 87-6 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 87-6
82:91
dwelling unit are considered owners of all of the animals located on or about
the residential dwelling unit.[Added 3-28-2005 by Ord. No. 475]
UNALTERED — An animal that is not neutered by surgical means.
§ 87-7. Licensing of dogs.
Every owner of a dog more than five months of age on January 1 of any
year or five months of age within the license year shall annually or prior
to the date such dog becomes five months of age, in the manner provided
by law for the payment of personal property taxes, pay a dog license tax
and obtain a license therefor as provided by Wis. Stats. §§ 174.05 and
174.07. The license year shall commence on January 1 and end on the
following December 31. Each applicant for a dog license shall present a
valid certificate of vaccination in accordance with §§ 87-14 and 87-15 of this
article.
§ 87-8. (Reserved)31
§ 87-9. Fees. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467; 1-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 489]
Such owner shall pay to the Village Treasurer the fee in an amount set by
the Village Board.
§ 87-10. Issuance of license. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467;
7-28-2014 by Ord. No. 620]
Upon payment to the Treasurer of the required fee, the Clerk shall issue to
such person a license to keep such dog for one year and such person shall,
upon procuring the license, place upon the dog a collar with a tag furnished
to him by the Village Clerk or the County Clerk. No person shall own an
animal which is required to be licensed but is not.
§ 87-11. State regulations.
Wis. Stats. ch. 174 and § 95.21 shall apply so far as applicable.
§ 87-12. Animals at large; damaging premises.
A. Animals at large. [Amended 7-28-2014 by Ord. No. 620]
(1) Prohibited. No owner shall permit any animal to run at large within
the Village. A dog or cat is not at large if it is not more than 100 feet
from an owner or agent competent to control the dog or cat without
a leash and the dog or cat is not annoying other individuals or
trespassing.
31.Editor's Note: Former § 87-8, Licensing of cats, was repealed 7-28-2014 by Ord. No. 620.
§ 87-6 WATERFORD CODE § 87-12
82:92
§ 87-13. Harboring certain animals prohibited; nuisance and
vicious animals. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 6-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 556]
(2) No person other than the owner shall open any gate or door so as to
enable any animal to leave any premises for the purpose and result
of setting such animal at large.
(3) Any dog running at large or untagged is subject to impoundment. A
dog is considered untagged if a valid license is not attached to its
collar.
B. Damaging premises, property or injuring another animal. No person
shall permit any animal to escape or to be set free or to go upon any
public or private premises or land without the permission of the owner
thereof or to injure or destroy any lawn, flower bed, plant, shrub, tree
or fence or any other part of such premises, or to break, tear up, injure,
defecate on or destroy property of the owner, or to injure or attack
another animal.
A. Public nuisance. No person shall own or keep an animal which
repeatedly interferes with passersby or passing vehicles, or which
attacks other animals or persons, or is at large or unrestrained, or
damages private or public property, or excessively barks, whines, howls
or makes other sounds common to its species.
B. Vicious animals. With the exception of animals under the control of law
enforcement, no person shall own, keep or harbor a vicious animal.
Evidence that an animal has, without provocation, bitten or inflicted
injury on a person or domestic animal two or more times during the
subject animal's life, or did bite or inflict injury once, causing wounds or
injuries creating death or a potential danger to the health or life of the
victim, shall constitute a prima facie showing that the animal is vicious.
Any animal trained or used for fighting against another animal shall be
presumed to be vicious under this section.
C. Disposition of nuisance or vicious animals.
(1) Upon verified notification of a violation of this section, the Village
Board will make a determination as to whether the animal is a
public nuisance or is vicious.
(a) In making its determination, the Village Board shall consider
the circumstances, and may determine that an animal is not
vicious if:
[1] Death, injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at
the time such was sustained, was committing trespass
upon premises occupied by the owner of the animal, or
was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal,
or was committing or attempting to commit a crime or
§ 87-12 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 87-13
82:93
violating or attempting to violate a statute or ordinance
which protects person or property.
[2] Death, injury or damage was sustained by a domestic
animal which was teasing, tormenting, abusing or
assaulting the animal; provided, however, that this section
shall not apply if the animal is trained or used for fighting.
[3] The animal was protecting or defending a human being
within the immediate vicinity of the animal from an
unjustified attack or assault.
(b) No animal may be declared vicious for acts committed by the
animal while being utilized by a law enforcement officer for law
enforcement purposes.
(2) Upon the Village Board's determination, the Village Clerk shall
serve written notice and order, hand-delivered or sent by U.S.
Postal Service Certified Mail, return receipt required, giving the
owner no more than 10 days from receipt of the notice and order:
(a) In the case of a public nuisance animal, to dispose of the
animal and show proof of the relocation of the animal and the
place of its relocation. If the owner does not dispose of such
animal, it may be impounded and held for the appropriate time
and then either adopted or euthanized, or it may be dealt with
as unwanted.
(b) In the case of a vicious animal, to dispose of the animal and
show proof of the relocation of the animal and the place of its
relocation or a certificate of euthanization. If the owner does
not dispose of such animal it may be impounded and
euthanized.
(3) If the owner wishes to appeal the order of the Board, such appeal
shall be in writing and filed with the Village Clerk no more than 10
days after receipt of the notice and order, or within the time
designated on the order. Upon receipt of a written appeal, the
Village Board shall conduct a hearing on the matter. The Board
shall thereafter render a written decision:
(a) In the case of a public nuisance animal, that the animal is a
public nuisance and shall be removed or is not a nuisance and
shall remain with the owner; or
(b) In the case of a vicious animal, that the animal is dangerous
and must be euthanized or is not dangerous and shall remain
with the owner.
(4) The owner of any animal which is impounded and/or euthanized
shall be held responsible for payment of any expenses incurred by
§ 87-13 WATERFORD CODE § 87-13
82:94
§ 87-14. Certificate of inoculation required. [Amended 7-28-2014 by
Ord. No. 620]
No license shall be issued hereunder for any dog unless the applicant
exhibits a certificate of a qualified veterinarian showing that the dog has a
current inoculation for rabies.
§ 87-15. Rabies control. [Amended 7-28-2014 by Ord. No. 620;
9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 621]
See § 142-4 of this Municipal Code.
§ 87-16. Waste collection.
No dog or cat owner shall allow the same to be on any public or private
property not owned or possessed by such person, and provided that the
property is not posted to prohibit the presence of such animal, unless he has
and uses a device to scoop up excrement and an appropriate depository in
which to place such excrement. This shall not apply to visually or physically
handicapped persons.
§ 87-17. Cruelty toward or mistreatment of animals.
§ 87-18. Limitation on number of dogs and cats allowed. [Amended
3-28-2005 by Ord. No. 475; 2-25-2013 by Ord. No. 605]
the Village, by animal control or by the impoundment facility. See
§ 87-25. [Amended 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 599]
A. No person shall willfully or maliciously inflict unnecessary neglect or
needless cruelty, torture, or abuse, or cruelly beat, strike or abuse any
animal, or by any act, omission or neglect cause or inflict any
unnecessary or unjustifiable pain, suffering, injury or death to any
animal, whether the animal belongs to such person or to another,
except that reasonable force may be employed to drive away vicious or
trespassing animals.
B. Any person owning, in charge of or having custody of any animal shall
not abandon it. Any person who abandons any animal shall be guilty of
causing the animal unnecessary and unjustifiable suffering. Any
unwanted animal shall be delivered to the Humane Society or holding
facility for proper disposal.
C. No person shall lead any animal upon a highway or street from a motor
vehicle or trailer or semitrailer drawn by a motor vehicle.
A. Purpose. The owning, harboring and keeping by any person of a large
number of dogs, cats or any combination in a residence or on a lot used
for residential purposes within the Village detracts from the quality of
life within the residential area due to the various noise, odor, health and
safety problems which constitute a public nuisance. The Village has
§ 87-13 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 87-18
82:95
§ 87-19. Care of animals.
§ 87-20. Enforcement; disposition of animals. [Amended 1-23-2006
by Ord. No. 489; 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 599; 12-27-2016 by Ord.
No. 646]
deemed it necessary to abate such public nuisance by the creation of
the limitation in Subsection B.
B. Limitation. No more than three dogs or cats or any combination thereof
over three months of age may be kept in any residential dwelling unit in
the Village of Waterford. Working dogs such as service dogs, medical
alert dogs and certified therapy dogs are not included in the
calculation. Proof of accreditation shall be provided to the Village, and
licenses are required.
A. Providing proper shelter.
(1) No person owning or responsible for confining any animal may fail
to provide the animal with proper accessible shelter, which shall
consist of a moistureproof structure of suitable size to
accommodate the animal and allow retention of body heat during
inclement weather, and shall be provided with a sufficient quantity
of suitable bedding to provide insulation and protection against
cold and dampness. Shelter for a dog shall be made of durable
material with a solid floor raised at least two inches from the
ground, with the entrance covered by a flexible, windproof
material.
(2) The housing facilities and confinement areas shall be structurally
sound and maintained in good repair to protect the animal from
injury and provide sufficient space to allow the animal adequate
freedom of movement and to be easily cleaned. Sufficient shade by
natural or artificial means shall be provided to protect the animal
from direct sunlight.
(3) The shelter, housing facilities and confinement areas shall be kept
clean and reasonably dry, without standing water or mud, and shall
be kept free of feces and trash.
B. Providing food and drink.
(1) Any person owning or responsible for caring for an animal shall
provide food which is free of contamination, wholesome, palatable
and of sufficient quality, quantity and nutritive value required for
that animal. Food receptacles shall be accessible, durable and kept
clean.
(2) Any person owning or responsible for caring for an animal shall
provide potable fresh water at all times. Water receptacles shall be
accessible, durable and kept clean.
§ 87-18 WATERFORD CODE § 87-20
82:96
§ 87-21. Prohibited animals. [Amended 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 556]
A. Confinement of dogs. The Police Department or contracting law
enforcement agency shall impound any dog found running at large in
the Village in the Village temporary holding facility until the owner
claims the dog or the dog is called for by the contracting Humane
Society.
B. The Village shall direct any person wishing to surrender ownership of a
cat or dog to the contracting Humane Society. The owner of an animal
surrendered to the contracting Humane Society is responsible for the
payment of fees charged by the Humane Society.
C. The Village may make arrangements for the impoundment or return-tofield
of any animal that is not a dog that is found running at large in the
Village. The Village may advise any person wishing to turn over a cat
found running at large that he or she may turn the cat over to the
contracting Humane Society and should inform the person of the
Humane Society strategy regarding leaving healthy cats in place
(including cats that have been ear-tipped) and that it would be better to
search for their owners.
D. Disposition of animals. The person in charge of the contracting Humane
Society, or other agency to which animals found in the Village are
referred, may dispose of animals in accordance with Wis. Stats. §
173.23, the Humane Society’s return-to-field strategy, or other
applicable law.
E. Owner or keeper to pay costs. The owner or keeper of any animal that is
impounded shall be responsible for payment of all costs related to the
impoundment as set forth in § 87-25.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall keep,
maintain, or have in his possession or under his control within the
Village any livestock or poultry, including but not limited to any cattle,
cow, horse, sheep, swine (including any pot-belly pig), goat, chicken,
duck, turkey, poultry, geese, or any polecat, skunk, raccoon, emu,
ostrich, fox, game or game birds, nor shall any person keep a hybrid
canine or feline.
B. No person shall keep, maintain, or have in his possession or under his
control within the Village any nuisance or vicious animal, as determined
by the Village Board pursuant to § 87-13, or as determined by, and/or
ordered removed from, any court, municipality, town, county or state.
C. No person shall keep, maintain, or have within his possession or under
his control within the Village any poisonous reptile or any other
dangerous or carnivorous wild animal or reptile, any vicious or
dangerous domesticated animal, or any other animal or reptile of wild,
vicious or dangerous propensities, including but not limited to:
§ 87-20 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 87-21
82:97
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, or have in his
possession or under his control within the Village any of the
following animals:
(a) All poisonous animals and reptiles including rear-fang snakes.
(b) Apes: chimpanzees (Pan); gibbons (Hylobates); gorillas
(Gorilla) orangutans (Pongo); and siamangs (Symphalangus).
(c) Baboons (Papoi, Mandrillus).
(d) Bears (Ursidae).
(e) Cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus).
(f) Crocodilians (Crocodilia), 30 inches in length or more.
(g) Constrictor snakes, six feet in length or more.
(h) Coyotes (Canis latrans).
(i) Elephants (Elephas and Loxodonta).
(j) Game cocks and other fighting birds.
(k) Hippopotami (Hippopotamidea).
(l) Hyenas (Hyaenidae).
(m) Jaguars (Panthera onca).
(n) Leopards (Panthera pardus).
(o) Lions (Panthera leo).
(p) Lynxes (Lynx).
(q) Monkeys, old world (Cercopithecidae).
(r) Pumas (Felis concolor); also known as cougars, mountain lions
and panthers.
(s) Ocelots (Felis pardalis).
(t) Rhinoceroses (Rhinocero tidae).
(u) Snow leopards (Panthera uncia).
(v) Tigers (Panthera tigris).
(w) Wolves: red wolf (Canis Lupus), gray timber (Canis Nigar), or
hybrid dog, part wolf.
(x) Poisonous insects.
(y) Wild animals as defined in Wis. Stats. § 169.01(37).
§ 87-21 WATERFORD CODE § 87-21
82:98
§ 87-22. Exceptions. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 432]
This article shall not apply to any livestock brought into the Village for the
purpose of being shipped out of the Village.
§ 87-22.1. Keeping of backyard chickens. [Added 8-28-2017 by Ord.
No. 655]
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 87-21A, chickens may be kept in the
Village under the provisions set forth herein.
(2) Exceptions.
(a) The provisions of Subsection C(1) above shall not apply to pet
shops, zoological gardens, circuses, professional animal acts
and wild life exhibits if special permits are granted pursuant to
§ 87-24 and:
[1] Their location conforms to the provisions of the zoning
ordinance of the Village, and all appropriate zoning and
building permits are issued.
[2] All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and
sanitary condition and so maintained as to eliminate
objectionable odors.
[3] Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to
prevent their escape.
[4] No person lives within 100 feet of the quarters in which
the animals are kept.
(b) "Wild animal," as used in this section, does not include captivebred
species of caged birds, rodents, turtles, fish, and
nonpoisonous, nonconstricting snakes.
A. Permit required. No person shall keep chickens in the Village without
obtaining a valid permit issued by the Clerk. The permit process
requires a completed application, including a site plan and a manure
management plan, accompanied by the fee set by the Village Board and
shown in the Fee Schedule. The permit application is also subject to
notification and approval pursuant to Subsection B. The fee shall not be
refundable in the event that the license is denied.
(1) Permits shall only be issued to persons living in single-family or
two-family residential premises. No permits will be issued for
commercial buildings or mixed-use occupancies.
(2) If the applicant is a tenant, the owner of the property must also sign
the application. If the building contains two dwellings, the other
tenant(s) shall either sign the application or the applicant shall
include the names and address of the other tenant(s) on the
§ 87-21 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 87-22.1
82:99
application and the Clerk shall send the notification of the
application to the other tenant(s) as set forth in Subsection B.
(3) Permits are not transferable from person to person or property to
property. If the permit holder moves, a new permit must be applied
for.
(4) Permits shall expire on March 31 of each year, regardless of the
date of issuance, and must be renewed annually. The fee shall not
be prorated for partial years.
(5) The applicant should check all of the rules and regulations of their
neighborhood or owners' association prior to making the
application. The Village is not responsible for issuing a permit that
violates any such rules or regulations.
B. Permit issuance.
(1) Initial issuance. Before an initial permit is issued for the keeping of
chickens in a particular location, the following process shall be
followed:
(a) Neighborhood approval required.
[1] Once a permit is applied for, the property owner, if
someone other than the applicant, and the owners of all
directly or diagonally abutting properties, including those
across an alley, along with tenants in the same building,
shall be notified by the Clerk. This shall be done via firstclass
U.S. mail.
[2] Property owners, and tenants of the same building, shall
have 14 working days to file a written objection and
request for a hearing to the Clerk if they object to the
granting of a permit.
[3] If a timely written objection and request for a hearing has
been submitted to the Clerk, the Clerk shall schedule the
matter for a public hearing to be held at the next available
Village Board meeting, and shall notify the objector(s) and
the applicant of the date and time of the hearing.
[4] Within 10 days of completion of the hearing conducted
pursuant to Subsection B(1)(a)[3], the Village Board,
through the Clerk, shall mail to the objector(s) and the
permit applicant its written determination on the granting
of the permit, taking into consideration factors listed
under Subsections C and D.
(b) Coop inspection and construction.
[1] Building permit. Prior to permit issuance, the applicant
shall obtain a building permit for the coop and run and pay
§ 87-22.1 WATERFORD CODE § 87-22.1
82:100
the applicable building permit fee therefor,
notwithstanding any provision of Chapter 98 to the
contrary. The Building Inspector shall inspect the coop
and run for size, placement, and conformance with the
requirements below prior to issuance of the permit.
[2] Coop and run construction.
[a] A chicken coop is considered an accessory structure
subject to § 245-10H, except as provided herein.
[b] The coop and run enclosures shall not be located
closer than 25 feet to any residential structure on an
adjacent lot, and shall be located behind the dwelling
or garage so as not to be seen when the property is
viewed from the front street yard. No coop or run shall
be located in the front or side yard of a dwelling.
[c] Chicken coops and runs together shall be large
enough to provide at least 16 square feet per chicken.
[d] A chicken coop shall have a solid roof, and shall be
predator-proof and thoroughly ventilated. It shall be
constructed in a workmanlike manner, be moistureresistant
and either raised up off the ground or placed
on a hard surface such as concrete, patio block or
gravel. A chicken run need not have a solid roof, but if
it does not, it shall be covered with a net, mesh, wire,
or similar material to prevent the chickens from
escaping from the run.
[e] Coops and runs shall be designed to prevent the
collection of standing water, and to be easily accessed,
cleaned, and maintained by the owners. Adequate
drainage shall be established so that surrounding
properties are protected from surface water drainage
containing contaminants or waste.
(c) DATCP registration. The permit holder shall register the
premises with the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade
and Consumer Protection (DATCP) and provide proof of the
registration to the Clerk prior to issuance of the permit.
(2) Renewal of permit. No neighborhood notification or coop
inspection is required prior to renewal of a permit. Upon an
application for renewal, the Clerk shall review the record of all
violations and complaints filed, and may refer the matter to the
Village Board for consideration of the renewal, or may issue the
renewal permit.
§ 87-22.1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 87-22.1
82:101
C. Keeping of chickens allowed. The keeping of a maximum of four
chickens, with a permit, is allowed on a one- or two-family residential
lot, provided the following:
(1) No person shall keep any rooster. No person shall keep any other
type of fowl, including but not limited to turkeys, guinea fowl,
pheasants, pigeons, or ducks.
(2) No person shall slaughter any chickens on the permitted property.
(3) Chickens shall be provided with fresh water at all times and
adequate amounts of feed.
(4) Chickens shall be provided with a sanitary and adequately sized
covered coop, and shall be kept in the coop or in a sanitary and
adequately sized and accessible covered enclosure or run, at all
times.
(5) Chicken coops and covered runs shall be maintained to reasonably
prevent the collection of standing water, and shall be cleaned of
droppings, uneaten feed, feathers and other waste daily and as is
necessary to ensure that the coop and run do not become a health,
odor or other nuisance. Adequate drainage shall be maintained so
that surrounding properties are protected from surface water
drainage containing contaminants or waste.
(6) Chickens shall not be allowed outside the coop or the covered run.
A chicken found off the permitted property shall be subject to
impoundment, and the provisions of §§ 87-20 and 87-25 apply;
provided, however, that § 87-20B does not apply and an owner may
not surrender a chicken to the contracting Humane Society, and is
required to personally rehome the chicken.
(7) In addition to compliance with the requirements of this section, no
one shall keep chickens that cause any nuisance, unhealthy
condition, create a public health threat or otherwise interfere with
the normal use of property or enjoyment of life by humans or
animals.
D. Public health requirements.
(1) Chickens shall be kept and handled in a sanitary manner to prevent
the spread of communicable diseases among birds or to humans.
(2) Any person keeping chickens shall immediately report any unusual
illness or death of a chicken to DATCP, and any human illness
related to a chicken to the Health Department.
(3) The DATCP, Village or Health Department may order testing,
quarantine, isolation, vaccination or humane euthanasia of ill
chickens or any chicken believed to be a carrier of a communicable
disease.
§ 87-22.1 WATERFORD CODE § 87-22.1
82:102
§ 87-23. Powers of Health Officer.
The Health Officer may issue an order prohibiting the keeping of any
animal, fowl or bird which is deemed to pose a health hazard to the general
public.
§ 87-24. Special animal permits. [Added 3-28-2005 by Ord. No. 475;
6-25-2008 by Ord. No. 530; 2-25-2013 by Ord. No. 605]
The keeping of an animal or bird otherwise prohibited by this article may
be permitted if a special animal permit is granted under this section. Such
a permit may be issued to permit circus performances, petting zoos, pony
rides or other temporary public exhibition, entertainment or demonstration
events using animals. If a special event permit is required under Chapter
188 of this Municipal Code, a separate special animal permit under this
section is not required; provided, however, that the application required
under this section shall accompany the application for the special event
permit.
(4) Manure, feathers and other materials shall be disposed of away
from the property. They may not be spread as fertilizer or
composted on the property.
E. Violations. The Clerk shall keep a record of all complaints, charges,
warnings and other reports filed against the permit holder. In addition
to the penalties set forth in § 87-25, any person violating this section is
subject to the following:
(1) Permit revocation. A permit is subject to revocation by the Village
Board upon notification of a conviction for failure to comply with
any provision of Subsections C or D. The Village Board shall notify
the permit holder of its consideration of the revocation, and shall
allow the permit holder the opportunity to be heard. Once a permit
is revoked, the chickens shall be removed from the Village and a
permit shall not be reissued to the same applicant or residence for
a period of 12 months.
(2) Double permit fees. Any person who does not obtain a permit prior
to having live chickens on their property shall pay double fees for
the permit and building permit.
(3) Cost of inspections. Any person found to be in violation of the
regulations hereunder shall be responsible for payment of the
Village's costs related to inspection of the property.
A. Application. The application for a special animal permit hereunder shall
be filed with the Village Clerk and shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the person or organization holding the
event, the name and address of the person responsible for the
animals, the date and location of the event, the types and number
of animals to be present in the Village as part of the event, the
§ 87-22.1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 87-24
82:103
§ 87-25. Violations and penalties; fees and costs. [Amended
1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 599]
housing for the animals, and the provisions for the disposal of
animal waste.
(2) Whether the applicant has been convicted of violating any animal
control or cruelty law or ordinance, including any violation of this
article of the Municipal Code, and, if so, when and in what court, in
the previous five years. The Village may but is not required to
investigate the applicant and the information provided.
B. Action by Clerk. The Clerk shall make a report to the Village Board of
the application, which shall grant or deny such permit and shall define
the effective dates of the permit.
C. Issuance.
(1) Upon the granting of any special permit, the same shall be issued
by the Village Clerk.
(2) All permits shall be numbered in the order of their date of issuance
and shall state clearly the name of the permittee, the address
where the animal(s) will be kept, the type(s) of animal(s) allowed,
the date of issuance, the effective dates, and the fee paid.
D. Conditions of issuance.
(1) The permittee shall pay a special animal permit fee in an amount
set by the Village Board. The special animal permit shall expire on
the date set forth in the permit.
(2) No permit shall be granted to any person who knowingly furnishes
any false statement on the application.
E. Authority of Village President. When the Board is not in session, the
Village President may order the issuance of a special animal permit for
an event hereunder, provided such issuance shall be acted upon by the
Village Board at its next regular meeting.
F. Appeal of denial of permit. The denial of a permit by the Village Board
may be appealed to the Circuit Court.
A. Violations and penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of
this article or any regulation, rule or order made hereunder shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in the subsection violated and/or as
provided by Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code.
B. Fees and costs. In addition to any penalties imposed pursuant to
Subsection A, the owner of any animal found in the Village in violation
of this chapter, and/or impounded pursuant to this chapter, shall be
responsible for the payment of all fees, costs and charges related to the
§ 87-24 WATERFORD CODE § 87-25
82:104
violation and/or impoundment as follows: [Amended 7-28-2014 by
Ord. No. 620]
(1) Dogs found running at large.
(a) When a dog that is found running at large in the Village is
reclaimed by the owner before it is turned over to the
contracting Humane Society, the owner shall pay all fees for
impounding and keeping and caring for the dog, which shall
include the administrative costs. Additional fees will be
charged for after-hour calls for pick-up or release; i.e., all calls
between 4:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, and all weekend
and holiday calls. Fees shall increase for each additional
impoundment in any twelve-month period. Prior to release of
the dog to the owner, the owner shall provide proof of required
vaccination and licensing, or arrange to provide such proof
within 10 days. If such proof of vaccination and licensing is not
provided at the time the dog is claimed, the owner shall prepay
the cost, and the amount will be refunded to the owner upon
the provision of said proof. If the owner does not provide proof
of vaccination and licensure to the Village Treasurer within 10
days, the Village may issue citations for violations of §§ 87-7
and 87-15E. The fees shall be in the amounts set by the Village
Board and shown in the Fee Schedule. The fees shall be billed
to the owner and payment shall be made to the Village
Treasurer within 30 days of being billed therefor. In the event
that the amount due is not paid to the Village within 30 days,
the amount may be charged as a special charge on the
property of the owner pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats., or
may be collected pursuant to any other method allowed by law.
(b) When a dog that is found running at large in the Village is
turned over to the contracting Humane Society, the owner
shall be responsible for paying the Village's fees for
impounding and keeping and caring for the dog, including
after-hours fees and additional fees for repeat impoundments,
as set forth in Subsection B(1)(a), in addition to all expenses
charged by the contracting Humane Society in accordance
with its regulations. The Village shall bill the owner for the
Village's fees. In the event that the fees are not paid to the
Village within 30 days of being billed, the fees may be charged
as a special charge on the property of the owner pursuant to
§ 66.0627, Wis. Stats., or may be collected pursuant to any
other method allowed by law.
(2) Other animals. The owner of any animal that is in violation of this
chapter and/or is impounded pursuant to this chapter is
responsible for paying all of the Village's actual costs and charges
incurred in investigating, apprehending, impounding, keeping and
caring for the animal, and all costs of prosecution, in addition to
expenses charged by any Humane Society or other person or entity
§ 87-25 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 87-25
82:105
engaged by the Village to care for the animal. The Village shall
bill the owner for the Village's costs and charges. In the event that
the costs and charges are not paid to the Village within 30 days
of being billed, the costs and charges may be charged as a special
charge on the property of the owner pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis.
Stats., or may be collected pursuant to any other method allowed
by law.
(3) All fees, costs and charges are due whether any animal is
reclaimed, released to another person, or destroyed.
§ 87-25 WATERFORD CODE § 87-25
82:106
Chapter 93
BOATING
§ 93-1. Applicability and enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter apply to the waters of the Fox River within
the Village of Waterford. The chapter shall be enforced by the contracting
law enforcement agency.
§ 93-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to provide safe and healthy conditions for the
enjoyment of aquatic recreation consistent with public rights and interests
and the capability of the water resources.
§ 93-3. State boating and safety laws adopted.
Wisconsin boating laws found in Wis. Stats. §§ 30.50 to 30.80 and the
Wisconsin Administrative Code provisions adopted pursuant thereto are
adopted by reference herein.
§ 93-4. Definitions.
SLOW-NO-WAKE — That speed at which a boat moves as slowly as possible
while still maintaining steerage control.
§ 93-5. Slow-no-wake area.
No person shall operate a boat faster than slow-no-wake speed in the waters
of the Fox River marked by slow-no-wake buoys in the area described as
follows: That part of the Fox River legally defined as a portion of the Fox
River, located in the NE 1/4 of Section 35, T4N, R19E, Village of Waterford,
Racine County, Wisconsin, described as follows: that area of the Fox River
from the northerly line of the westerly dam having control gates; thence
northerly 1,600 feet, more or less, to an east-west line 100 feet north of
the northern tip of Fox Isle. Said east-west line is located 500 feet, more or
less, south of the north line of said NE 1/4. The area described includes the
waters east and west of Fox Isle and contains 26 acres, more or less.
§ 93-6. Violations and penalties.
A. Wisconsin state boating penalties as found in Wis. Stats. § 30.80, and
deposits established in the applicable edition of the State of Wisconsin
Revised Uniform Deposit and Bail Schedule for conservation,
environmental protection, boating, snowmobile, ATV/UTV, and captive
wildlife violations established by the Wisconsin Judicial Conference
("Bond Book"), are hereby adopted by reference, and all references to
fines are amended to forfeitures and all references to imprisonment are
hereby deleted; provided, further, that the costs and deposits for
§ 87-25 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 93-6
82:107
Chapter 95
BRUSH, NOXIOUS WEEDS AND RANK GROWTH OF
VEGETATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Burning — See Ch. 100.
Nuisances — See Ch. 165.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 178.
§ 95-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the words set out in this section shall have
the following meanings:
DESTROY — The complete killing of weeds or the killing of plants above the
surface of the ground by cutting, at such time and in such manner as will
effectually prevent such plants from maturing to the bloom or flower stage,
and no later than the time that such weeds and plants reach the height of
12 inches.
NOXIOUS WEEDS and RANK GROWTH OF VEGETATION — Includes the
following:
§ 95-2. Noxious weeds and rank growth of vegetation prohibited.
violations prosecuted in Municipal Court shall be imposed as required
by law.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any
regulation, rule or order made hereunder, that is not included in the
Uniform Deposit and Bail Schedule shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code.
Canada thistle, leafy spurge, field bindweed (creeping Jenny),
quackgrass, purple loosestrife, multiflora rose and any other weed that
the State of Wisconsin declares to be noxious.
A.
Any weed, grass or similar plant growth that, if allowed to pollinate,
would cause or produce hay fever in human beings or would cause a
skin rash through contact with the skin.
B.
Grass or vegetation exceeding 12 inches in height, or the accumulation
of dead weeds, grass or brush. Such rank growth of grass and
vegetation or accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush may
constitute a fire hazard or allow debris to be hidden, affecting the
public safety, and may adversely affect property values of other land
within the Village. Trees, shrubbery and garden areas that are
reasonably maintained are not included in this definition.
C.
§ 93-6 WATERFORD CODE § 95-2
82:108
§ 95-3. Annual Notice to destroy.
The Village Clerk shall annually, on or before May 15, publish as required by
state law a notice that every person is required by law to destroy all noxious
weeds and rank growth of vegetation on lands in the Village which he or
she owns, occupies or controls. The notice shall also state that, in the event
that noxious weeds and rank growth of vegetation are not destroyed, the
Village may destroy the noxious weeds and rank growth of vegetation, and
the costs will be charged to the land, and, in addition, citations for failure
to comply with this requirement may be issued.
§ 95-4. Administration.
§ 95-5. Enforcement. [Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 666]
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant or occupant of land to permit
or maintain noxious weeds or rank growth of vegetation on such land. It
shall be unlawful to allow or permit any growth of noxious weeds or
vegetation to a height greater than 12 inches.
B. This section shall not apply to natural areas, which shall be defined as
densely wooded areas, wetlands, marshes, floodplains or Villageapproved
conservancy areas, or on certain DNR land exempted under
Wis. Stats. § 66.0407(5). Stormwater pond areas are exempted as to the
length of the grass if the grass conforms to the approved plans for the
stormwater pond, but noxious weeds shall be controlled.
A. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats.
§§ 66.0407 and 66.0517 and the Village's power to act for the health,
safety and welfare of the public set forth in Wis. Stats. § 61.34.
B. This chapter shall be administered by the Director of Public Works, who
shall be the Weed Commissioner as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 66.0517
and who shall enforce the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0407 and
66.0517 and the provisions of this chapter. The Weed Commissioner
may appoint designees to assist in the duties set forth in this chapter.
C. The Weed Commissioner is authorized to destroy noxious weeds
pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0517, which provides that if a person
neglects to destroy noxious weeds as required under Wis. Stats.
§ 66.0407(3), the Weed Commissioner shall destroy, or have destroyed,
the noxious weeds in the most economical manner, and that a Weed
Commissioner may enter upon any lands that are not exempt under
Wis. Stats. § 66.0407(5) and cut or otherwise destroy noxious weeds
without being liable to an action for trespass or any other action for
damages resulting from the entry and destruction, if reasonable care is
exercised.
A. The Weed Commissioner or designee, or any Village Law Enforcement
Officer, shall thoroughly investigate concerns regarding the existence
of noxious weeds within the borders of the Village of Waterford that are
§ 95-2 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 95-5
82:109
witnessed or brought to their attention. The Weed Commissioner shall
respond to complaints within a reasonable period of time.
B. If a person violates the provisions of § 95-2, the violation shall be
documented and photographed, and a citation shall be issued to the
property owner. The citation shall identify the property and the
violation, shall demand that the noxious weeds or rank growth of
vegetation be destroyed within 10 days from the date of the notice. A
compliance verification form shall be issued giving the owner the
opportunity to show proof of compliance within 10 days of the citation.
The form shall notify the owner that the property must be kept in
conformance, and shall advise that failure to correct the problem will
result in the destruction or removal of the noxious weeds or rank
growth of vegetation by the Village, and that all of the costs incurred by
the Village shall be added to the property owner’s tax bill as a special
charge, and that the owner has the right to appeal the citation as set
forth in § 95-5E of the Code.
C. After 10 days, the property shall be reinspected to determine if the
noxious weeds or rank growth of vegetation have been destroyed, and
the results of the inspection shall be documented and retained in the
file, along with photographic evidence of the violation. If the noxious
weeds or rank growth of vegetation are still present, the Weed
Commissioner shall arrange for the noxious weeds or rank growth of
vegetation to be removed by a contracted cutter as soon as reasonably
possible.
(1) For second and subsequent violations in the same calendar year,
the violations shall be documented and the Police Department shall
issue citations for each day the violation continues. The Weed
Commissioner shall also arrange for the weeds or other rank
growth of vegetation to be removed by a contracted cutter as soon
as reasonably possible.
D. The Weed Commissioner will forward the Village’s costs of eliminating
the vegetation on the property to the Village Treasurer, who shall bill
the property owner for the work, together with an administrative fee to
recover the Village’s costs for enforcing this chapter in an amount set
by the Village Board. If the bill is not paid within 30 days, it shall
become a lien on the property, and if not paid by October 15, the
Treasurer shall place the billed amount, plus an additional ten-percent
administrative fee to recover the Village’s additional costs, on the tax
roll as a special charge upon the property tax bill where the noxious
weeds or other rank growth of vegetation were destroyed pursuant to
Wis. Stats. § 66.0627.
E. Any person who is aggrieved by a notice of violation and ordered to
remove the violation under this chapter may appeal to the Village Board
by providing notice of the appeal to the Village Clerk within 10 days of
the written notice of violation. The Board, after a hearing, may reverse,
affirm or modify the order of the Weed Commissioner or recommend
§ 95-5 WATERFORD CODE § 95-5
82:110
§ 95-6. Violations and penalties.
In addition to such other remedies as may be available as set forth herein,
violations of this chapter are subject to the enforcement and penalty
provisions described in Chapter 1, Article II, of this Code.
Chapter 98
BUILDING, PLUMBING, ELECTRICAL AND MECHANICAL
CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 142.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 178.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 191.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 223.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 235.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
dismissal of the citation upon notice to the appellant and the Village
Attorney, and to that end shall have all of the powers of the Weed
Commissioner. The Village shall not remove or arrange for the removal
of the violation or issue additional citations while the appeal is pending.
§ 95-5 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 95-6
82:111

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 98-1. Building, plumbing, electrical and mechanical regulations.
These provisions shall apply to all building, plumbing, electrical and HVAC
activaties in the Village of Waterford, and shall be known as the "Building,
Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical Code of the Village of Waterford."
This chapter may also be referred to collectively as the Village "Building
Code," and the provisions of this code may be referred to by the individual
codes adopted herein. Every person who is under the jurisdiction of this
chapter and who furnishes or performs building, plumbing, electrical or
HVAC services, or who owns, sells, leases or lets for hire, uses, designs,
installs, repairs, operates, maintains or grants possession of any equipment,
materials, or apparatus relating to said services in the Village shall comply
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 98-2. Authority.
These regulations are adopted under the statutory authority granted
pursuant to Wis. Stats. Chs. 101 and 145, including, but not limited to, Wis.
Stats. §§ 101.12, 101.65, 101.76, 101.86, 101.975 and 145.04.
§ 98-3. Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to promote the health, safety, and
general welfare of our community, and to protect property values and
provide for orderly, appropriate development and growth of the community
by the enforcement of the adopted Codes.
§ 98-4. Definitions.
As used in these regulations, the following terms have the meaning
prescribed herein. (Any item not defined herein shall follow the Wisconsin
Administrative Code definitions.)
A. These regulations prescribe reasonable minimum standards, rather
than specifications for building and mechanical installations and
equipment generally. The provisions and requirements set forth in these
regulations are intended to require safe and stable construction,
installation and maintenance of the various mechanical systems; and
compliance with these standards, provisions and requirements is
intended to result in buildings, structures, and mechanical installations
reasonably free from hazards.
B. Specifications are not complete when they merely require compliance
with these regulations, because the adequacy, suitability, operating
efficiency, convenience, finish, appearance and value of buildings,
structures and mechanical installations may vary greatly without
departure from these regulations.
§ 98-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 98-4
82:113
ADDITION — Any new construction whereby an existing building or
structure, or building or structure in course of construction, is increased in
area or cubical content.
ALTERATION — Any change, addition, modification, or repair to any
structural part of an existing structure, any change which involves room
arrangement, fenestration, exit stairways, fire protection equipment, exits,
application of exterior finish materials or cladding, or any modification of
signs, parking areas, fencing, canopies, landscaping, site topography or
similar site features.
BUILDING — Any structure erected or constructed of wood, metal, stone,
plastic or other materials, which is intended to be used by human beings for
occupancy, vehicle storage, other storage, commerce, education, cultural
activities or other purpose, including accessory buildings greater than 200
square feet. The term does not include children's play structures. (See
§ 98-21C for requirements for accessory buildings 200 square feet or
smaller.)
BUILDING AREA — The area of a floor is the area bounded by the exterior
surface of the building walls or the outside face of columns where there
is no wall. Area includes all floor levels such as subbasements, basements,
ground floors, mezzanines, balconies, lofts, all stories and all roofed areas
including porches and garages, except for cantilevered canopies on the
building wall. Use the roof area for freestanding canopies.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The individual(s) or firm appointed by the Village
to exercise all of the powers and duties of a building, plumbing, electrical,
and HVAC inspector under Wisconsin law and Village ordinances.
CONSTRUCTION — Any part or portion of the activity of installing, locating,
siting, erecting or raising a building.
CONTRACTOR — Any person, firm or entity which undertakes any activity
related to the construction of a building other than the mere provision of
supplies and/or materials.
DEMOLITION — The activity of completely or partially destroying a
previously erected or constructed building.
ELECTRICAL — The trade which relates to the design, installation,
maintenance and repair of the mechanical equipment, wiring, fixtures and
connections which tie a structure to the power grid of an electric generating
utility and distribute the electricity through a structure to end uses,
including any work which may be performed by a master electrician
licensed by the State of Wisconsin or a person under the supervision of such
an electrician.
FIXTURE — A plumbing device, including, without limitation, the following:
sinks, bathtubs, wash basins, water closets, shower stalls, urinals, laundry
tubs, water heaters of any type, range boilers, floor drains, catch basins,
bubblers, sumps, bar connections, soda fountains, ice boxes, machine waste
connections, acid tanks, ejectors and all plumbing fixtures and waterconnected
appliances, together with all changes or alterations where
§ 98-4 WATERFORD CODE § 98-4
82:114
inspections are necessary; and house drain, sewer, water and fire protection
installations, when no plumbing fixtures are installed.
HVAC — An acronym which stands for "heating, ventilating and air
conditioning;" the trade which installs mechanical equipment, systems and
accessory ducting and gratings for the purpose of warming, purifying,
cooling and exchanging air in a building.
OCCUPANCY — The act of utilizing a building for human habitation, use,
or occupancy. Any use of a building for any activity that is customarily or
routinely associated with utilization of a building as a residence, detached
residential accessory structure, or commercial use shall constitute
occupancy.
OWNER — The individual, firm or entity that has record title to the real
estate on which construction or demolition is taking place.
PLUMBING — The trade which relates to the design, installation and
maintenance or repair of pipes, drains, sinks, basins, hot water heating
systems, natural gas pipes, grease traps, floor drains, and all other work for
which the individual performing the work may either be a master plumber
licensed by the State of Wisconsin or work under the supervision of such a
plumber.
Plumbing includes:
The construction, connection or installation of any drain or waste
piping system from the outside or proposed outside foundation
walls of any building to the mains or other sewerage system
terminal within bounds of or beneath an area subject to easement
for highway purposes, including private domestic sewage
treatment and disposal systems, and the alteration of any such
systems, drains or waste piping; and
(1)
The water service piping from the outside or proposed outside
foundation walls of any building to the main or other water utility
service terminal within bounds of or beneath an area subject to
easement for highway purposes and its connections; and
(2)
The water pressure systems other than municipal systems as
provided in Wis. Stats. Ch. 281; and
(3)
A plumbing and drainage system so designed and vent piping so
installed as to keep the air within the system in free circulation
and movement; to prevent, with a margin of safety, unequal air
pressures of such force as might blow, siphon or affect trap seals
or retard the discharge from plumbing fixtures or permit sewer
air to escape into the building; to prohibit cross-connection,
contamination or pollution of the potable water supply and
distribution systems; and to provide an adequate supply of water
to properly serve, cleanse and operate all fixtures, equipment,
appurtenances and appliances served by the plumbing system.
(4)
A.
§ 98-4 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 98-4
82:115
REPAIRS — Repairs for purposes of maintenance or replacements in any
existing building or structure which do not involve structural portions of
the building or structure or which do not affect room arrangement, light
and ventilation, access to or efficiency of any exit stairways or exits, fire
protection or exterior aesthetic appearance and which do not increase a
given occupancy and use shall be deemed minor repairs.
STOP-WORK ORDER — A directive issued with respect to a construction
project by an inspector that compels the owner and any contractor or
builder of a building to cease any further work or activity on the
construction project until the inspector has authorized the resumption of
the construction project.
STRUCTURE — In this chapter, "structure" means anything other than a
building that is constructed, erected, and framed of component parts and
which is fastened, anchored, or rests on a permanent foundation or on the
ground for any occupancy or use whatsoever. It includes fair, carnival and
festival open structures; fire escape, stairway, or chute escapes and railings;
fences and railings; open-air observation, water tank and other towers;
traveling cranes, hoists.
WORKMANLIKE MANNER — Work of such character so as to meet
manufacturer's specifications, accepted national standards or recognized
trade practices, and to provide a durable result as intended to insure
public safety, health and welfare insofar as they are affected by building
construction, use and occupancy.
§ 98-5. Scope.
These regulations apply to all one- and two-family dwellings, commercial
buildings and structures (including but not limited to multiple-family
dwellings and business, office, industrial, manufacturing, and institutional
buildings and structures), swimming pools, decks, residential accessory
buildings and storage buildings. Notwithstanding this section, these
regulations shall not apply to children's play structures.
§ 98-6. Permit required.
Plumbing does not include minor repairs to faucets or the removal of
stoppages in solid or waste pipes.
B.
A. No owner or contractor may commence construction of any building,
mechanical, electrical or plumbing system prior to obtaining a valid
permit from the Building Inspector. Application for a permit shall be
made to the Inspector upon forms that the Inspector shall provide.
B. The construction which shall require a permit includes, but is not
limited to:
(1) New buildings, including detached structures (decks) and detached
accessory buildings.
§ 98-4 WATERFORD CODE § 98-6
82:116
(2) Additions that increase the physical dimensions of a building,
including decks.
(3) Alterations to the building structure where the reported cost shall
include market labor value, or alterations to the building's heating,
electrical or plumbing systems.
(4) Replacement of major building equipment, including furnaces and
central air conditioners, water heaters and any other major piece of
equipment shall require a permit except as noted in Subsection
C(2) below.
(5) Any electrical wiring for new construction or remodeling.
(6) Any HVAC for new construction or remodeling.
(7) Any plumbing for new construction or remodeling.
(8) Any new or rewired electrical service, including services for
storage, accessory, and other buildings.
(9) Residing, reroofing, major repairs, and window enlargement.
Structural load-bearing calculations may be requested by the
Building Inspector for reroofing a building if the proposed
reroofing would constitute a third or more layer of roofing.
(10) Any moving or relocating of buildings or structures including site
work and applicable foundation system.
(11) Any work on subterranean structures, footings, foundations, or
retention walls.
C. Exceptions.
(1) The following activities shall not require a permit:
(a) Finishing of interior surfaces, installation of cabinetry, and
repairs which are deemed minor by the Building Inspector.
(b) Normal repairs of HVAC, plumbing and electrical equipment or
systems such as replacing switches, dimmers and fixtures,
unless further or additional HVAC, electrical, or plumbing work
is deemed necessary or required under the provisions of this
chapter.
(2) No person manufacturing or requiring electrical apparatus and
equipment, and employing a state electrical contractor's
certification, shall be required to have an electrical permit for his
or its testing equipment.
(3) No electrical permit shall be required for private or public utilities
engaged in the distribution and sale of heat, light, electricity and
power.
§ 98-6 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 98-7
82:117
§ 98-7. Adoption of codes.
§ 98-8. Existing buildings and structures.
Unless otherwise specifically stated in these regulations, an existing
building or structure, and every element, system or component of an
existing building or structure, shall be maintained to conform with the
building and fire code requirements that applied when the building,
structure, element, system or component was constructed, and shall comply
with these regulations wherever applicable.
§ 98-9. Delegated municipality status; appointed agent
responsibilities.
A. Chapters 101 and 145 of the Wisconsin Statutes, along with the
following chapters of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, as well as all
subsequent revisions, are adopted by the Village and shall be enforced
by the Building Inspector and/or Plans Examiner, who shall be
commercially certified by the Wisconsin Division of Industry Services:
Ch. SPS 302 Plan Review Fee Schedules
Ch. SPS 305 (incl.
Appendix)
Licenses, Certification and Registration
Ch. SPS 316 (Electrical Code (Volume 2)
Ch. SPS 320-325 Uniform Dwelling Code
Ch. SPS 326 Manufactured Home Communities
Ch. SPS 327 Camping Units
Ch. SPS 328 Smoke Detectors and Carbon Monoxide
Detectors
Ch. SPS 360-366 Wisconsin Commercial Building Code
Ch. SPS 375-379 Buildings Constructed Prior to 1914
Ch. SPS 381-387 Uniform Plumbing Code
Ch. PSC 114 Wisconsin State Electrical Code, Volume
1
B. The provisions of these statutes and codes shall govern design and
construction of all buildings within the Village, along with the
additional provisions set forth in this chapter and Chapter 250 of this
Municipal Code. In all instances where there appears to be a conflict
between applicable provisions of the adopted codes with respect to any
instance of design or construction of any building within the Village, the
more restrictive provisions shall apply unless to do so would violate the
municipal authority to adopt said codes.
A. Delegated municipality. The Division of Industry Services has granted
the Village the authority to conduct commercial building, HVAC, fire
§ 98-7 WATERFORD CODE § 98-9
82:118
alarm systems, fire suppression system, and plumbing plan reviews and
inspections for buildings of any size.
(1) Responsibilities. The Village shall assume the following
responsibilities for the Department of Safety and Professional
Services (Department):
(a) Provide inspection of commercial buildings with certified
commercial building inspectors.
(b) Provide plan examination of commercial buildings with
certified commercial building inspectors.
(2) Plan examination. Drawings, specifications and calculations for all
the types of buildings and structures, except state-owned buildings
and structures, to be constructed within the limits of the
municipality shall be submitted, if the plans are for any of the
following:
(a) A new building or structure.
(b) An addition to a building or structure.
(c) An alteration of a building space, element, or structure.
(3) Plan review process.
(a) Building, HVAC, fire alarm, and fire suppression system plans
shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with the
procedures detailed in Wis. Admin. Code. ch. SPS 361.
Applicants for plan review shall submit the following directly to
the Village:
[1] Application Form SBD-118.
[2] Plan review fee per Wis. Admin. Code table SPS 302.31-2.
Payment shall be made to the Village.
[3] Digital or hardcopy plans in accordance with Wis. Admin.
Code ch. SPS 361.
(b) Plumbing plans shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance
with the procedures detailed in Wis. Admin. Code. ch. SPS 382.
Applicants for Plan Review shall submit the following directly
to the Village:
[1] Application Form SBD-6154.
[2] Plan review fee per Wis. Admin. Code § SPS 302.64.
Payment shall be made to the Village.
[3] Digital or hardcopy plans in accordance with Wis. Admin.
Code table SPS 382.20-2.
§ 98-9 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 98-9
82:119
§ 98-10. Inspector; authority and enforcement.
(4) Acceptance of DSPS review. The Village will continue to accept any
plan reviews conducted by the Division of Industry Services if
applicants are unaware of the Village's ability to conduct such plan
reviews, or choose to send their projects to the Division of Industry
Services for review.
(5) Optional waiver of plan review responsibility. The Village may
choose for any reason to waive its plan review responsibilities and
require a building or building or building component be reviewed
by the Division of Industry Services.
B. Building Inspector/Plans Examiner. The Building Inspector and/or Plans
Examiner authorized by the Village to enforce the adopted codes and
responsibilities shall be properly certified by the Division of Industry
Services.
C. Building permit required. No person shall build or cause to be built any
new public building or alter a public building without first submitting
plans and specifications to the Building Inspector and obtaining a
building permit for such building.
D. Penalties. Enforcement of this section shall be by means of withholding
of building permits, imposition of forfeitures and injunctive action.
Forfeitures shall be not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 for each day
of noncompliance, and as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II of this
Municipal Code.
E. This section shall be effective upon passage and publication as provided
by law, and upon the grant of delegated municipality status by the
Department of Safety and Professional Services, Division of Industry
Services.
A. Appointment and term. A Building Inspector who is certified for
building, plumbing, electrical and HVAC inspections shall be appointed
by the Village President, subject to confirmation by the Village Board, to
two-year terms, such terms to expire on the second Monday of May of
even-numbered years, unless sooner removed pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 17.13(1), or may, in the alternative, be appointed for a length of time
determined by contract. A single person or a firm may be appointed to
fill more the position. The Building Inspector, with the approval of the
Village Board, may appoint Assistant Inspectors to act in the event of
the Inspector's absence or inability to perform the duties, but such
appointment shall not carry with it any increase in compensation.
B. Certification. The Inspector and Assistant Inspector shall be certified
for inspection purposes by the Department of Commerce in the
required categories specified under Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 305.
C. Compensation. The Inspector shall receive compensation under such
terms as may be approved by the Village Board.
§ 98-9 WATERFORD CODE § 98-10
82:120
D. Duties. The Inspector shall enforce all provisions of these regulations,
and all other state and Village provisions relating to construction,
installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of buildings, structures,
mechanical, electrical and plumbing systems within the Village, shall
make such inspections, perform such tests and issue such orders as
may be necessary for such enforcement, and shall have other such
responsibilities and duties as set forth in the Statutes, Administrative
Code, this Code, and applicable contract, and as established by the Plan
Commission and the Village Board.
E. Powers. The Building Inspector or an authorized certified agent of the
Inspector may, at all reasonable hours, upon presentation of proper
credentials, enter upon any public or private premises for inspection
purposes. The Inspector may require the production of the permit for
any building, plumbing, electrical or HVAC work. No person shall
interfere with or refuse to permit access to any such premises to an
Inspector or his/her agent while in the performance of his/her duties. In
the event that an Inspector is refused access to any such premises, then
the Inspector is authorized to apply for a special inspection warrant
pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0119.
F. Inspections. In order to permit inspection of a project at all necessary
phases without causing delay for the owner, the owner and/or
contractor shall request all of the following inspections in conformity
with the appropriate time frame defined in the Wisconsin
Administrative Code or at least 48 hours in advance by the applicant/
contractor or property owner as applicable.
(1) Footing.
(2) Foundation.
(3) Backfill.
(4) Rough carpentry, HVAC, electric, and plumbing.
(5) Drain tile/basement floor.
(6) Underfloor plumbing.
(7) Electric service.
(8) Insulation.
(9) Final carpentry, HVAC, electric, and plumbing.
(10) Erosion control.
(11) Final occupancy.
G. Failure to request any inspection will be the responsibility of the
contractor and/or property owner. No construction shall be deemed
approved by default or lack of inspection by the Inspector, except as
provided by the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
§ 98-10 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 98-10
82:121
§ 98-11. Submission of plans.
H. The permit holder or the permit holder's representative shall notify the
Building Inspector when the stages of construction are reached that
require an inspection. All ladders, scaffolds and test equipment
required to complete an inspection or test shall be provided by the
property owner, permit holder or their representative. If upon any
inspection it is found that a required inspection cannot be made
because work to be inspected has been covered or concealed, the
permit holder or agent shall uncover the work, as directed by the
Commissioner, and no approval of covered or concealed work shall be
given until the required inspection can be made and the work complies
with the applicable regulations of this code.
I. The expense of uncovering or exposing any work which must be
inspected, where such work was required by the failure of the owner to
request any inspection, will be the responsibility of the contractor and/
or property owner.
J. Records. The Inspector shall perform all administrative tasks required
by the Department under all codes covered in § 98-7. In addition, the
Inspector shall keep a record of all applications for permits and shall
number each permit in the order of its issuance. The Inspector shall file
monthly and annual reports as required by the Village Board, and such
other reports as may be required by the Wisconsin Statutes or
Administrative Code.
K. The officials and staff of the Village of Waterford shall assist the
Inspector in the enforcement of these regulations as necessary.
A. The owner or contractor shall, with respect to any proposed
construction or demolition, submit sets of building, HVAC, plumbing
and electrical plans to the Building Inspector for any work which
expands the size of a building, any new building, or as required by the
Inspector. If a new building or building addition is proposed, then a plat
of survey stamped by a surveyor licensed by the State of Wisconsin,
drawn to scale, showing such proposed work and existing buildings and
property lines shall be submitted. Another set of plans may be
requested at the discretion of the Inspector for the Assessor. The
Inspector may require the owner or contractor to submit plans for any
construction or demolition project when the Inspector determines that
it is necessary to review such plans to assure that the proposed project
will comply with all applicable codes.
B. The above-described "plat of survey" for a new building shall be a
parcel survey (one original with surveyor's signature and stamp plus
two copies). Said survey shall show the following:
(1) Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings.
(2) Lot dimensions and all lot corner elevations using U.S.G.S. datum.
§ 98-10 WATERFORD CODE § 98-11
82:122
§ 98-12. Issuance and expiration of permit.
(3) Building setbacks.
(4) Location and elevation using U.S.G.S. datum (must be in
accordance with the approved grading plan).
(5) Elevation of the lot and relation to sidewalk, street, etc., using
U.S.G.S. datum.
(6) Elevation and setback of adjacent buildings using U.S.G.S. datum.
(7) Types of monuments at lot corners (i.e., I.P.).
(8) Water courses, easements and drainage pattern.
(9) Seal and signature of surveyor licensed in the State of Wisconsin.
A. The Inspector shall issue the requested permit if the owner or
contractor demonstrates that all state, county and local submission
requirements are satisfied. If a permit card is issued, it shall be posted
at the job site in a visible location from the street.
B. Expiration, extension and renewal of permits.
(1) Permit expiration. Permits for new one and two-family dwellings
shall expire pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code § SPS 320.09(9). Permits
and/or plan approvals for commercial buildings shall expire as set
forth in Wis. Admin. Code § SPS 361.36. For all other buildings,
alterations, additions, accessory buildings and accessory
structures, permits shall expire 12 months from the date the permit
is issued.
(2) Permit extensions and renewals. Time periods referenced herein
may be extended, provided the request is submitted and the fee for
the extension or renewal is paid. The conditions for the extension of
commercial plan approval required by the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, ch. SPS 302 and § SPS 361.36(2), shall be met
and the fee paid in addition to the fees set forth herein where
applicable.
(a) Permit extensions. If not otherwise provided in the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, a permit extension shall be defined as a
six-month continuation of the original building permit and
shall:
[1] Be granted if completion of construction work is
anticipated within a six-month period;
[2] Commence on the day immediately following expiration of
the original permit, a previous permit extension, or a
previous permit renewal;
[3] Be valid for a period of six months; and
§ 98-11 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 98-12
82:123
[4] Be limited to a total of two extensions, running
consecutively for a total period of one year.
(b) Permit renewal. If not otherwise provided in the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, a permit renewal shall be defined as a
continuation of a building permit for the length of the original
term of the permit and shall:
[1] Commence on the day following expiration of the original
permit, a previous permit extension, or a previous permit
renewal;
[2] Be valid for the same length as the original permit;
[3] Be limited to a total of two periods equal to the length of
the original permit.
(c) Permit extension and renewal fees. If not otherwise provided in
the Wisconsin Administrative Code, the fees for permit
extensions and renewals are as follows:
[1] Permit extensions. Permit extension fees shall be 50% of
the permit fees, or the minimum fee, whichever is greater,
for the complete project in effect at the time of extension
application, per permit issued.
[2] Permit renewals. Permit renewal fees, per permit issued,
shall be as defined in this subsection, or the established
minimum fees in effect at the time of renewal, whichever is
greater.
[a] If no work has been done and no inspections have
been performed and passed: 100% of full fees.
[b] If inspections have been performed and passed
through "foundation backfill" (no rough inspections):
80% of full permit fee.
[c] If all rough inspections have been performed and
passed (no insulation or finals): 50% of full permit fee.
[d] If only final inspection remains: 20% of full permit fee,
but not less than minimum fees for each trade.
C. By accepting a permit, the applicant, owner or contractor grants the
Inspector the right of access to the real estate on which the permitted
construction or demolition will occur.
D. Permits are issued conditionally on the condition that the owner and/or
contractor(s) shall conform to the requirements of all applicable codes,
zoning ordinances and setback requirements in constructing the
building.
§ 98-12 WATERFORD CODE § 98-12
82:124
§ 98-13. (Reserved)
§ 98-14. Occupancy permit.
If the Building Inspector, after all required inspections are completed,
performs a final inspection and finds that a building has been constructed
in accordance with the applicable codes, then the Inspector shall issue an
occupancy permit. If the building fails to comply with the code in minor
respects which do not threaten the safety, health or welfare of the building's
occupants, the Building Inspector may issue a temporary occupancy permit
for 30 days or a specified term. No person may have occupancy of a building
until an occupancy permit is issued. In lieu of a temporary permit, the
Building Inspector may set forth the requirements for completion of the
work and accept a financial surety, payable to the Village, to ensure that
the work is completed within a specified time frame, and may issue an
occupancy permit. A fee for an occupancy permit, in an amount established
by the Village Board, shall be paid prior to the issuance of the occupancy
permit.
§ 98-15. Fees and permit issuance.
E. No permit shall be issued to any person who is in violation of these
regulations until such violation has been corrected, nor to any person
who owes the Village any permit fees.
F. No permit shall be issued to any person against whom an order issued
by an Inspector is pending.
G. It shall be the responsibility of the installer or contractor to determine if
a permit is required and to obtain the same prior to commencing work.
H. Restrictions on issuance of permits.
(1) Except for an owner of a dwelling who resides or will reside in the
dwelling, no person may obtain a building permit unless the person
annually obtains a certificate of financial responsibility from the
Wisconsin Department of Commerce in compliance with Wis. Stats.
§ 101.654.
(2) Except for an owner of a single-family building owned and occupied
by him or her as his or her home, and as otherwise excepted under
Wis. Stats. § 145.06, no person may obtain a plumbing permit
unless the person is licensed or registered pursuant to Wis. Stats.
Ch. 145.
A. At the time of issuance of a permit applied for under these regulations,
the applicant shall:
(1) Pay fees as established periodically by the Village and set forth in
the Fee Schedule.
§ 98-12 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 98-15
82:125
§ 98-16. Violations and penalties.
(2) Provide to the Inspector a list of all contractors performing work on
the premises.
(3) If contractors are required to be licensed by state law or
regulation, provide evidence of all contractors' licenses.
(4) If a professionally licensed engineer or architect is required by
state statute or regulation to supervise the project, provide
evidence of the identity of the supervising design professional by
providing:
(a) Stamped plans in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § SPS
361.3.
(b) Signed letter of supervision on Form SBD - 118.
B. (Reserved)
C. Where additional inspections are necessary due to condemned work
resulting from faulty construction or repairs, or where additional
inspections are necessary because of the failure to make corrections in
work found faulty or defective, a reinspection fee, in the amount set
forth in the Fee Schedule, shall be paid.
D. There shall be added to the Fee Schedule as from time to time adopted
and revised by the Village Board of the Village of Waterford a fee for
each inspection which is accomplished by any the Inspector at the
direction of the Village of Waterford, inclusive of any follow-up involved
in that same inspection process, the direction to be provided by the
Village Board, the Village Plan Commission, the Village Health Officer,
the Village Administrator, or the Village Attorney.
E. In the event any work shall be commenced, for which a permit is
required, prior to obtaining such a permit from the Inspector, the same
shall constitute a violation of these regulations and the permit fee shall
be quadrupled, and the violation shall be subjected to the penalties as
set forth in §§ 98-16 and 98-17 and Chapter 1, Article II, of this
Municipal Code; and further, every day of the continuance of the
circumstance hereinabove described shall constitute a separate
violation of these regulations.
F. Permit fees shall become the property of the Village and shall not be
refundable even though the permit issued is not used unless such fees
exceed $100. In such cases, only that portion of the permit fee in excess
of $100 shall be refunded if the permit is not used; but in no case shall
any permit fee or fraction thereof be refundable after six months from
the date of issue of such permit, whether used or not.
§ 98-15 WATERFORD CODE § 98-16
82:126
§ 98-17. Stop-work orders.
The Building Inspector may issue a stop-work order for a project to prevent
further noncomplying work. No person, firm or entity may continue a
construction project after a stop-work order has been issued. The person,
firm or entity which receives such a stop-work order may contest the
validity of the same by requesting a hearing before the Board of Appeals,
as set forth in § 245-54 of this Municipal Code. The Board of Appeals shall
affirm the stop-work order unless the owner or contractor shows that the
Inspector erred in determining that the construction project violated a
provision or provisions of these regulations or the state building codes.
§ 98-18. Variances.
The Board of Appeals shall hear requests for variances from this chapter to
the extent the Board has authority to hear and grant variances, as set forth
in § 245-54 of this Municipal Code. The Board shall approve, conditionally
approve, or deny a requested variance. The Board may grant a variance
from a code requirement only if the variance is permitted by state law and
if the performance of the proposed variance is equal to or greater than the
code requires. Variances from provisions of the applicable state codes shall
be requested as set forth in those codes.
A. Prohibition. No person, entity, or firm may construct, remodel, demolish
or repair any building or mechanical system in a manner which violates
any provision or provisions of these regulations.
B. Every person, firm or entity which violates these regulations or any
regulation, rule, or order made hereunder shall, upon conviction, forfeit
not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 for each day of noncompliance,
together with the costs of prosecution, and as set forth in Chapter 1,
Article II of this Code.
C. Violations discovered by the Inspector shall be corrected within 30
days, or more if allowed by the Inspector, after written notice is given.
Violations involving life safety issues shall be corrected in a reasonable
time frame established by the Inspector.
D. Compliance with the requirements of these regulations is necessary to
promote the safety, health and wellbeing of the community and the
owners, occupants and frequenters of buildings. Therefore, violation of
these regulations shall constitute a public nuisance which may be
enjoined in a civil action in addition to prosecution therefor.
E. The Village Police Department, Building Inspector, Health Officer and/
or Administrator, or their authorized representatives, shall inquire into
violations of these regulations and shall report the same to the
appropriate official for investigation and prosecution.
§ 98-16 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 98-19
82:127
§ 98-19. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by an order of the Inspector may, within 20 days
thereafter, appeal from such order to the Board of Appeals pursuant to
§ 245-54 of this Municipal Code and not through the provisions of Wis. Stat.
ch. 68. Appeals of decisions of the Board of Appeals may be made to the
Circuit Court, pursuant to § 245-54. Appeals of final determinations may
be reviewed as set forth in Wis. Admin. Code § SPS 320.21. The ruling of
the Inspector shall be enforced until reversed or modified by the Board of
Appeals.
§ 98-20. Disclaimer and nonliability for damages.
A. Village not liable. These regulations shall not be construed to relieve or
lessen the responsibility or liability of any person supplying building,
HVAC, electrical or plumbing services or materials, or selling, renting,
leasing, owning, distributing, connecting, disconnecting or maintaining
any building, HVAC, electrical or plumbing equipment for damages to
persons or property caused by any defect therein or therefrom; nor
shall the Village be held as assuming any such responsibility or liability
by reason of the issuance or revocation of any license, permit or
certificate or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any such
equipment, plans or applications, information or schedules in these
regulations; nor shall the Village be held liable for any damages
resulting from enforcement of these regulations.
B. Village officials not liable.
(1) Where action has been taken by the Building Inspector or the
Inspector's duly authorized representative, or by any member of
the Plan Commission or Village Board, or by any other Village
official or duly authorized representative, to enforce these
regulations, such action or act shall be considered as done in the
name of and on behalf of the Village; and any such person so acting
for the Village shall not be judged as liable for any damage that may
accrue to persons or property as the result of any such act
committed in the discharge of duties.
(2) These regulations shall not be construed as an assumption of
liability by the Village or the Inspector for damages because of
injuries sustained or property destroyed by any defect in any
dwelling or equipment.
§ 98-19 WATERFORD CODE § 98-20
82:128
ARTICLE II
Additional Building Code Provisions
§ 98-21. Scope of Uniform Dwelling Code expanded.
For the purposes of this chapter, the standards contained in the Wisconsin
Uniform Dwelling Code shall be expanded to apply as the standards for
construction of the following:
A. Additions, alterations and major equipment replacements for one- and
two-family dwellings built prior to the enactment of the Uniform
Dwelling Code, and major equipment replacements for one- and twofamily
dwellings built prior to June 1, 1980.
B. Detached accessory buildings greater than 200 square feet serving oneand
two-family dwellings. These structures shall meet the following
frost protection for footings and foundations requirements:
(1) Grade-beam slabs are required for structures with a continuous
floating slab of reinforced concrete. The slab shall not be less than
four inches in thickness. Reinforcement shall be a minimum of six
inches by six inches, Number 10 wire mesh or by using 1.5 pounds
of fiber mesh per cubic yard of concrete with varying fiber mesh
lengths. The slab shall be provided with a thickened edge all
around, eight inches wide and eight inches below the top of the
slab.
(2) Structures not constructed with a floating slab shall have footings
and foundations placed below frost penetration level, but in no case
less than 48 inches below grade per Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 321.
C. Detached accessory buildings less than 200 square feet in size.
Concrete slabs, frost-free footings, and the like are not required, but if
they are installed they shall follow Subsection B above and/or Wis.
Admin. Code ch. SPS 321. Wood bearing beams, walls or members in
contact with the ground shall be pressure-treated or decay-resistanttype
wood per Wis. Admin. Code § SPS 321.10.
D. (Reserved)
E. Manufactured homes.
(1) Maintenance and replacement of equipment. As set forth in § 98-8,
an existing manufactured home shall be maintained to conform
with the building code requirements in effect when the home was
constructed. Manufactured home maintenance and replacement of
equipment in manufactured homes shall be performed in
conformance with 24 CFR 3280, Manufactured Home Construction
and Safety Standards (HUD Standards), which are hereby adopted
for that purpose. No person may replace major equipment in a
manufactured home without a permit therefor and compliance with
this section.
§ 98-21 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 98-21
82:129
§ 98-22. Architectural control.
(2) Alterations and additions. Alterations and additions to
manufactured homes constructed since the enactment of the
Uniform Dwelling Code are subject to the Uniform Dwelling Code.
The scope of the Uniform Dwelling Code is expanded to cover
additions and alterations to manufactured homes built before the
enactment of the Uniform Dwelling Code. No person may perform
additions or alterations to a manufactured home without a permit
therefor and compliance with this section.
A. Title. This section shall be known as the "Architectural Control
Ordinance" of the Village.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Village by regulating
the exterior architectural design of structures hereafter built, enlarged,
altered or demolished within or moved within or into the Village and by
prohibiting structures incompatible with the character of surrounding
or neighboring structures constructed or being constructed, thereby
maintaining and conserving the taxable value of land and buildings
throughout the Village and preventing the depreciation thereof.
C. Building permit issuance contingent on favorable architectural review.
No building permit required by this chapter shall be issued unless it has
been found by a majority vote of the Plan Commission, upon request for
determination by the Building Inspector, and after a view of the site of
the proposed structure and an examination of the building permit
application, that the exterior will, when erected, not be so at variance
with nor so similar to either the exterior architectural appeal and
functional plan of structures already constructed or in the course of
construction in the immediate neighborhood or the character of the
applicable district established by Chapter 245, Zoning, as to cause a
substantial depreciation in the property values of such neighborhood or
within such district.
D. Hearing. The Plan Commission may hear the applicant for the building
permit in question and/or the owner of the lot on which it is proposed to
erect or move the structure in question, together with any other
persons, whether residents or property owners, desiring to be heard, at
a regularly scheduled meeting of the Plan Commission. Within 48 hours
after the close of the hearing, the Plan Commission shall in writing
make or refuse to make the finding required by Subsection C hereof.
Such finding and determination shall be in writing and signed on behalf
of the Plan Commission by its Chairman, who shall file a copy of such
finding and determination in the office of the Village Clerk and shall
mail a copy by certified mail to each applicant for the permit in
question. The Building Inspector shall issue or refuse to issue a building
permit in accordance with the determination of the Plan Commission.
§ 98-21 WATERFORD CODE § 98-22
82:130
§ 98-23. Fire break identification requirements.
E. Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the finding and determination of the
Plan Commission may appeal from such finding to the Village Board
pursuant to § 245-56.1 of this Code, such appeal to be in writing setting
forth the basis of the appeal and to be filed with the Village Clerk. Such
appeal shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the Village Board.
On the appeal, in the absence of proof to the contrary, a refusal to grant
the building permit shall be deemed to be based upon facts supporting
the conclusion that the exterior architectural appeal and functional
plan of structures already constructed or in the course of construction
in the immediate neighborhood, or the character of the applicable
district, as to cause a substantial depreciation in the property values of
such neighborhood or within such district.
A. Location of fire walls to be shown on plans. In every instance in which
this chapter requires the provision for installation of fire walls or fire
breaks, the location of each such fire wall or fire break shall be clearly
shown on the architectural plans for the proposed construction.
B. Fire walls to be identified. In conformance with Wis. Admin. Code § SPS
362.0706, Fire Wall Identification, and pursuant thereto, the Village of
Waterford shall require owners to identify the location of a fire wall at
the exterior wall of a building with a sign as provided therein and in
Subsection C below.
C. Sign requirements.
(1) General. The sign shall consist of three circles arranged vertically
on the exterior wall marking the location of the fire division wall or
occupancy separation wall and centered on the fire division wall or
occupancy separation wall. The circles may be affixed directly to
the surface of the building or may be placed on a background
material which is affixed to the building.
(2) Size of circle. Each circle shall be the same size. The diameter of
the circle shall be at least 1 1/2 inches, but no greater than two
inches.
(3) Spacing. The circles shall be spaced an equal distance apart. The
maximum distance measured from the top of the uppermost circle
to the bottom of the lowermost circle shall be 12 inches.
(4) Color. The color of the circle shall be limited to either red, amber
(orange-yellow) or white (clear) and shall be reflective. The color of
the circle shall contrast with the color of the background.
(5) Location. The top of the sign shall be located on the face of the
exterior wall of the building and be located no more than 12 inches
below the eave, roof edge, fascia or parapet.
§ 98-22 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 98-24
82:131
§ 98-24. Antenna facilities.
No antenna facility, including a "dish" antenna 40 inches or more in
diameter, an antenna 40 inches or more in diameter or diagonal
measurement, an antenna that extends higher than 12 feet above the
roofline, or any mast that extends higher than 12 feet above the roofline,
shall be erected or placed on any property within the Village until a permit
shall have first been obtained from the Village Board. This section does not
apply to antenna facilities used for the provision of mobile services: see
§ 245-17.2 for the regulation of such facilities.
§ 98-25. (Reserved)
A. Application. Application for an antenna facility permit shall be made in
writing to the Village Clerk, who shall in turn submit it to the Plan
Commission. With such application, there shall be submitted a fee in an
amount set by the Village Board and a complete set of plans and
specifications, including a plot plan showing location of the proposed
antenna facility with respect to adjoining alleys, lot lines and buildings.
If such application shall be approved by the Plan Commission, it shall
then be submitted to the Village Board at its next regular meeting for
final approval. The Plan Commission shall act on all such applications
within a period of 45 days.
B. Location of antenna facilities. In order to protect public safety and the
safety of the adjoining residence, any such antenna facility approved for
placement within the Village may only be located in the rear yard of a
residential lot and at such a distance from the adjoining lots as to
prevent encroachment on the adjoining lots in case of collapse. It shall
also be placed as close to the residence as is reasonably possible.
Placement in other districts shall be approved by the Plan Commission.
When determining the location of any antenna facility, distance from
power lines and any other safety factors shall be considered and shall
be a basis for rejection of a permit or a requirement that the antenna
facility be located in a specific location.
C. Connection to electrical lines. All electrical lines, cables and conduits
running to or from any such antenna facility shall be buried. If an
antenna facility is to be used by two or more residential property
owners, all interconnecting electrical connections, cables and conduits
shall also be buried. The location of all such underground lines, cables
and conduits shall be shown on the application for permit.
D. Wind pressure. Each antenna facility shall be securely anchored to
withstand a maximum wind pressure anticipated, taking into
consideration the size, shape and weight of all of its components.
E. Temporary placement. An antenna facility may be placed in a yard on a
trial basis for a period not exceeding 10 days.
§ 98-24 WATERFORD CODE § 98-26
82:132
§ 98-26. Street numbers.
The owner of any residential, multifamily, industrial, or commercial building
located in the Village of Waterford shall cause to be installed upon said
structure applicable identifying street numbers, which shall be assigned by
and obtained from the Building Inspector through the office of the Village
Clerk, upon request. Said numbers shall be displayed prominently upon the
structure to be visible from the street upon which the structure faces, all
for the benefit of the public, the providers of public safety services, and
the Village management. The Village shall have the right to change existing
house numbers, for safety reasons, where errors in street numbering have
occurred, and/or where building sites have been inserted between existing
properties.
§ 98-27. Swimming pools.
A. New construction. At the time of making application for a building
permit for the construction of a structure in the Village of Waterford,
the applicant shall obtain street numbers from the Building Inspector,
through the office of the Village Clerk, in a form provided by the Village,
which cost may be charged to the applicant. Such street numbers shall
be installed upon the property prior to the time that occupancy permits
are issued and as a condition for such occupancy permit issuance.
B. Existing structures. The owner of any existing residential, multifamily,
commercial, or industrial building located in the Village of Waterford
shall obtain a street number from the Building Inspector, through the
Village Clerk's office, the cost of which street number may be charged
to the applicant at the time of its request. Said numbers shall be
installed upon the structure in a location visible from the street upon
which the structure faces, within 20 days of notice from the Building
Inspector of the violation of this chapter by any such building owner.
Failure to make such installation within the twenty-day time period
shall constitute a violation of this section of the Municipal Code.
C. Location of street numbers. All street numbers shall be located on the
face of the building visible from the street upon which the building
faces, in near proximity to the main entrance to the structure, and not
concealed by building lines, architectural design, shrubbery, or other
facades attached to the building. Failure to comply with any term or
condition of this section of the chapter shall constitute a violation of this
section of the Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical Code.
A. Defined. "Swimming pool" shall mean any depression in the ground,
either temporary or permanent, or a container of water, either
temporary or permanent and either above or below the ground, in
which water of 42 or more inches in depth at any point is contained, or
which has a diameter of 10 feet or more. Spas, hot tubs, in-ground,
aboveground and public pools are included in this definition.
B. Permits.
§ 98-26 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 98-27
82:133
(1) Permits required.
(a) The construction of a swimming pool, as defined herein, except
as set forth in Subsection B(1)(b), requires evaluation under
the Building Code, the Electrical Code, the Plumbing Code and
Chapter 245, Zoning. One application for a pool permit, as set
forth herein, shall be accepted for review under the Building
Code, the Plumbing Code and Chapter 245, Zoning. Electrical
service related to a swimming pool must comply with the
current edition of Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 316 and may
require a separate application for evaluation under the
Electrical Code, as set forth in § 98-40 of this Municipal Code.
A separate deck and/or fence permit is required, even when
the deck and/or fence is constructed at the same time as the
swimming pool.
(b) Exemptions.
[1] Those swimming pools classified as public swimming pools
and requiring state permits pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code
ch. SPS 390, Design and Construction of Public Swimming
Pools and Water Attractions, and ch. DHS 172, Safety,
Maintenance and Operation of Public Pools and Water
Attractions, shall not be required to obtain the pool permit
required herein.
[2] Any person who obtains the permits(s) necessary for a
storable pool that meets the definition of a swimming pool
is not required to reapply for the permit(s) annually. The
owner may remove and reinstall the same pool in the
approved location each year for the life of the pool. If the
owner wishes to change the location or install a new pool,
new permit(s) must be applied for and obtained.
(c) Every person or entity that owns, directly or indirectly, or
operates, uses or has custody or control of or has the right to
use any swimming pool located in the Village shall also follow
the requirements of Chapter 195 of this Municipal Code.
(2) Application. An applicant for a pool permit shall provide the
following information, along with the permit fees set forth in the
Fee Schedule, as follows:
(a) Survey or accurate drawing of the property, in duplicate,
showing property dimensions, including square footage, all
existing structures, proposed swimming pool location,
including distances to all existing structures, filter and
wastewater disposal locations, fencing if required, proposed
decking, and overhead or underground electrical wiring.
(b) Type of pool installation, aboveground or in ground, including
dimensions and volume in gallons.
§ 98-27 WATERFORD CODE § 98-27
82:134
(c) Pool height above highest point of grade if aboveground
installation.
(d) Type and height of fence, if proposed.
(e) Type and support of decking, if proposed.
(f) Overall size and locations of the above in regard to existing
buildings and lot lines for property survey reference.
(g) Any change in finished grades near the pool.
(h) Two copies of a brochure which shows the type and style of the
pool to be installed.
(i) Prior to making the application for a pool permit, the applicant
shall check subdivision or homeowners' association
regulations regarding swimming pools and shall include those
regulations with the application. The Village shall not enforce,
and shall not be responsible for the enforcement of, said
subdivision or homeowners' association regulations but, when
it is made aware of them, may include them in its consideration
of the application.
(3) Issuance. An applicant shall be issued a pool permit if the
submitted plans are in conformance with the applicable sections of
this Municipal Code.
(4) Inspections of pool construction shall be made as follows:
(a) Aboveground pools.
[1] Location. An inspection shall be conducted when
excavation is started, but prior to constructing the pool
side walls. The pool owner shall locate and clearly mark all
corner lot markers that are relevant to the location of the
swimming pool.
[2] Final. An inspection shall be conducted after the electrical
service has been approved and installation is complete. All
safety equipment shall be on site, and fencing required in
this Municipal Code shall be installed before filling the
swimming pool.
(b) In-ground pools.
[1] Location. An inspection shall be conducted after
excavation is complete, prior to setting pool walls. The
pool owner shall locate and clearly mark all corner lot
markers that are relevant to the location of the swimming
pool.
[2] Final. An inspection shall be conducted after the electrical
service has been approved and installation is complete. All
§ 98-27 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 98-27
82:135
§ 98-28. Unsafe buildings.
Whenever the Building Inspector determines that any building or structure
is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous,
unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation, occupancy or
use, the Inspector shall recommend to the Village Board that an order be
sent to the owner to raze and remove all or part thereof, or to repair the
same if such structure can be made safe and sanitary by reasonable repairs.
Such orders and proceedings shall be as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0413.
§ 98-29. Razing and demolition.
safety equipment shall be on site, and fencing required
in this Municipal Code shall be installed before filling the
swimming pool.
A. Demolition permit required. No person may cause the demolition of any
structure or part of a structure greater than 400 square feet in area
without having first applied for and obtained a demolition permit from
the Building Inspector. No person may undertake any steps to demolish
the structure prior to receiving a permit.
B. Application. An application for a permit to demolish all or part of a
building shall include the following information:
(1) The name and address of the owner of the building on the date of
application and, if different, on the date of demolition;
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the contractor(s)
performing the demolition work;
(3) The date upon which demolition is to commence;
(4) The date by which demolition shall be complete;
(5) A list of all hazardous waste and hazardous and toxic substances
(as defined by Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 706, as amended from time
to time) contained in the building, a statement as to whether the
building contains asbestos (as defined by Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR
445 and 447), and a detailed description of the method to be used
in removing, transporting and disposing of any hazardous waste,
hazardous and toxic substances, and asbestos;
(6) A detailed description of how and where the waste materials
resulting from the demolition will be transported and disposed of
(including the description of the route to be used by trucks in
hauling the waste);
(7) A description of the method of demolition to be used;
(8) A description in detail of all methods to be used to prevent water
runoff and soil erosion from the site to neighboring properties and
to prevent releasing unreasonable amounts of dust from the site;
§ 98-27 WATERFORD CODE § 98-29
82:136
(9) Along with the application for permit for demolition, the applicant
shall present a release from all utilities serving the property,
stating that their respective service connections and appurtenant
equipment such as meters and regulators have been removed or
sealed and plugged in a safe manner.
C. Demolition. The demolition shall be conducted in a manner that is safe
and that does not adversely affect the environment. The basement or
crawl space floor is to be broken into pieces no more than four feet by
four feet in size to enable stormwater drainage. The foundation walls
must be demolished to at least two feet below grade.
D. Clearing and leveling the site.
(1) The site of any demolition shall be properly cleared of debris,
rubbish and pavement and shall be properly graded and leveled to
conform with the adjoining grade of the neighboring property; and
when so graded and leveled, the site shall be seeded, sodded or
treated in some other manner acceptable to the Building Inspector
so as to prevent blowing dust, dirt, or sand. Excavations remaining
after demolition shall be filled, graded and leveled off, not later
than 30 consecutive days after demolition is completed, and shall
be protected from entry until filled.
(2) Excavations from demolished buildings or structures shall not be
filled with any materials subject to deterioration. The Building
Inspector, upon notification by the permit holder, the owner or his
agent, in writing and upon forms provided by the Building
Inspector for that purpose, shall, within 72 hours, inspect each
excavation, or part thereof, before the excavation is filled.
(3) It shall be unlawful to fill any such excavation without inspection
and approval of the Building Inspector. Voids in filled excavations
shall not be permitted. In the event of the unavailability of the
Building Inspector to conduct an inspection within 72 hours after
written notice; the permit holder, owner or his agent may retain the
services of a certified, qualified municipal inspection service to
obtain an opinion that approves filling of the excavation. Said
opinion shall be deemed a sufficient approval by the Village,
provided that a written copy of the opinion is delivered to the Clerk
at least 48 hours before filling of the excavation commences.
(4) Unless the site is to be reconstructed within 90 days of demolition,
the site must be restored to a dust free and erosion free condition,
and seeded or sodded. The grass shall be maintained as set forth in
this Code.
E. Removal and disposal. Removal, transportation and disposal of all
hazardous waste, hazardous and toxic substances, and asbestos shall
be conducted in compliance with all applicable state, federal and local
statutes, ordinances and regulations. The permit holder shall give the
Building Inspector 72 hours' written notice prior to any removal,
§ 98-29 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 98-29
82:137
§ 98-30. Moving buildings.
transportation or disposal of hazardous waste, hazardous and toxic
substances, and asbestos.
A. General. No person shall move any building or structure upon any of
the public rights-of-way of the Village without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the Building Inspector and upon the payment of required
fee. Every such permit issued by the Building Inspector for the moving
of a building shall designate the route to be taken, the conditions to be
complied with and shall limit the time during which said moving
operations shall be continued. This section does not apply to
manufactured homes per the Federal Fair Housing Act.
B. Moving damaged buildings. No building shall be repaired, altered or
moved within or into the Village that has deteriorated or has been
damaged by any cause (including such moving and separation from its
foundation and service connections in case of moved buildings) 50% or
more of its equalized value. No permit shall be granted to repair, alter
or move such building within or into the Village. Furthermore, if the
equalized assessed value of the building is not within 10% of the
surrounding buildings within 1,000 feet of the parcel where the
building is proposed to be moved to, no permit shall be granted unless
the building is improved so that its equalized value is within 10% of the
average equalized value of any of the surrounding buildings that are of
a similar type.
C. Continuous movement. The movement of buildings shall be a
continuous operation during all the hours of the day, and day by day and
at night until such movement is fully completed. All of such operations
shall be performed with the least possible obstruction to thoroughfares.
No building shall be allowed to remain overnight upon any street
crossing or intersection, or so near thereto as to prevent easy access to
a fire hydrant or any other public facility. Barricades and warning lights
shall be kept in conspicuous places at each end of the building during
the night.
D. Street repair/inspection. Every person receiving a permit to move a
building shall, prior to moving the building, accompany the Building
Inspector and Director of Public Works on an inspection of the route the
building will travel within the Village limits. The applicant shall, within
one day after said building reaches its destination, report the fact to the
Building Inspector who shall thereupon, in the company of the Director
of Public Works, inspect the streets and highways over which said
building has been moved and ascertain the condition. If the removal of
said building has caused any damage to any street or highway, the
person to whom the permit was issued shall forthwith place the street
or highway in good repair as it was before the permit was granted. On
the failure of the permittee to do so within 10 days thereafter to the
satisfaction of the Village Board, the Village Board shall repair the
§ 98-29 WATERFORD CODE § 98-30
82:138
damage done to such streets and hold the person obtaining such permit
and the sureties on his bond responsible for payment of same.
E. Conformance with code. No permit shall be issued to move a building
within or into the Village and to establish it upon a location within the
Village until the Building Inspector has made an investigation of such
building at the location from which it is to be moved and is satisfied
from such investigation that said building is in a sound and stable
condition and of such construction that it will meet the requirements of
this Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical Code in all respects.
A complete plan of all further repairs, improvements and remodeling,
with reference to such building shall be submitted to the Building
Inspector, and the Inspector shall make a finding of fact to the effect
that all such repairs, improvements and remodeling are in conformity
with the requirements of this Building Code and that when same are
completed, the building, as such, will so comply with said Building
Code. In the event a building is to be moved from the Village to some
point outside of the boundaries thereof, the provisions, with respect to
the furnishing of plans and specifications for proposed alterations to
such building, may be disregarded.
F. Bond required.
(1) Before a permit is issued to move any building over any public way
in this Village, the party applying for said permit shall post a
performance bond with the Village in a sum to be fixed by the
Village. Said performance bond shall be held for indemnification of
the Village for any costs or expenses incurred by it in connection
with any claims for damages to any persons or property, and the
payment of any judgment, together with the costs or expenses
incurred by the Village in connection therewith, arising out of the
removal of the building for which the permit is issued. The bond
shall be released if, after the building is moved, the Building
Inspector and Director of Public Works have found that the permit
was complied with and no damages were caused by the move.
(2) The release of the bond required by Subsection F(1) shall be
further conditioned upon the permittee erecting adequate barriers
and, within 48 hours, filling in such excavation or adopting and
employing such other means, devices or methods approved by the
Building Inspector and reasonably adopted or calculated to prevent
the occurrences set forth herein. The Building Inspector may waive
the timelines in this subsection if the Building Inspector, after
investigation, determines that the excavation exposed by the
removal of such building from its foundation is not so close to a
public thoroughfare as to constitute a hazard to persons,
particularly children under 12 years of age, provided the barriers
remain in place during any permitted delay.
G. Insurance. The Building Inspector shall require, in addition to said bond
above indicated, public liability insurance covering injury to one person
§ 98-30 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 98-30
82:139
in the sum of not less than $500,000 and for one accident, aggregate
not less than $1,000,000, together with property damage insurance
in a sum not less than $500,000, or such other coverage as deemed
necessary.
H. Village Board approval required.
(1) Before any permit to relocate a building may be issued, the Village
Board shall examine the application for the permit and approve the
application by a majority vote.
(2) The application shall include exterior elevations of the building at
its proposed new location; accurate photographs of all sides and
views of the same; any proposed alterations of the exterior of said
building with the plans and specifications of such proposed
alterations, and a site plan showing the location of the building on
the final resting site.
(3) The Village shall not grant a permit unless the Village has taken a
view of the building proposed to be moved and of the site at which
it is to be located.
(4) The Village may not issue a permit for relocation of a building
unless it finds that the exterior appearances and design of the
building to be moved or moved and altered will be consistent with
the exterior appearance and design of the buildings already
constructed or in the course of construction in the immediate
neighborhood, or with the character of the applicable district
established by the zoning ordinances of the Village. [See Chapter
245.] No permit shall be granted if the relocation will cause a
substantial depreciation of the property values of the neighborhood
to which the building is proposed to be relocated.
(5) In case the applicant proposed to alter the exterior of said building
after moving the same, he shall submit, with his application papers,
complete plans and specifications for the proposed alterations.
Before a permit shall be issued for a building to be moved and
altered, the applicant shall deposit a cash deposit or performance
bond of not less than $5,000 with the Village to secure the timely
completion of all proposed exterior alterations to said building, as
set forth in the plans and specifications. This cash deposit or
performance bond shall be in addition to any other bond or surety
which may be required by other applicable ordinances of the
Village. The cash deposit or bond shall be refunded after the
exterior alterations are completed and the Building Inspector has
found the building exterior complies with the approved plans and
within the time frame set by the Village Board. The deposit shall be
forfeited if the exterior of the building does not comply with the
approved plans or if the time frame for completing the work is not
adhered to.
§ 98-30 WATERFORD CODE § 98-30
82:140
(6) No occupancy permit shall be issued for said building until the
exterior alterations proposed to be made have been completed.
(7) Whenever an application for relocation of a building is made to the
Building Inspector, he shall place the consideration of the
application on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled Village
Board meeting. The Building Inspector shall inform the Village
whether or not the application complies, in all respects, with all
other ordinances of the Village. The Village may, if it desires, hold a
public hearing on the permit.
§ 98-30 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 98-30
82:141

ARTICLE III
Additional Plumbing Code Provisions
§ 98-31. Existing unsanitary installations.
See § 142-2 of this Municipal Code.
§ 98-32. Connections to public sewerage system.
A. Connection fee. No connection to the public sewerage system may be
made unless a connection fee as established by the Village Board has
been paid.
B. Licensed plumber to do work. Except as provided in Wis. Stats.
§ 145.06, no person except a plumber licensed therefor shall be
permitted to tap or make connections with the general sewerage
system or any part thereof.
C. Location of drain junctions. Such information as the Building Inspector,
the Department of Public Works or the Village Engineer may have with
regard to the location of sewer junctions or slants shall be furnished to
plumbers, the Village assuming no risk as to the accuracy of the same.
If the junction is not found using the measurements furnished by the
Village Engineer or Inspector, connection shall be made as provided in
Wis. Admin. Code ch. Comm. 82.
D. Existing drains or sewers. Whenever it is necessary to disturb a drain or
sewer in actual use, the same shall not be obstructed or disconnected
without the permission of the Inspector; and no person shall make any
new connections with, or extensions to, any old drain without the
permission of the Inspector.
E. Connecting during freezing weather. The Director of Public Works may
determine, in his discretion, that opening a street for making a
connection with a main sewer is not appropriate under certain
circumstances and may delay the connection for public safety purposes.
See also § 191-3 of this Municipal Code.
F. Sewer and water connections. No work shall be done to connect any
building to any public sewer or public water service utility until such
building is completely enclosed by a roof, the outside walls backfilled to
rough grade, all sanitary sewer lines within buildings to be connected
that will be covered by basement floors having been inspected and
approved by the Building Inspector of the Village and a functional sump
and sump pump having been installed in the basement, if required. In
buildings without basements, the permit shall be issued after the
footing and subfloor have been constructed. No permit shall be issued
for the connection with the public sewer of any basement floor drain in
any building located within the 100-year floodplain as established and
determined under the Village floodplain ordinance. Buildings within the
§ 98-31 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 98-32
82:143
§ 98-33. Plumbing requiring street excavations.
See § 191-3 of this Municipal Code.
§ 98-34. Damaging plumbing prohibited.
No person shall intentionally, willfully or maliciously damage or obstruct
any sewer, house drain, catch basin or any plumbing fixtures or apparatus,
pipes or other parts of any plumbing in actual use, or any sewer, water or
gas pipe, or any parts or apparatus connected therewith, laid or constructed
in the streets, alleys or other public places or under any sidewalks of the
Village.
§ 98-35. Swimming pools.
100-year floodplain shall not have public sewer service for any floor
located below the exterior finished grade.
A. Definition. In this section, "swimming pool" shall have the meaning set
forth in § 98-27A of this Municipal Code.
B. Permit required. See § 98-27B of this Municipal Code.
§ 98-32 WATERFORD CODE § 98-35
82:144
ARTICLE IV
Additional Electrical Code Provisions
§ 98-36. Existing unsafe conditions.
The Building Inspector shall make periodic inspections of all electrical wires
and appliances installed within the Village, except in occupied dwellings.
When such wires or appliances are found to be in a dangerous or unsafe
condition, he shall notify the person owning, using, operating or installing
the same to place them in a safe condition. Any person failing or refusing to
complete the necessary repairs or changes within 15 days after receipt of
such notice shall be subject to penalties pursuant to §§ 98-16 and 98-17 for
each day that elapses after the expiration of such period; and the Inspector
may order the discontinuance of electrical service to such defective wires or
appliances until they have been repaired, removed or changed as directed
by the Inspector, subject to the limitations of this chapter.
§ 98-37. State certification of electricians required.
Wis. Stats. §§ 101.87 and 101.88 and Wis. Admin. Code ch. Comm 5, relating
to the state certification of electricians, are adopted and by reference made
a part of this chapter with the same force and effect as though set forth in
full.
§ 98-38. Temporary service.
An application for a permit for temporary service shall specify a period of
time for which such wiring is to remain in service. Service shall be cut off
at the end of such period and shall not again be connected without written
permission from the Building Inspector. For buildings in which conduit
wiring is required, special permits for temporary service may be granted by
the Building Inspector for the installation of open work and exposed wiring,
lights, power for building operations, display, decorative lighting, etc., for
use for a limited period, subject to discontinuance and complete removal
at the expiration and subject to condemnation and revocation within such
period.
§ 98-39. Emergency service.
§ 98-40. Swimming pools.
A. Report. For emergency service or work, the person doing such work or
causing such work to be done shall report the same to the Building
Inspector immediately after beginning work on forms furnished by the
Inspector for such purpose; and such work shall be done in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Inspection fee. Any fee for inspection of such emergency service shall
be determined in each individual case by the Inspector together with
the Village Administrator.
§ 98-36 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 98-40
82:145
§ 98-41. Complaints.
Complaints on improper or defective electrical equipment shall be
investigated and action shall be taken. Where complaints disclose
inadequacy of electrical equipment, the Building Inspector shall notify the
owner of the premises to that effect and in writing inform such owner as to
the changes, repairs, modifications or additions necessary for compliance
with this chapter. Upon failure of the owner to comply with the order of the
Inspector within 10 days after receiving such notice, the latter may enter
upon the premises with such assistance as may be necessary, causing the
existing conditions to be corrected; and the cost thereof shall be charged
against the property and shall be a lien thereon and shall be assessed and
collected as a special tax.
A. Definition. In this section, "swimming pool" shall have the meaning set
forth in § 98-27A of this Municipal Code.
B. Permit required. The electrical work, wiring and connections for
swimming pools, as defined herein, may require an electrical permit in
conformance with this chapter.
§ 98-40 WATERFORD CODE § 98-41
82:146
Chapter 100
BURNING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms and explosives — See Ch. 131.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 142.
Nuisances — See Ch. 165.
Solid waste — See Ch. 186.
§ 100-1. Purpose.
This chapter is intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare
and to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the Village of Waterford due to the air pollution and fire
hazards of open burning, outdoor burning and refuse burning.
§ 100-2. Applicability.
This chapter applies to all outdoor burning and refuse burning within the
Village of Waterford, with the following exceptions:
§ 100-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings prescribed
herein:
BONFIRE — An outdoor fire with a diameter of 40 inches or greater
intended for recreation or celebration.[Amended 1-8-2007 by Ord. No.
507]
CAMPFIRE — An outdoor fire with a diameter of less than 40 inches
intended for recreation or cooking, not including a fire intended for disposal
of waste wood or refuse.[Amended 1-8-2007 by Ord. No. 507]
CHIMINEA — An outdoor fireplace with only one opening for the insertion
of fuel, and a chimney.[Added 1-8-2007 by Ord. No. 507]
CLEAN WOOD — Natural wood which has not been painted, varnished
or coated with a similar material, has not been pressure-treated with
A. This chapter does not apply to grilling or cooking using charcoal, wood,
propane or natural gas in cooking or grilling appliances.
B. This chapter does not apply to burning in a stove, furnace, fireplace or
other heating device within a building used for human or animal
habitation unless the material being burned includes refuse as defined
in § 100-3 of this chapter.
C. This chapter does not apply to the use of propane, acetylene, natural
gas, gasoline or kerosene in a device intended for heating, construction
or maintenance activities, except as provided in § 100-8G(2).
§ 98-41 BURNING § 100-3
100:147
preservatives and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other
composite wood products.
CONFIDENTIAL PAPERS — Printed material containing personal
identification or financial information that the owner wishes to destroy.
FIRE CHIEF — The Chief of the Village of Waterford Fire Department or
other person authorized by the Fire Chief.
OPEN BURNING — Kindling or maintaining a fire outdoors, where the
products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air. Open
burning includes fires contained in a chiminea, outdoor fireplace, outdoor
fire pit, or other burning device.[Amended 1-8-2007 by Ord. No. 507]
OUTDOOR BURNING — Open burning or burning in a solid-fuel-fired
outdoor heating device.
OUTDOOR FIREPLACE or OUTDOOR FIRE PIT — A portable,
manufactured, or permanent fire pit, chiminea, patio fireplace, burn barrel,
or other container made of copper, steel, clay, cast iron, aluminum, brick,
stone or other material intended to contain a fire within its fire bowl.[Added
1-8-2007 by Ord. No. 507]
PATIO FIREPLACE — An outdoor fireplace with only one opening for the
insertion of fuel, and a chimney.[Added 1-8-2007 by Ord. No. 507]
REFUSE — Any waste material except clean wood.
SOLID-FUEL-FIRED OUTDOOR HEATING DEVICE — Any equipment,
device or apparatus, or any part thereof, which is installed, affixed or
situated outdoors for the primary purpose of combustion of fuel to produce
heat or energy used as a component of a heating system providing heat for
any interior space or water source.
§ 100-4. General prohibition on open burning, outdoor burning and
refuse burning.
Open burning, outdoor burning and refuse burning are prohibited in the
Village unless the burning is specifically permitted by this chapter.
§ 100-5. Materials that may not be burned.
Unless a specific written approval has been obtained from the Department
of Natural Resources, the following materials may not be burned in an open
fire, furnace, stove or any other indoor or outdoor incineration or heating
device:
A. Rubbish or garbage, including but not limited to food wastes, food
wraps, packaging, animal carcasses, paint or painted materials,
furniture, composite shingles, construction or demolition debris or
other household or business wastes.
B. Waste oil or other oily wastes except used oil burned in a heating device
for energy recovery subject to the restrictions in Wis. Admin. Code ch.
NR 590.
§ 100-3 WATERFORD CODE § 100-5
100:148
§ 100-6. Open burning of leaves, brush, clean wood and other
vegetative debris.
Notwithstanding § 186-19D of this Code, open burning of leaves, brush,
stumps, clean wood and other vegetative debris is allowed in accordance
with the provisions below. Grass clippings may not be burned. Grass
clippings must be recycled in accordance with § 186-19D by taking them to
the Department of Public Works building.
C. Asphalt and products containing asphalt.
D. Treated or painted wood, including but not limited to plywood,
composite wood products or other wood products that are painted,
varnished or treated with preservatives.
E. Any plastic material, including but not limited to nylon, PVC, ABS,
polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films and
plastic containers.
F. Rubber, including tires and synthetic rubber-like products.
G. Newspaper, corrugated cardboard, container board, office paper and
other materials that must be recycled in accordance with Chapter 186,
Solid Waste, except as provided in § 100-10 of this chapter.
H. Yard waste, consisting of leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden
debris and brush, including clean woody vegetative material no greater
than six inches in diameter that must be recycled in accordance with
Chapter 186, Solid Waste, except as provided in § 100-6 of this chapter.
A. All allowed open burning shall be conducted in a safe, nuisance-free
manner, when wind and weather conditions are such as to minimize
adverse effects and not create a health hazard or a visibility hazard on
roadways. Open burning shall be conducted in conformance with all
local and state fire protection regulations.
B. Except for barbecue, gas and charcoal grills, no open burning shall be
undertaken during periods when either the Fire Chief or the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources has issued a burning ban applicable
to the area.
C. Open burning shall be conducted only on the property on which the
materials were generated or at a facility approved by and in accordance
with provisions established by the Department of Natural Resources
and the Fire Chief.
D. Unless explicitly allowed elsewhere in this chapter, a commercial
enterprise other than an agricultural or silvicultural operation may
open burn only at a facility approved by and in accordance with
provisions established by the Department of Natural Resources and the
Fire Chief.
§ 100-5 BURNING § 100-6
100:149
E. Outdoor campfires for cooking, ceremonies or recreation are allowed,
provided that the fire is confined by a control device or structure such
as an outdoor fire place, fire ring, or fire pit. Bonfires are allowed only if
approved by and in accordance with provisions established by the Fire
Chief, who shall issue a permit therefor pursuant to § 100-10.
F. In emergency situations such as natural disasters, burning that would
otherwise be prohibited is allowed if specifically approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and the Fire Chief.
G. Distance from buildings and structures. [Amended 1-8-2007 by Ord.
No. 507]
(1) Distance from buildings on abutting properties and property lines.
(a) Open burning under this section shall only be conducted at a
location at least 50 feet from the nearest building or
combustible material which is not on the same property, and at
least 10 feet from all property lines, except as set forth in
Subsection G(1)(b).
(b) Open burning in an outdoor fireplace or outdoor fire pit may be
conducted at a location at least 20 feet from the nearest
building or combustible item which is not on the same
property, and at least 10 feet from all property lines if the
diameter of the outdoor fireplace or outdoor fire pit is 40
inches or less, the device has (and the user uses) a solid metal
or metallic mesh cover or lid and a fire bowl or metal screen
that completely contains and surrounds the fire area, or the
device is a chiminea or patio fireplace.
(2) Distance from structures on the same property.
(a) Except for barbecue, gas and charcoal grills, no burning shall
be undertaken within 30 feet from any building, structure,
combustible material, combustible wall or partition, exterior
window opening, exit access or exit, including any deck, unless
authorized by the Fire Chief, except as set forth in Subsection
G(2)(b).
(b) Open burning in an outdoor fireplace or outdoor fire pit may be
conducted at a location at least 20 feet from the nearest
building or combustible material if the diameter of the outdoor
fireplace or outdoor fire pit is 40 inches or less, the device has
(and the user uses) a solid metal or metallic mesh cover or lid
and a fire bowl or metal screen that completely contains and
surrounds the fire area, or the device is a chiminea or patio
fireplace, without Fire Chief approval.
H. Open burning shall only be conducted between 12:00 noon and 7:00
p.m., except for campfires contained within an outdoor fireplace, fire pit
or fire ring, which may be conducted between 12:00 noon and 10:00
§ 100-6 WATERFORD CODE § 100-6
100:150
§ 100-7. Solid-fuel-fired outdoor heating devices.
§ 100-8. Fire Department practice burns.
Notwithstanding §§ 100-4 and 100-5 of this chapter, the Village of Waterford
Fire Department may burn a standing building if necessary for fire-fighting
practice and if the practice burn complies with the requirements of the
Department of Natural Resources.
§ 100-9. Exemption for burning certain papers.
Notwithstanding § 100-5G of this chapter, paper and cardboard products
may be used as a starter fuel for a fire that is allowed under this chapter.
p.m. Bonfires may be conducted during the times set forth in the permit
issued by the Fire Chief.
I. Open burning shall be constantly attended and supervised by a
competent person of at least 18 years of age until the fire is
extinguished and is cold. The person shall have readily available for use
such fire extinguishing equipment as may be necessary for the total
control of the fire.
J. No materials may be burned upon any street, curb, gutter or sidewalk
or on the ice of a lake, pond, river or waterbody.
K. No open burning may be conducted on days when the Department of
Natural Resources has declared an ozone action day applicable to the
Village.
A. New solid-fuel-fired outdoor heating devices prohibited. No person may
install a solid fuel-fired outdoor heating device in the Village of
Waterford after the date of passage and publication of this chapter.
B. Existing devices. If a solid-fuel-fired outdoor heating device is in place
on the date of passage and publication of this chapter, it may be
operated and maintained according to manufacturer guidelines;
however, if an existing solid fuel-fired outdoor heating device
grandfathered under this chapter becomes hazardous, harmful,
noxious, and/or a safety or health issue to the surrounding
neighborhood as determined by the Building Inspector and Fire Chief,
the owner shall correct, improve or abate the nuisance using whatever
means are necessary. If the nuisance cannot be abated, then operation
of the device shall be discontinued until a solution to the nuisance can
be found.
A. Small quantities of confidential papers from a residence may be burned
if necessary to prevent the theft of financial records, identification or
other confidential information.
B. Confidential papers from a commercial enterprise shall be shredded or
destroyed in a manner other than burning.
§ 100-6 BURNING § 100-9
100:151
§ 100-10. Bonfire permits.
No person shall start or maintain any bonfire without a permit issued by the
Fire Chief. The fee for the permit shall be in an amount set by the Village
Board.
§ 100-11. Burning ban.
When weather conditions warrant, the Fire Chief or the Department of
Natural Resources may declare a burning ban on all open burning and
temporarily suspend previously issued bonfire permits.
§ 100-12. Liability.
A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire shall be responsible for all
fire suppression costs and any other liability resulting from damage caused
by the fire.
§ 100-13. Right of entry and inspection.
The Fire Chief or any authorized officer, agent, employee or representative
of the Village who presents credentials may inspect any property for the
purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If
the owner or occupant of the premises denies access to the property for this
purpose, a special inspection warrant may be obtained in accordance with
Wis. Stat. § 66.0119.
§ 100-14. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Chapter 104
C. A fire set for burning of a small quantity of confidential papers shall be
subject to and comply with § 100-6 of this chapter.
A. A permit issued under this section shall require compliance with all
applicable provisions of this chapter and any additional special
restrictions deemed necessary to protect public health and safety, and
shall also specify the beginning and ending time for the bonfire.
B. Any violation of the conditions of a bonfire permit shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter. Any violation of this chapter or the bonfire
permit shall void the permit.
A. The Fire Chief, the Police Department and the Building Inspector are
authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any
regulation, rule or order made hereunder, shall be subject to a penalty
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code. Violation of
this chapter shall also constitute a public nuisance which may be
enjoined in a civil action in addition to prosecution therefor.
§ 100-9 WATERFORD CODE § 100-14
104:152
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 104-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Village of Waterford's Cable
Communications Franchise Ordinance." Within this document it shall also
be referred to as "this franchise" or "the franchise."
§ 104-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this franchise, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense,
words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the
singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are
mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning.
BASIC SERVICE — That service tier which includes the retransmission of
local television broadcast signals.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM or SYSTEM — A facility consisting of
a set of closed transmission paths associated signal generation, reception,
and control equipment that is designed to provide cable services and which
is provided to multiple subscribers within the Village. Such term does not
include:
CABLE SERVICE —
FCC — The Federal Communications Commissions or any successor
thereto, having jurisdiction over cable television.
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more television broadcast stations;
A.
A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit
dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless
such facility or facilities uses any public right-of-way;
B.
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to
the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except
that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such
facility is used in the retransmission of video programming directly to
subscribers; or
C.
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility systems.
D.
The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming (i.e.,
programming provided by, or generally comparable to programming
provided by, a television broadcast station); and
A.
Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such
video programming.
B.
§ 100-14 CABLE TELEVISION § 104-2
104:153
FORCE MAJEURE — Acts of God; employment strike(s); acts of public
enemies; orders of any government entity of the United States of America
or of the state or any of their departments, agencies, political subdivisions;
epidemics; landslides; lightning; earthquakes; fires; tornadoes; storms;
floods; washouts; droughts; civil disturbances; explosions; partial or entire
failure of utilities or any other cause or event not reasonably within the
control of the disabled party.
GRANTEE — Time Warner Cable of Southeastern Wisconsin, LP, a
subsidiary of Time Warner Entertainment Company, LP, its agents, lawful
successors, transferees or assignees.
GROSS REVENUES — All service fees, installation charges, and all other
fees or charges collected from the provision of cable services to subscribers
of the system. Gross revenues shall not include (1) excise taxes; or (2) sales
taxes or any other taxes or fees, including the franchise fee, which are
imposed on the grantee or any subscriber by any governmental unit and
collected by the grantee for such governmental unit.
PERSON — Any corporation, partnership, proprietorship or organization
authorized to do business in the state or any natural person.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any real property other than a street owned by any
governmental unit.
STATE — The State of Wisconsin.
STREET — The surface of and the space above and below any street,
road highway, freeway, lane, path, way, alley, court, sidewalk, boulevard,
parkway, drive, or any public easement or right-of-way now or hereafter
held by the Village which shall entitle grantee to the use thereof for the
purpose of installing or transmitting over poles, wires, cables, conductors,
ducts, confluents, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and
other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a system.
VILLAGE — The Village of Waterford, as the same now or in the future may
exist.
§ 104-3. Grant of authority.
For the purposes of constructing, operating and maintaining a system in
the Village, grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, relocate,
reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along the
streets, including over public rights-of-way and through easements, within
the Village such lines, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes,
amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments and other operating
equipment as are necessary and pertinent to the operation of the system.
§ 104-4. Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
A. This franchise is granted pursuant to the terms and conditions
contained herein. Such terms and conditions shall be subordinate to all
applicable provisions of state and federal laws, rules and regulations.
§ 104-2 WATERFORD CODE § 104-4
104:154
§ 104-5. Territorial area involved.
This franchise is granted for the territorial boundary of the Village. In the
event of annexation by the Village, any new territory shall become part of
the area covered.
§ 104-6. Franchise term.
This franchise shall commence upon the effective date of this chapter and
shall expire 15 years thereafter unless renewed, revoked or terminated
sooner as herein provided.
§ 104-7. Franchise nonexclusive.
The franchise granted herein is nonexclusive. The Village specifically
reserves the right to grant, at any time, one or more additional franchises
for a system in accordance with state and federal law; provided, however,
no such future franchise shall be granted on terms more favorable or less
burdensome than those contained herein. In the event a future franchise is
granted on terms more favorable or less burdensome than those contained
herein, then this franchise shall be deemed amended as of the effective
date of the future franchise to incorporate the more favorable or less
burdensome term(s) or condition(s) herein.
§ 104-8. Written notice.
§ 104-9. Repair of streets and property.
Any and all streets or public property or private property which is disturbed
or damaged during the construction, repair, replacement, relocation,
operation, maintenance or reconstruction of the system shall be promptly
B. Grantee's rights are subject to the police powers of the Village to adopt
and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and welfare of
the public that are not otherwise inconsistent with the terms and
conditions of this franchise. Grantee shall comply all applicable general
laws and ordinances enacted by the Village pursuant to that power.
A. All notices or demands required to be given under this franchise shall
be deemed to be given when delivered personally to the persons
designated below or upon the date actually received as evidenced by
registered or certified mail receipt addressed as follows:
(1) If to the Village: Village Administrator, Village of Waterford, 123
North River Street, Waterford, Wisconsin 53185.
(2) If to grantee: Time Warner Cable of Southeastern Wisconsin, LP,
Division President, 1610 North Second Street, Milwaukee, WI
53212.
B. Such addresses may be changed by either party upon notice to the
other party given as provided in this section.
§ 104-4 CABLE TELEVISION § 104-9
104:155
repaired by grantee to a condition as good as that prevailing prior to
grantee's work.
§ 104-10. Construction and use of facilities.
A. Subject to the Village's approval, the grantee shall have the right to
erect and maintain its own poles at locations as it may find necessary
for the proper construction and maintenance of the cable
communications system. Approval shall be procured by the grantee
from the proper Village department providing for the erection of these
poles.
B. The grantee's transmission and distribution system poles, wires,
appurtenances, shall be located, erected, and maintained, so as not to
endanger or interfere with the lives of persons or to interfere with any
improvements the Village may deem proper to make or to unnecessarily
hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, sidewalks,
or other public property. Removal or relocation of poles or equipment
when necessary to avoid such interference shall be at the grantee's
expense.
C. Construction and maintenance of the system shall be performed in an
orderly and workmanlike manner. Grantee shall at all times comply with
the National Electrical Safety Code and such applicable ordinances and
regulations of the Village affecting electrical and structural
installations which may be presently in effect or changed by future
ordinance.
D. All installations of cable distribution facilities shall be of a permanent
nature, durable, installed in accordance with good engineering
practice, and of such sufficient height to comply with all existing Village
regulations, ordinances, and state laws, so as not to interfere with the
right of the public or individual property owner and shall not interfere
unduly with the travel and use of public places by the public during the
construction, repair, or removal thereof, and shall not unduly obstruct
or impede traffic.
E. The grantee shall maintain its system so that cables, wires, poles and
other facilities shall conform to the pattern of the existing public utility
cables, wires, poles and other facilities, subject to the right of the
Village to require relocation, either overhead or underground, of such
cables, wires, poles and other facilities when the Village determines
that such relocation is necessary and in the public interest but not for
arbitrary and capricious reasons. Any such relocation shall be at the
grantee's expense unless the utilities are compensated for such
relocation, in which case the grantee shall be similarly compensated.
F. The grantee shall maintain its system so that poles, and other
structures of public utilities which are available shall be used to the
extent practicable to minimize interference with travel. Before placing
or setting new poles, the grantee shall file notice of such intention with
§ 104-9 WATERFORD CODE § 104-10
104:156
§ 104-11. Legal obligations.
the Village and specify the location, height, and dimensions, of the
poles and notify affected residents whose property may be disturbed.
The construction shall not be commenced until the specifications have
been submitted to the appropriate Village agency and the grantee has
received its written approval, which shall not be unreasonably withheld
or delayed.
G. Whenever, by reason of the construction, repair, maintenance,
relocation, widening, raising, lowering of the grade, or vacation of any
street by the Village or by the location or manner of construction,
reconstruction, maintenance or repair of any public property, structure
or facility by the Village, or any public improvement, municipally owned
or operated utility services or pursuant to any plan adopted by the
Village, or any public improvement, municipally owned or operated
utility services or pursuant to any plan adopted by the Village for
rehabilitating any section of the Village, it shall be deemed necessary
by the Village for the grantee to move, relocate, change, alter or modify
any of its facilities or structures, such change, relocation, alteration or
modification shall be promptly made by the grantee. Any such
relocation shall be at the grantee's expense unless the utilities are
compensated for such relocation, in which case the grantee shall be
similarly compensated. In the event the grantee, after such notice, fails
or refuses to commence, pursue or complete such relocation work
within a reasonable time, the Village shall have the authority, but not
the obligation, to remove or abate such structures or facilities and to
require the grantee to pay to the Village the cost of such relocation,
alteration, or modification. If the grantee fails to complete in a timely
manner any relocation requested by the Village and the Village incurs
any costs resulting from such delay, the grantee shall be liable to the
Village for such costs.
H. The grantee shall, upon request of any person holding a building
moving permit or permit to move oversize loads issued by the Village,
temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings or
oversize loads. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or
lowering of the wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same,
and grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in
advance. The grantee shall be given not less than 72 hours' advance
notice to arrange for such temporary changes.
I. The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and
overhanging the streets of the Village so as to prevent the branches of
such trees from coming in contact with the grantee's wires and cables.
A. The grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and
hold harmless the Village, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and
employees, against and from any and all claims, demands, causes of
actions, suits, proceedings, damages, liabilities and judgments of every
kind arising out of or due to the grantee's construction or operation of
§ 104-10 CABLE TELEVISION § 104-11
104:157
§ 104-12. Compliance with applicable laws.
All work undertaken in connection with the construction, reconstruction,
maintenance, operation or repair of the grantee's system shall be subject to
and governed by all present laws, rules and regulations of the Village, the
state and the United States of America, including the FCC and any other
federal agency having jurisdiction.
§ 104-13. Notice of rate increases.
Prior to implementing any rate increase for basic, standard or premium
service, grantee shall give the following notices:
the system in the Village, including but not limited to damages for
injury or death or damages to property, real or personal, and against all
liabilities to others and against all loss, cost and expense, resulting or
arising out of any of the same.
B. The grantee shall, at the sole risk and expense of the grantee, upon
demand of the Village, appear in and defend any and all suits, actions,
or other legal proceedings, whether judicial, quasi-judicial,
administrative, or otherwise brought or instituted or had by third
persons or duly constituted authorities, against or affecting the Village,
its officers, boards, commission, agents, or employees, arising out of or
due to the grantee's construction or operation of the system in the
Village.
C. The grantee shall pay and satisfy and shall cause to be paid and
satisfied any judgment, decree, order, directive, or demand, rendered
made or issued, against the grantee, the Village, its officers, boards,
commissions, agents or employees, for the foregoing; and such
indemnity shall exist and continue without reference to or limitation by
the amount of any bond, policy of insurance, deposit, undertaking or
other assurance required hereunder or otherwise.
D. In order for the Village to assert its rights to be indemnified, defend and
held harmless, the Village must:
(1) Promptly notify grantee of any claim or legal proceeding which
gives rise to such right;
(2) Afford grantee the opportunity to participate in and fully control
any compromise, settlement, resolution or disposition of such claim
or proceeding; and
(3) Fully cooperate in the defense of such claim and make available to
grantee all such information under its control relating thereto.
A. At least 30 days' advance notice to the Village; and
B. At least 30 days' advance notice to subscribers.
§ 104-11 WATERFORD CODE § 104-14
104:158
§ 104-14. Liability insurance.
§ 104-15. Performance standards.
§ 104-16. Subscriber complaints.
A. The grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of the franchise
specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the
franchise, liability insurance insuring the municipality and the grantee
in the minimum amount of:
(1) For property damage to any one person: $1,000,000;
(2) For property damage to any one accident: $1,000,000;
(3) For personal injury to any one person: $1,000,000; and
(4) For personal injury in any one accident: $1,000,000.
B. Upon request of the Village, grantee shall furnish to the Village
satisfactory evidence that an insurance policy has been obtained and is
in full force and effect.
A. The grantee shall construct, operate and maintain its system according
to the specifications of the FCC.
B. The grantee's system shall be designed and rated for twenty-four-houra-
day continuous operation.
C. The grantee shall at all times employ a reasonable standard of care to
prevent failures or accidents which are likely to cause damages,
injuries or nuisances to the public.
D. The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs within a fortyeight-
hour business-day cycle if access to the customer's house is
available during that time period, and interrupt service only for good
cause and for the shortest times possible. Insofar as possible, such
interruptions shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during
periods of minimum use of the system.
E. The grantee shall provide a parental control device capability for a
reasonable charge, upon request, to any subscriber.
A. During the term of this franchise, the grantee shall maintain a local or
toll-free telephone number for the purpose of receiving and resolving
all complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions,
billing inquiries and similar matters. The grantee shall provide trained
personnel to receive and process telephone and in-person calls
concerning service problems during normal business hours. Outside of
normal business hours, the grantee may provide a telephone answering
service or an automated telephone answering system to receive
telephone calls concerning service problems. No later than 30 months
after acceptance of the franchise by grantee, the grantee will have
§ 104-14 CABLE TELEVISION § 104-16
104:159
§ 104-17. Transfer of assignment of franchise.
The rights granted herein shall not be transferred or assigned by the
grantee without written notice to the Village. Such consent shall not be
qualified representatives available to respond to customer telephone
inquiries 24 hours a day and seven days a week.
B. As subscribers are connected or reconnected to the system, the grantee
shall, by appropriate means, such as a card or brochure, furnish
information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or
complaints, including the name, address and local telephone number
where such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed.
C. When there have been similar complaints made, or where there exists
other evidence, which in the judgment of the Village casts doubt on the
reliability or quality of the system, the Village shall have the right and
authority to require that the grantee test, analyze, and report on the
performance of the system. The grantee shall fully cooperate with the
Village in performing such testing and shall prepare results and a
report, if requested, within five days' notice. Such report shall include
the following information:
(1) The nature of the complaint or problem which precipitated the
special tests.
(2) What system component was tested.
(3) The equipment used and procedures employed in testing.
(4) The method, if any, in which such complaint or problem was
resolved.
(5) Any other information pertinent to said tests and analysis which
may be required.
D. The Village may require that tests be monitored by a professional
engineer selected by the Village at the Village's expense.
E. Subscriber credit for outages. Upon service interruption and/or outages
of subscriber's cable service, the following shall apply:
(1) For service interruptions and/or outages of over four hours and up
to seven days, the grantee shall provide, at the subscriber's
request, a credit of 1/30 of one month's fees for affected services
for each twenty-four-hour period service is interrupted for four or
more hours for any single subscriber, with the exception of
subscribers disconnected because of nonpayment or excessive
signal leakage.
(2) For service interruptions and/or outages of seven days or more in
one month, the grantee shall provide, at the subscriber's request, a
full month's credit for affected services for all affected subscribers.
§ 104-16 WATERFORD CODE § 104-17
104:160
unreasonably withheld. No transfer or assignment shall become effective
until the transferee or the assignee has filed with the Village its written
acceptance of the terms and conditions of this franchise. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary, no such prior consent shall be required for a
transfer or assignment to any entity controlling, controlled by or under the
same common control as the grantee.
§ 104-18. Franchise renewal.
This franchise shall be renewed in accordance with applicable state and
federal law.
§ 104-19. Village's right to revoke.
In addition to all other rights which Village has pursuant to law or equity,
the Village reserves the right to revoke, terminate or cancel this franchise
and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto in the event that:
§ 104-20. Revocation procedures.
A. Grantee violates any material provision of this franchise; or
B. Grantee practices any fraud upon the Village; or
C. Grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is
adjudged bankrupt or a receiver is appointed to it.
A. The Village shall notify the grantee of its intention to revoke, terminate
or cancel this franchise. The written notice shall describe in reasonable
detail the specific violation so as to afford grantee an opportunity to
remedy the violation.
B. Grantee shall have 90 days subsequent to receipt of the notice in which
to correct the violation before the Village may formally revoke,
terminate or cancel this franchise. Grantee may, within 30 days of
receipt of the notice, notify the Village that there is a dispute as to
whether a violation has, in fact, occurred. Such notice by grantee to the
Village shall stay the ninety-day period described above.
C. The Village shall hear grantee's dispute and shall determine whether a
default or violation by grantee has occurred. In the event the Village
shall determine that a default or violation has occurred the Village shall
supplement the decision with written findings of fact.
D. If, after hearing the dispute, grantee has been found to be in default,
grantee shall then have 60 days from such a determination to remedy
the violation or failure. At any time after that sixty-day period the
Village may, by formal action at a public hearing affording reasonable
notice and opportunity for grantee to be heard, revoke, terminate or
cancel this franchise.
§ 104-17 CABLE TELEVISION § 104-21
104:161
§ 104-21. Removal upon revocation.
Upon the revocation of this franchise as herein provided, grantee shall
remove all of its attachments and wires from poles used as authorized
herein.
§ 104-22. Force majeure.
If by reason of a force majeure any party is unable in whole or in part to
carry out its obligations hereunder, that party shall not be deemed to be in
violation or default during the continuance of such inability.
§ 104-23. Maps.
Upon request of the Village, grantee shall maintain on file with the Village
a true and accurate map or set of maps showing all system equipment
installed and in place in streets and other public places.
§ 104-24. Service area.
§ 104-25. Unauthorized connections or modifications.
A. Residents in those areas with an average density of at least 20 homes
per mile, as measured from the nearest point of usable trunk line, shall
be provided service upon payment of the standard installation charge
and applicable monthly fees; except that installations requiring
underground drops or aerial drops in excess of 175 feet shall be
considered nonstandard installations to be charged to the subscriber at
grantee's actual cost of installation.
B. Service to homes not meeting those density requirements of Subsection
A above shall be made available to those who desire grantee's services
on a time-plus-material basis.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, without the express consent of the
grantee, to make any connection, extension, or division, whether
physically, acoustically, inductively, electronically or otherwise, with or
to any segment of the system for any purpose whatsoever.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully interfere, tamper, remove,
obstruct or damage any part, segment or content of the system for any
purpose whatsoever.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, operate or maintain a
system without having first applied for and received a franchise from
the Village.
D. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of the Village, which penalty provision are
incorporated herein by reference.32
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II, General Penalty.
§ 104-21 WATERFORD CODE § 104-26
104:162
§ 104-26. Franchise fee payments.
Subject to applicable law, the grantee shall pay to the Village 5.0% of the
annual gross revenues. The franchise fee shall be due and payable 45 days
after the expiration of the calendar quarter. The Village shall have the right
to audit, at reasonable times and places and at its expense, the books and
financial records of the grantee to verify franchise fee payments.
§ 104-27. System upgrade.
The grantee hereby agrees to complete an upgrade of its cable system
within 40 months from its acceptance of the franchise. The upgraded system
shall have a minimum bandwidth capacity of 750 MHz (forward bandwidth
54 to 750 MHz; reverse bandwidth five to 40 MHz) with 550 MHz initially
activated and a minimum of 79 NTSC analog or equivalent downstream
video channels initially activated. All system passives, taps, and connectors
shall be capable of passing one GHz bandwidth. The Village reserves the
right to have an independent engineer or equivalent audit the system to
verify completion.
§ 104-28. Service to schools and municipal buildings.
Grantee shall offer, free of charge, two outlets of basic service and standard
tier service to all public and private (Grade K-12) schools located within
200 feet of the system and one outlet to each municipal building located
within 200 feet of the system and all such buildings and schools as of the
acceptance date served by the existing system. For initial connections to
schools, both free outlets must be scheduled and installed simultaneously.
Service will be made free of charge and as promptly as possible to all such
schools and municipal buildings requesting connections. If any internal
wiring installation is requested to serve additional outlets in such schools
and municipal buildings, it shall be provided at grantee's cost of materials
and labor at the applicable hourly service charge at Village's request;
provided, however, that such internal wiring will be provided without
charge if grantee is able to coordinate with other comparable electrical
wiring installation in cases of new construction or substantial rehabilitation
of existing schools or municipal buildings. Basic and standard services will
be provided to each outlet in such schools and municipal buildings free of
any charge.
§ 104-29. Internet service to schools.
At the Village's request, the grantee shall initially provide free connection
to a local internet access provider for each public and private high school at
one location in each school in the Village no later than 12 months prior to
the initiation of the system upgrade as specified in § 104-27. Each location
will receive:
A. One measured business grade telephone line.
B. One 28.8 Kbps. modem.
§ 104-26 CABLE TELEVISION § 104-29
104:163
§ 104-30. Public, educational and governmental access.
The grantee hereby agrees to provide three channels for public, educational
and governmental cablecasting. Each channel shall be at least 6 MHz
NTSC analog or digital equivalent, be carried on the basic service, and be
available to the entire subscriber system serving the Village. Designation of
use and operation shall be by the Village.
§ 104-31. Capital contribution.
C. One local internet access account which includes:
(1) Twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week Internet access at
28.8 Kbps.
(2) Domain name service.
(3) Internet mail.
(4) One PC software browser (Netscape — Type graphic — user
interface).
D. Upon successful development by grantee's parent corporations, Time
Warner Communications and Time Inc., of an on-line internet access
service for personal computers, the grantee will provide all schools
served by the grantee with a local connection to this on-line service to
the extent that it is available on the cable system, including one free
modem and one free access to the Time Warner Communications/Time
Inc. on-line service. Access to Time Warner's on-line service does not
include access to any non-Time Warner commercial services available
through Time Warner's on-line service.
A. The grantee agrees to provide the Village with capital support for
public, educational, and governmental access equipment and facilities
in the amount of $0.15 per customer per month as set forth below. The
Village agrees that all amounts paid by the grantee as the "capital
contribution" may be added to the price of basic cable service and
collected from grantee's subscribers as "external costs," as such term is
used in 47 CFR 76.922 as it may from time to time be amended. The
collection of capital contribution from grantee's subscribers shall
commence on the January 1 following the completion of all
requirements in Subsection B below. In addition, all amounts paid as
the capital contribution may, at the grantee's discretion, be separately
stated on subscribers' bills as permitted in 47 CFR 76.985 as it may
from time to time be amended.
B. The capital contribution will be paid quarterly, simultaneous with the
franchise fee payment by the grantee to the Village upon request after:
(1) The approval by the Village of the charges, if required pursuant to
47 CFR 76.933; and
§ 104-29 WATERFORD CODE § 104-31
104:164
§ 104-32. Customer service standards.
The grantee shall maintain qualified representatives available via a local,
toll-free or collect call telephone access line which will be available to its
subscribers at a minimum of 10 hours per day Monday through Friday,
and eight hours per day on Saturday and Sunday. At other times, grantee
may use automated telephone response systems. No later than 30 months
after acceptance of the franchise by grantee, the grantee will have qualified
representatives available to respond to customer telephone inquiries 24
hours a day and seven days a week.
§ 104-33. Performance bond.
(2) Notice is sent to subscribers of the adjustment.
C. Following the completion of the system upgrade in the Village, the
grantee will, at the Village's request, make a one-time advance payment
calculated at $0.05 per subscriber (based on the subscriber count as of
December 31 of the preceding year) times 12 months, times 15 years
(or the remaining length of the franchise term) payable to the Village 90
days following the Village's request. If the Village chooses this option,
the capital contribution, as defined in Subsection A above, will be
reduced to $0.10 per subscriber per month per year for the remaining
years of this agreement.
A. The grantee shall deliver at the time of acceptance a performance bond
of $25,000 to secure performance under this franchise agreement.
B. If the grantee fails to comply with any law, ordinance or resolution
governing the franchise, or fails to well and truly observe, fulfill and
perform each term and condition of the franchise, as it relates to the
conditions relative to the construction of the system, including the
franchise agreement which is incorporated herein by reference, there
shall be recoverable jointly and severally, from the principal and surety
of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the municipality as a
result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification,
or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the grantee, plus
a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees, including the municipality's
legal staff, and costs, up to the full amount of the bond.
C. The municipality may, upon completion of construction of the service
area, waive or reduce the requirement of the grantee to maintain the
bond. However, the municipality may require a performance bond to be
posted by the grantee for any construction subsequent to the
completion of the initial service areas, in a reasonable amount and upon
such terms as determined by the municipality.
D. The bond shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby
understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the
surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until 30
days after receipt by the Municipality, by registered mail, a written
§ 104-31 CABLE TELEVISION § 104-33
104:165
§ 104-34. Severability.
If any term, condition or section of this franchise or the application thereof
to any person or circumstance shall, to any extent, be held to be invalid
or unenforceable, the remainder hereof and the application of such term,
condition or section to persons or circumstances other than those as to
whom it shall be held invalid or unenforceable shall not be affected thereby,
and this franchise and all the terms, conditions and sections hereof shall, in
all other respects, continue to be effective and to be complied with.
Chapter 109
CARRIAGE SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 87.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 191.
Traffic and parking — See Ch. 207.
notice of such intent to cancel and not to renew." Upon receipt of
a thirty-day notice, this shall be construed as default granting the
municipality the right to call in the bond.
E. The municipality, at any time during the term of this chapter, may waive
grantee's requirement to maintain a performance bond. The invitation
to waive the requirement can be initiated by the municipality or
grantee.
§ 104-33 WATERFORD CODE § 104-34
109:166
ARTICLE I
Licenses
§ 109-1. License required.
No person shall transport passengers in a horse-drawn carriage in the
Village of Waterford without first obtaining a carriage license.
§ 109-2. Application. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
Application for a carriage license shall be made in writing to the Village
Clerk, stating the full name of the applicant, his or her address and date
of birth, the name under which the applicant is doing business and the
location of the business. The applicant shall specify the seating capacity of
the carriage and identify the proposed hours of operation, and shall include
with the application the route upon which he or she intends to operate, the
route upon which he or she intends to travel to reach and leave that route,
and the location where the horse and carriage will stand while waiting
for fares. When applying for a license, the applicant shall consent to a
background investigation.
§ 109-3. Term of license; fee.33
Licenses granted hereunder shall expire on June 30 of each year. The fee
to be paid upon application for the license shall be in an amount set by the
Village Board.
§ 109-4. Approval of license. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
The Village Clerk shall request the Police Department to perform a
background investigation of the applicant and the business. The application
and the results of the investigation shall be presented to the Village Board
for its review of the application and its decision as to the grant of the
license. If the Village Board approves the license, the Village Clerk shall
issue said license upon the applicant's fulfillment of § 109-5. If the Village
Board refuses to approve the license, it shall state the reasons on the
record, and no part of the application fee shall be refunded.
§ 109-5. Insurance. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
A. No license shall be issued until the applicant deposits with the Village
Clerk a policy of liability insurance covering all carriages, horses and
drivers to be included under the license. Said insurance policy shall be
issued by an insurance company authorized and licensed to do business
in this state. Coverage shall be provided in the minimum amounts of
$500,000 for bodily injury or death to any one person, $1,000,000 for
injuries or death in any one accident or occurrence caused by the
operation of the horse-drawn carriage or by the driver, the horse(s) or
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 109-1 CARRIAGE SERVICES § 109-5
109:167
§ 109-6. Revocation.
The Board may revoke a license issued hereunder for more than three
violations of the rules of operation listed in Article II of this chapter for
operation of the licensed carriage in a manner which is harmful to the
safety, health or welfare of the community, or for any violation of the animal
welfare provisions of Chapter 87, Article II, of this Municipal Code or state
law.
the carriage(s) separately or in any combination, and $100,000 for
property damage arising out of any accident or occurrence caused by
the operation of the horse-drawn carriage or by the driver, the horse(s)
or the carriage(s) separately or in any combination.
B. Each insurance policy shall provide that the same shall not be canceled
before the expiration of its term except upon 30 days' written notice to
the Village Clerk of the Village of Waterford. The policy shall be
approved by the Village Attorney. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No.
467]
C. The cancellation or other termination of any insurance policy issued in
compliance with this section shall automatically revoke and terminate
all licenses issued for the carriages covered under said insurance policy
unless another policy shall have been filed, approved and effective prior
to the time of said cancellation or termination.
§ 109-5 WATERFORD CODE § 109-6
109:168
ARTICLE II
Rules of operation
§ 109-7. Established routes. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
Licensees must adhere to the routes specified in the license application.
New or temporary routes must be applied for and approved by the Village
Board and filed with the Clerk before a licensee may use the new or
temporary route. Any deviation from the established route without said
approval shall be a violation of this section.
§ 109-8. Driving time limit; weather factors.
No driver shall be allowed to drive a horse-drawn carriage for more than
a period of 10 hours in any twenty-four-hour day. No carriage shall be
operated while the temperature exceeds 90° Fahrenheit.
§ 109-9. Sanitation requirements.
Licensees shall comply with the following sanitation requirements:
§ 109-10. Safety requirements.
The seating capacity of the carriage shall be specified in the carriage
license. No driver shall permit more passengers than can be seated on the
seats of the carriage, except children under five years of age may be carried
by an adult. No driver shall permit any passenger to sit alongside the driver
while the driver is engaged in the operation of the horse and carriage.
§ 109-11. Feeding and care of horses.
Licensees shall ensure adequate rest periods, feeding schedules, health
and related animal performance and well-being for each horse under the
licensee's ownership, care or control. This responsibility shall include
carriage load limits, hours of operation and daily hours of animal usage,
except that no animal shall be required to work more than 10 hours per day.
No animal shall be left unattended.
§ 109-12. Certificate of soundness required. [Amended 11-22-2004
by Ord. No. 467]
For each horse that will be pulling a carriage, licensees shall provide a
certificate of soundness issued by a veterinarian licensed in this state,
A. All horses shall be equipped with adequate devices to prevent manure
from falling upon the streets of the Village. No driver shall allow
manure or urine to remain on any street, alley, gutter, sidewalk, lawn,
field, or any public or private property, and the driver of the animal shall
immediately remove the same by the most effective means possible.
B. All animal waste shall be promptly transported to sites legally
empowered to accept such waste for treatment and disposal.
§ 109-7 CARRIAGE SERVICES § 109-12
109:169
finding such animal to be free of infectious disease, in good health and
fit for hack and carriage service under this chapter. Each horse shall be
reinspected at intervals of no more than six months. No horse shall be used
to draw a carriage unless such a certificate of soundness, dated within the
preceding six-month period, is on file with the Village Clerk.
§ 109-12 WATERFORD CODE § 109-12
109:170
ARTICLE III
Penalties
§ 109-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any regulation,
rule or order made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided by
Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code.
§ 109-13 CARRIAGE SERVICES § 109-13
109:171
Chapter 112
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water and sewers — See Ch. 223.
§ 112-1. Cross-connection control program and regulations.
A. Authority and purpose.
(1) The Department of Natural Resources, in Wis. Admin. Code § NR
810.15, requires that the water supplier for every municipal water
system develop and implement a comprehensive control program
for the elimination of all existing unprotected cross-connections
and prevention of all future unprotected cross-connections to the
last flowing tap or end-use device. This chapter shall be
administered by the Department of Public Works.
(2) The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public water system
from contamination due to, but not limited to, the interconnection
of contaminants through the water service connection into the
public water system.
B. Adoption of state Codes. Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters NR
810 and SPS 382, as amended, are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated into this section, subject to the limitations set forth
herein.
C. Definition of cross-connection. A cross-connection is defined as a
connection or potential connection between any part of a water supply
system and another environment containing substances in a manner
that, under any circumstances, would allow the substances to enter the
water supply system by means of back siphonage or back pressure, and/
or any physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise
separate systems, one of which contains potable water from the Village
of Waterford's public water system, and the other of which contains
water from a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety,
or steam, gases, or chemicals, whereby there may be a flow from one
system to the other, with the direction of flow depending on the
pressure differential between the two systems.
D. Unprotected cross-connections prohibited.
(1) No person may establish or maintain, or permit to be established or
maintained, any unprotected cross-connection. Cross-connections
shall be protected as required in Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 382.
§ 109-13 WATERFORD CODE § 112-1
109:172
(2) No person may remove or permit to be removed a cross-connection
control device or method.
(3) No person may create or maintain an interconnection between the
public water supply system and another source of water unless
permitted by the Water Utility and the Department of Natural
Resources in individual cases.
E. Cross-connection control program and inspections.
(1) Cross-connection control program. The Village shall create and
enforce a cross-connection control program in accordance with
Wis. Admin. Code § NR 810.15. The frequency of regular
inspections shall be established by the Village in accordance with
the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(2) Inspections. Persons authorized by the Village may inspect
property served by the public water system for cross-connections,
whether as part of the Village's cross-connection control program
(CCCP) or at any other time.
(a) Nonresidential inspections. A State-of-Wisconsin-certified
cross-connection inspector/surveyor engaged by the Village
shall periodically inspect all nonresidential buildings and
premises served by the Village water system for unprotected
cross-connections and shall order all such cross-connections to
be immediately eliminated. The inspector shall comply with the
inspection and compliance procedures outlined in the Village
of Waterford cross-connection control program adopted by
resolution of the Village Board. The inspector shall keep a
record of each such inspection, all orders issued under this
section, and all follow-up compliance inspections performed.
Copies of all inspection records and other documents relating
to cross-connection compliance shall be promptly filed with the
Director of Public Works. Inspections shall be conducted
pursuant to the schedule set forth in the CCCP. If the Director
of Public Works determines that any nonresidential property
poses a risk similar to, or less than, residential properties, the
Director may waive the inspection requirement under this
subsection and cause inspections to be made pursuant to
Subsection E(2)(b). The Director shall keep a record of each
such designation.
(b) Residential inspections. The Director of Public Works, or a
qualified employee of the Public Works Department, shall
inspect all residential structures served by the Village's water
system, other than normal bathroom and kitchen fixtures,
whenever any water meter is removed, replaced or serviced,
whenever he or she has reason to believe an unprotected
cross-connection exists, at other times when requested by the
property owner, and otherwise as required by the CCCP. A
§ 112-1 CARRIAGE SERVICES § 112-1
109:173
record of each such inspection shall be maintained by the
Public Works Department. The inspecting employee shall order
the elimination of all unprotected cross-connections.
(c) Public education. The Director of Public Works shall assure
that public education materials as required in the CCCP are
distributed as set forth therein.
(3) Any unprotected cross-connection identified by an inspection shall
be corrected within the time given by the inspector, who shall set a
time for correction and reinspection at the time of the discovery of
the violation. The time for correction may range between
immediately and 60 days, depending on the type of crossconnection.
The inspector shall notify the Director of Public Works
of unprotected cross-connections. Failure to correct an
unprotected cross-connection within the time given shall be
sufficient cause for the Water Utility to discontinue water service to
the property, as provided under Subsection H.
(4) Cost of inspections. The cost of inspections of nonresidential
properties set forth in Subsection E(2)(a) shall be allocated to each
property served and are authorized to be levied and imposed on
said property as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627.
The charges shall be included on the property tax bill for each
property and shall be collected as set forth in said statute.
Inspections performed by the Department of Public Works under
Subsection E(2)(b) shall not be subject to this provision. The Village
may, at its option, use any other method of billing authorized by
law. [Amended 3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 632]
F. Right of entry. Upon presentation of credentials, an authorized
representative of the Village shall have the right to request entry, at any
reasonable time, to a property served by a connection to the public
water system for the purpose of inspecting the property for crossconnections.
Refusing entry to such Village representative shall be
sufficient cause for the Water Utility to discontinue water service to the
property, as provided under Subsection H. If entry is refused, a special
inspection warrant under § 66.0119, Wis. Stats., may be obtained.
G. Provision of requested information. The Village may request an owner,
lessee, or occupant of property served by a connection to the public
water system to furnish the Village with pertinent information
regarding the piping systems on the property. Refusing to provide
requested information shall be sufficient cause for the Water Utility to
discontinue water service to the property, as provided under Subsection
H.
H. Discontinuation or denial of water for violation. Upon notification by the
Director of Public Works or his or her designee, the Water Utility may
discontinue or deny water service to any property wherein any
unprotected connection in violation of this section exists, or where
§ 112-1 WATERFORD CODE § 112-1
109:174
Chapter 115
DANCES AND DANCE HALLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 82.
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 148.
Licensing — See Ch. 154.
Minors — See Ch. 159.
§ 115-1. Authority and purpose. [Added 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
entry for an inspection has been denied, and take other precautionary
measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination
of the public water system. Water service may be discontinued,
however, only after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing
under Wis. Stats. Ch. 68, except as provided in Subsection I. Water
service to such property shall not be restored until the unprotected
cross-connection has been eliminated or entry for inspection has been
granted.
I. Emergency discontinuance. If it is determined by the Village or Water
Utility that an unprotected cross-connection or emergency endangers
public health, safety, or welfare, and requires immediate action, and if a
written finding to that effect is filed with the Village Clerk and delivered
to the customer's premises, water service may be immediately
discontinued. The customer shall have an opportunity for hearing under
Wis. Stats. Ch. 68 within 10 days of such emergency discontinuance.
Water service to such property shall not be restored until the
unprotected cross-connection has been eliminated.
J. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person who directly or indirectly prevents or hinders an
authorized Village representative or inspector from making an
inspection, examination, removal or installation under this section
shall forfeit not more than $25, plus costs, for each offense.
(2) Any person who violates any other provision of this section shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of this
Municipal Code.
(3) Each day in which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
A. Authority. The Village Board of the Village of Waterford, through its
explicit authority under Wis. Stat. § 125.10(1) to adopt regulations
governing the sale of alcohol beverages which are in addition to those
set forth in Wis. Stat. Ch. 125, and its general police powers set forth in
§ 112-1 CARRIAGE SERVICES § 115-1
109:175
Wis. Stat. § 61.34(1) to act for the good order of the municipality
and for the health, safety and welfare of the public; and its powers
of regulation and suppression; and its lack of authority to regulate
obscenity in light of Wis. Stat. § 66.0107(3), and does not intend by
adopting this chapter to regulate obscenity, since nudity in and of itself
is not obscene, declares its intent to enact an ordinance addressing the
secondary effects of live, nude, nonobscene, erotic dancing in bars and
taverns and dance halls
B. Purpose. The regulations in this chapter are adopted because the
Village Board recognizes that:
(1) Bars and taverns and dance halls featuring live nude, nonobscene,
erotic dancing have in other communities tended to further the
increase of criminal and other offensive activity, to disrupt the
peace and order of the communities, to depreciate the value of real
property, to harm the economic welfare of the communities and to
negatively affect the quality of life of the communities, and such
secondary effects are detrimental to the public health, safety and
general welfare of citizens; and
(2) The US Supreme Court has held that nude dancing is expressive
conduct within the outer perimeters of the First Amendment to the
United States Constitution and is therefore entitled to some limited
protection under the First Amendment, and the Village Board
further recognizes that freedom of speech is among our most
precious and highly protected rights, and the Village Board wishes
to act consistently with full protection of those rights; and
(3) Based on the experiences of other communities, bars and taverns
and dance halls in which live, nude, nonobscene, erotic dancing
occurs may and do generate secondary effects which the Village
Board believes are detrimental to the public health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Village of Waterford; and
(4) Among these secondary effects are:
(a) The potential increase in prostitution and other sex-related
offenses, as well as other crimes and offenses;
(b) The potential depreciation of property values in neighborhoods
where bars and taverns and dance halls featuring nude
dancing exist;
(c) Health risks associated with the spread of sexually transmitted
diseases; and
(d) The potential for infiltration by organized crime for the
purpose of unlawful conduct; and
(5) The Village Board desires to minimize, prevent and control these
adverse effects and thereby protect the health, safety and general
§ 115-1 WATERFORD CODE § 115-1
109:176
§ 115-2. Definitions. [Amended 7-12-1999 by Ord. No. 382]
In the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply:
DANCE HALL —
PUBLIC DANCE —
§ 115-3. Applicability.
welfare of the citizens of the Village of Waterford; protect the
citizens from increased crime; preserve the quality of life; preserve
the property values and character of surrounding neighborhoods;
and deter the spread of urban blight; and
(6) The Village Board has determined that enactment of an ordinance
prohibiting live, nude, nonobscene, erotic dancing in bars and
taverns licensed to serve alcohol beverages and in dance halls
promotes the goal of minimizing, preventing and controlling the
negative secondary effects associated with such activity.
A. Any room, place or space in which a public dance may be held; or
Any place in which dance classes are held and instruction in dancing
given to persons over 17 years of age, including pavilions and
amusement parks; or
B.
Any room, space or place, within or controlled by an establishment, in
which entertainment by dancers is offered, which dancing is intended
to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to customers or
where the establishment advertises or promotes employees or
independent contractors engaging in erotic dancing.
C.
Exceptions. Theaters, performing arts centers, civic centers, and dinner
theaters where live dance, ballet, music and dramatic performances of
serious artistic merit are offered on a regular basis are not dance halls.
D.
Any dance to which admission can be had by the general public with
or without the payment of a fee or the purchase, possession or
presentation of a ticket or token; or
A.
B. Any dance operated by club membership, season ticket or invitation; or
Any dance open or offered to the public generally, regardless of how
the music is furnished and regardless of whether such dance is the
exclusive or principal activity or an activity incidental to some other
commercial activity; or
C.
Any dance by an employee or employees of an establishment, or by
an independent contractor or independent contractors, who engage in
erotic dancing which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification to customers or patrons. See § 115-12E.
D.
§ 115-1 CARRIAGE SERVICES § 115-3
109:177
§ 115-4. Licenses.
§ 115-5. Action on license application. [Amended 6-26-2000 by Ord.
No. 401; 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467; 6-23-2008 by Ord. No. 530]
A. This chapter shall not apply to dances conducted by any church, grade
school, high school or college or any other recognized educational
institution located in the Village which are intended primarily to be
attended by students of such schools.
B. This chapter shall not be construed to prevent the attendance of
children 17 years of age or under at bathing beaches or at public dance
halls when public dances are not being held.
A. Required. No person shall permit any room, space, place or building
owned, leased, managed or controlled by him to be used as a public
dance hall without a license therefor.
B. Application. The application for a license hereunder shall be filed with
the Village Clerk for presentation to the Village Board at any regular or
special meeting. Such application shall contain the following:
[Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
(1) The name, age, residence, occupation and citizenship of the
applicant, if an individual, or the names of the principal officers and
their residences and ages, if the applicant is an association or
corporation, and the name and address of the manager or person in
charge.
(2) The length of time such applicant, if an individual, or the manager
or person in charge, if the applicant is a firm, partnership,
corporation or association, has or have resided in the Village, and
whether he or any of them have been convicted of violating any law
or ordinance regulating the conduct of public dance halls or public
dances and, if so, when and in what court.
(3) Where such public dance hall will be located or conducted, as well
as the location of the rooms to be occupied by such dance and the
total amount of floor space to be used for dancing purposes.
(4) Whether the applicant or manager has, either alone or with
someone else, previously been engaged as the owner, lessee or
employee of a public dance hall; and when, where and for how long.
(5) The name and address of the owner of the premises for which the
license is sought.
(6) Whether a hotel, rooming house, lodging house, restaurant or
tavern is conducted in any part of the premises for which the
license is sought.
§ 115-3 WATERFORD CODE § 115-5
109:178
§ 115-6. Issuance of license.
§ 115-7. Conditions of issuance of license.
A. Investigation by Police Department. The Village Clerk shall forward
such application to the Village Police Department, which shall
investigate such application and make a report of its findings to the
Village Board.
B. Action by the Village Board. Such application, along with the report of
the Chief of Police, shall be considered by the Village Board. The Village
Board may make such further investigation and inspections as it deems
necessary and may inspect all premises for which an application for a
license has been made to see that the same conforms with the
provisions of this chapter at any reasonable hour upon presentation of
the appropriate credentials. The Village Board shall grant or deny such
license.
A. Upon the granting of any license, the same shall be issued by the
Village Clerk. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
B. All licenses shall be numbered in the order of their date of issuance and
shall state clearly the name of the licensee, the location of the public
dance hall, the date of issuance and expiration and the fee paid.
A. No dance hall license shall be issued unless there is compliance with all
state laws and Village ordinances governing the issuance of the same,
and the proposed public dance hall complies with all Village ordinances
and state laws governing public buildings and all health and fire
regulations applicable thereto and is a safe and proper place for the
proposed use.
B. No license shall be granted unless the Village Board finds the applicant
and manager or person in charge to be capable of maintaining public
peace and good order at a public dance. In determining such capability,
the Village Board may take into consideration the records of law
enforcement agencies or of any courts that touch upon the applicant's
operation of a dance hall in the preceding license years.
C. No license shall be granted unless adequate modern toilet facilities are
provided within the building where the public dance is to be held and an
adequate supply of drinking water is available, nor shall any license be
granted unless the dance hall is properly lighted and ventilated and all
parts of the premises are safe and sanitary.
D. No license shall be granted to any applicant who has been convicted
within five years of the date of the application of a second offense
against any of the provisions of this chapter or any similar ordinance of
any other city, village or county; nor shall any license be granted to any
person who has, within five years of the date of application, been
§ 115-5 CARRIAGE SERVICES § 115-7
109:179
§ 115-8. Authority of Village President.
When the Board is not in session, the Village President may order the
issuance of a license hereunder, provided such issuance shall be acted upon
by the Village Board at its next regular meeting.
§ 115-9. Revocation and suspension of license.
§ 115-10. License fees.34
The fees for a license hereunder shall be in an amount set by the Village
Board.
§ 115-11. Classes of licenses.
The following classes of nontransferable licenses for public dances shall be
issued:
convicted of a felony nor to any association or corporation of which any
of the members have been so convicted.
E. No license shall be granted to a person under 18 years of age.
F. No license shall be renewed without a reinspection of the premises and
a review of the applicant's record of operation during the previous
license years.
G. No license need be granted to any person who has been convicted of
selling or furnishing fermented malt beverages or liquor to minors in
violation of state laws or local ordinances.
H. No license shall be granted to any person who knowingly furnishes any
false statement in his application for a dance hall license.
A. Procedure. See § 154-26.
B. Effect. No applicant to whom a license has been refused or whose
license has been suspended or revoked may make further application
until at least six months have elapsed from the date of such action
unless he can show that the reason therefor no longer exists.
A. Class A. A Class A license is required for the premises in which a public
dance is held where a charge is made for admission, or where
admission is by means of a ticket or token, or where the dance is
advertised as such, and where music is supplied by live musicians or a
person employed to electronically generate music.
B. Class B. A Class B license is required for the premises in which a public
dance is held where no charge is made for admission, or where
admission is not by means of a ticket or token, and where music is
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 115-7 WATERFORD CODE § 115-11
109:180
§ 115-12. Conduct of dance halls and dances.
supplied by live musicians or a person employed to electronically
generate music.
C. Class C. A Class C license is required when dancing is incidental to
another business conducted in the premises used for dancing and
where no charge, either directly or indirectly, is made for admission and
no orchestra or musicians are employed to furnish the music for such
dancing.
D. Special Permit. A Special Permit license may be granted to hold not
more than two public dances in any structure or premises not licensed
under either Subsection A, B or C. Such Special Permit license shall be
valid only within a specified twenty-four-hour period.
A. Proper license to be posted. No person shall post a license issued
hereunder on premises other than those described in the application.
B. Conduct of patrons. No person conducting a public dance or operating
a public dance hall, or any manager or agent of such person, shall:
(1) Permit, during any public dance in such hall, the use of intoxicating
liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of state law or
village ordinances.
(2) Permit the presence of any intoxicated person or person under the
influence of drugs in such dance hall or on the premises in which
such dance hall is located.
(3) Permit any child 17 years of age or under to be in such dance hall
who is not accompanied by his parent or lawful guardian.
(4) Permit indecent, boisterous or disorderly conduct or the use of
profane language on the dance floor.
(5) Permit any public dance between 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.35
C. Endurance contests prohibited. No person shall advertise, operate,
maintain, promote or aid in the advertising, operating, promoting or
maintaining of any mental or physical endurance contest, whether a
marathon, walkathon, skateathon or any other like endurance contest;
provided this subsection shall not apply to amateur or professional
athletic events.
D. "Taxi-dances" prohibited. No person shall conduct a public dance or
public ball in the form commonly known as a "taxi-dance."
E. Erotic dancing. [Added 7-12-1999 by Ord. No. 382]
35.Editor's Note: Former Subsection (b)(6), requiring a police or peace officer on the
premises during a dance, was repealed 7-12-1999 by Ord. No. 382.
§ 115-11 CARRIAGE SERVICES § 115-12
109:181
(1) Nude dancing in licensed establishments prohibited. No person
shall perform or engage in, and no licensee or manager or agent of
the licensee shall permit any person, employee, entertainer or
patron to perform or engage in any live act, demonstration, dance
or exhibition on the premises of a licensed establishment which:
(a) Shows his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal clef or
cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering; or
(b) Shows any portion of the female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; or
(c) Shows the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
(2) Regulations. A licensee, who either personally or through his agent
or employee furnishes or permits the performance of any erotic act
or dance which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification to customers:
(a) Shall not permit such act or dance unless such act or dance
shall be performed on a stage area designated for such
purpose and which shall be raised from the floor level and shall
be separated by a railing or other device so as to provide a
distance of at least five feet between the patrons and the
performers, so as to deter patrons from participating in any act
or dance, and shall not permit the use of the surface of a bar as
a stage area;
(b) Shall not permit any patron to participate in any act or dance
with performers;
(c) Shall not permit any person, employee, entertainer or patron
to have physical contact with any performer or entertainer
during any performance, except for the taking of tips which
must be taken on the hip or the side of the entertainer's
costume or in a garter;
(d) Shall not permit any person upon the licensed premises to
solicit or perform acts of "sexual conduct" as that term is
defined in Wis. Stat. § 944.21(2)(e);
(e) Shall not permit the solicitation by any entertainer of any
intoxicating liquor, fermented malt beverage or other drink
from any customer or patron or other person on the premises;
and no entertainer shall solicit any such drink from any
customer, patron or other person on said premises;
(f) Shall not permit any entertainer, waiter, waitress or other
employee to sit at any table or in any booth or elsewhere on the
licensed premises with any customer or patron; provided,
however, that this subsection shall not apply to a customer or
patron who is a member of the immediate family of the licensee
§ 115-12 WATERFORD CODE § 115-12
109:182
§ 115-13. (Reserved)36
§ 115-14. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-12-1999 by Ord. No.
382]
or to any person claiming under him who lives in the same
household as the licensee and is at least 18 years of age;
(g) Shall not permit any entertainer, waiter, waitress or other
employee who does not meet the wearing apparel standards
set forth above in § 115-12E(1) to wait upon or serve any
patron;
(h) Notwithstanding Subsection B(3), shall not permit any child
under the age of 18 to be present on the premises during an
erotic dancing performance.
(3) This section does not apply to a licensed establishment defined as
an adult establishment pursuant to § 245-9 for which a conditional
use permit has been granted pursuant to § 245-16.1. Such an
establishment shall, however, be subject to the regulations set forth
in § 245-16.1. [Added 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 504]
A. Any person who fails to obtain the proper license or violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be required, upon conviction, to forfeit
not less than $100 and not more than $500 for each offense, together
with the costs of prosecution; and in default of payment of such
forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the Racine
County Jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not to exceed 30
days for each violation. Each violation and each day a violation
continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
B. The Village Attorney may, in addition to all other penalties, bring action
to prevent a violation of this chapter.
C. Any violation of this chapter constitutes sufficient grounds for
suspending, revoking or not renewing a dance hall license or permit
and/or an alcohol beverage license under Chapter 148, Intoxicating
Liquor and Fermented Malt Beverages, and Wis. Stat. § 125.12.
36.Editor's Note: Former § 115-13, Health and Sanitation Committee, as amended, was
repealed 6-23-2008 by Ord. No. 530.
§ 115-12 CARRIAGE SERVICES § 115-14
109:183
Chapter 120
(RESERVED)
Chapter 126
FAIR AND OPEN HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 165. Property maintenance — See Ch. 178.
§ 126-1. Intent.
It is the policy of the Village that all persons shall have an equal opportunity
for housing, as provided by statute, and the Village recognizes its
responsibilities under Wis. Stat. § 106.50, as amended, and endorses the
concepts of fair and open housing for all persons and prohibition of
discrimination therein.
§ 126-2. Statute adopted.
The Village Board of the Village of Waterford hereby adopts Wis. Stat.
§ 106.50, as amended, and all subsequent amendments thereto.
§ 126-3. Assistance in prevention and removal of housing
discrimination.
§ 126-4. Violations and penalties.
A. The officials and employees of the Village of Waterford shall assist in
the orderly prevention and removal of all discrimination in housing
within the Village by implementing the authority and enforcement
procedures set forth in Wis. Stat. § 106.50, as amended.
B. The Village Clerk shall maintain forms for complaints to be filed under
Wis. Stat. § 106.50, as amended, and shall assist any person alleging a
violation thereof in the Village of Waterford to file a complaint
thereunder with the Wisconsin Department of Work Force
Development, Equal Rights Division, for enforcement of Wis. Stat.
§ 106.50, as amended.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of Wis. Stat. § 106.50 shall
be subject to a penalty imposed by the state as provided in Wis. Stat.
§ 106.50.
B. Any employee or official of the Village who shall violate the provisions of
§ 126-3 shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article II,
§ 115-14 WATERFORD CODE § 126-4
120:184
Chapter 131
FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 137. Peace and good order — See Ch. 174.
§ 131-1. Discharging firearms prohibited. [Amended 11-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 581]
of this Code, unless that person is in violation of Wis. Stat. § 106.50, in
which case § 126-4A shall apply.
A. Definition. In this section, "firearm" shall mean a weapon that acts by
force of gunpowder.
B. No person, except a law enforcement officer in the line of duty, shall fire
or discharge any firearm within the Village except as set forth in
Subsection C.
C. This section shall not prevent:
(1) The discharge of a firearm if the discharge is exempted from
ordinance enforcement pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0409(3)
because of privilege or otherwise.
(2) The maintenance and use of supervised rifle or pistol ranges or
shooting galleries authorized by the Village Board.
(3) The firing or discharging of BB, spring or air guns by persons over
16 or under the direct personal supervision of a parent or guardian
on private property if the use is contained entirely within the
private property and no BB, pellet, paintball or other ammunition is
discharged onto public property or the property of another.
(4) The discharge of blanks from a firearm during an officially
sanctioned parade, a funeral or similar event.
D. This section shall be deemed to prohibit discharging a firearm within
the Village, provided that the Police Department may issue written
permits to owners or occupants of private premises to hunt or shoot on
such premises if it finds such privilege necessary for the protection of
life or property and subject to such safeguards as it may impose for the
safety of the lives and property of other persons within the Village.
§ 126-4 (RESERVED) § 131-2
120:185
§ 131-2. Shooting arrows and throwing stones and other missiles
prohibited. [Amended 11-14-2011 by Ord. No. 581]
No person shall shoot any arrow or throw any object, stone, snowball or
other missile or projectile by hand or by any other means at any other
person or at, in or into any building, street, sidewalk, alley, highway, motor
vehicle, park, playground or other public place within the Village. This
section does not prohibit the use of bows or crossbows and arrows, or
other missiles, on private property if the use is contained entirely within the
private property and no arrow or other missile enters public property or the
property of another.
§ 131-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any regulation,
rule or order made hereunder, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code.
Chapter 132
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms and explosives — See Ch. 131.
Nuisances — See Ch. 165.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 174.
Fireworks, explosives and ammunition — See
Ch. 245, § 245-17.1
§ 132-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 167.10(5), as may be
amended from time to time.
§ 132-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NOVELTY FIREWORKS — The following types of fireworks:
A cap containing not more than 1/4 grain of explosive mixture, if the cap
is used or possessed or sold for use in a device which presents direct
bodily contact with a cap when it is in place for explosion.
A.
B. A toy snake which contains no mercury.
A sparkler on a wire or wood stick not exceeding 36 inches in length
that is designed to produce audible or visible effects or to produce
audible and visible effects.
C.
§ 131-2 WATERFORD CODE § 132-2
120:186
NOVELTY FIREWORKS, COMMERCIAL — Novelty fireworks for which a
permit is required in this chapter.
STATUTORY FIREWORKS — Anything manufactured, processed or
packaged for exploding, emitting sparks or combustion which does not have
another common use, inclusive of pyrotechnics, but not including any of the
following:
§ 132-3. Regulation of statutory fireworks.
A device designed to spray out paper confetti or streamers and which
contains less than 1/4 grain of explosive mixture.
D.
A fuseless device that is designed to produce audible or visible effects
or audible and visible effects, and that contains less than 1/4 grain of
explosive mixture.
E.
A device that is designed primarily to burn pyrotechnic smokeproducing
mixtures, at a controlled rate, and that produces audible or
visible effects, or audible and visible effects.
F.
A cylindrical fountain that consists of one or more tubes and that is
classified by the Federal Department of Transportation as a Division 1.4
explosive, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50.
G.
A cone fountain that is classified by the Federal Department of
Transportation as a Division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50.
H.
A. Fuel or a lubricant.
B. A firearm cartridge or shotgun shell.
A flare used or possessed or sold for use as a signal in an emergency or
in the operation of a railway, aircraft, watercraft or motor vehicle.
C.
A match, cigarette lighter, stove, furnace, candle, lantern or space
heater.
D.
E. A model rocket engine.
F. Tobacco and a tobacco product.
G. Anything defined herein as "novelty fireworks."
A. No person may possess, use or sell statutory fireworks in the Village
except as provided in this section.
B. Possession and use of statutory fireworks. Statutory fireworks may be
possessed or used in the Village only under the following
circumstances.
(1) Statutory fireworks may be used for fireworks and pyrotechnic
displays given by public authorities, civic organizations, or groups
of individuals that have been granted a permit for such display by
the Village President and Fire Chief as set forth in § 132-4.
§ 132-2 (RESERVED) § 132-3
120:187
§ 132-4. Statutory fireworks permit required.
(2) Statutory fireworks may be possessed while transporting the
fireworks to a city, town, village or county where the possession of
the fireworks is authorized by permit or ordinance, but the person
doing the transporting may not remain in the Village for more than
12 hours.
(3) Statutory fireworks may be sold or possessed by persons delivering
the fireworks to a person or group granted a permit under this
section.
(4) Statutory fireworks may be possessed and used by the Village
without a permit, but Village fire and law enforcement officials
must be notified of the proposed use of fireworks at least two days
in advance.
A. No person may sell, store, use or display statutory fireworks without a
permit issued hereunder.
B. Application and fee. [Amended 1-11-2010 by Ord. No. 547]
(1) Application for statutory fireworks permits shall be made in writing
at least 30 days in advance of the date of the display, and shall
specify the name and address of the permit holder, the kind and
quantity of fireworks that will be displayed, and the date and
location of permitted use. The owner or person in authority of the
site of the display shall consent in writing to the use of the site.
Applicants must submit a site plan for the display and pay a fee in
an amount set forth by the Village Board at the time of application.
(2) The public high school district shall be required to obtain a permit
for fireworks hereunder, but shall be exempt from the permit fee.
C. Review and issuance.
(1) The application shall be reviewed by the Village President and the
Fire Chief, who shall issue the permit only if the requirements of
this chapter and § 245-17.1 are met.
(2) No permits shall be issued to minors.
(3) No permit shall be issued unless the Village President and the Fire
Chief determine that the use will be of such composition, character,
and so located, discharged or fired as in the opinion of the Village
President and Fire Chief shall not be hazardous to property or
endanger any person or persons.
(4) No permit shall be issued unless the permittee has and maintains
adequate liability insurance with minimum limits of $1,000,000
bodily injury and property damage, combined single limit, naming
the Village, its officers, employees and agents as additional
insureds. Said insurance shall indemnify and defend the Village, its
§ 132-3 WATERFORD CODE § 132-4
120:188
§ 132-5. Novelty fireworks regulation.
§ 132-6. Commercial novelty fireworks permit required.
officers, employees and agents against all claims, liability, loss
damages or expenses, whether caused by or contributed to by the
negligence of the Village, its officers, employees or agents. Said
insurance shall provide that the Village receive written notice 30
days prior to any cancellation, nonrenewal or material change in
the policy. Proof of said insurance shall be submitted to the Village
President and Fire Chief prior to the issuance of the permit.
(5) No permit shall be issued for the manufacture of statutory
fireworks, and no permit shall be issued for the storage of statutory
fireworks, except as that storage may be necessary in preparation
for a display permitted hereunder, and then only for a period no
longer than 72 hours, or except as may be permitted by the Board
of Appeals in the Industrial District.
(6) No person may sell statutory fireworks in the Village unless the
person purchasing the statutory fireworks is a Village official or has
a permit issued under this section.
(7) No permit shall be issued for the indoor display or use of statutory
fireworks.
D. Permit regulations.
(1) The use or display of permitted statutory fireworks shall conform to
the standards set forth in NFPA 1, Chapter 65, Explosives,
Fireworks and Model Rocketry, as may be amended from time to
time.
(2) Every display shall be handled by a competent adult operator.
(3) After the permit is issued, sale, possession, use and distribution of
fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No
permit granted hereunder is transferable.
A. No person may sell novelty fireworks, or store or possess novelty
fireworks for other than personal use, without a permit from the
Village.
B. Individuals may possess and use novelty fireworks on private property
with the permission of the owner or person in charge thereof. Novelty
fireworks may be used in Village rights-of-way, but not in the paved
portion of streets. Novelty fireworks may not be used in Village parks or
in or on other Village property.
A. No person may sell, store, or possess novelty fireworks for other than
personal use without a permit issued hereunder.
§ 132-4 (RESERVED) § 132-6
120:189
B. Application. Application for novelty fireworks permits for seasonal sales
shall be made in writing at the same time as application is made for a
conditional use permit or Precise Implementation Plan approval
required in § 245-17.1A. The application shall specify the name and
address of the permit holder, the kind and quantity of fireworks that will
be possessed and sold, and the dates and location of the sales. The
owner or person in authority of the site of the storage and sales shall
consent in writing to the use of the site. Applicants must submit a site
plan identifying the location of the storage, the sales, and any existing
structures on the property and within 100 feet of the property lines. The
applicant shall pay a fee in an amount set forth by the Village Board at
the time of application.
C. Review and issuance.
(1) The application shall be reviewed by the Village President and the
Fire Chief after approval of the conditional use permit or Precise
Implementation Plan amendment by the Plan Commission. No
person shall be issued a permit hereunder unless the required Plan
Commission approval is obtained.
(2) No permits shall be issued to minors.
(3) No permit shall be issued unless the Village President and the Fire
Chief determine that the novelty fireworks are stored in a safe and
secure trailer and that sales of the novelty fireworks will be made
from a temporary shelter or tent in an outdoor area that, in the
opinion of the Village President and Fire Chief, will not be
hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons. In
addition:
(a) The site must be at least 80,000 square feet.
(b) The storage and sales of the novelty fireworks must be at 100
feet from any permanent structure located on or near the site.
(c) The site must be served by adequate parking, ingress and
egress.
(4) No permit shall be issued unless the permittee has and maintains
adequate liability insurance with minimum limits of $1,000,000
bodily injury and property damage, combined single limit, naming
the Village, its officers, employees and agents as additional
insureds. Said insurance shall indemnify and defend the Village, its
officers, employees and agents against all claims, liability, loss
damages or expenses, whether caused by or contributed to by the
negligence of the Village, its officers, employees or agents. Said
insurance shall provide that the Village receive written notice 30
days prior to any cancellation, nonrenewal or material change in
the policy. Proof of said insurance shall be submitted to the Village
President and Fire Chief prior to the issuance of the permit.
§ 132-6 WATERFORD CODE § 132-6
120:190
§ 132-7. Storage and handling of statutory and novelty fireworks.
(5) No permit shall be issued for the manufacture of novelty fireworks,
and no permit shall be issued for the storage of novelty fireworks,
except as storage may be necessary to sales permitted hereunder,
or except as may be permitted by the Board of Appeals in the
Industrial District.
(6) A permit for the sales of novelty fireworks issued hereunder shall
not be valid for a period of longer than three weeks.
(7) Temporary shelters or tents for the sale of novelty fireworks
permitted hereunder may be erected no earlier than June 18 and
must be removed no later than July 11. Storage trailers containing
novelty fireworks may be placed on the site no earlier than June 15
and must be removed no later than July 11.
(8) No permit shall be issued to any person who, in the previous 18
months, was found guilty of two or more violations of this chapter.
D. Permit regulations.
(1) The display and sales of permitted novelty fireworks shall conform
to the standards set forth in NFPA 1, Chapter 65, Explosives,
Fireworks and Model Rocketry, as may be amended from time to
time.
(2) After the permit is issued, storage, sale and possession for sale
shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted hereunder
is transferable.
A. No person may store or handle statutory fireworks or commercial
novelty fireworks on any premises unless the premises are equipped
with fire extinguishers approved by the Fire Chief or Fire Inspector.
B. No person may smoke where statutory fireworks or commercial novelty
fireworks are stored or handled.
C. A person who stores or handles statutory fireworks or commercial
novelty fireworks shall immediately notify the Fire Chief or Fire
Inspector of the location, description and quantity of the fireworks.
D. No person may store statutory fireworks or commercial novelty
fireworks within 100 feet of a dwelling.
E. No person may store statutory fireworks or commercial novelty
fireworks within 100 feet of a public assemblage or place where
gasoline or volatile liquid is sold in quantities exceeding one gallon.
F. No person may use statutory fireworks while attending a fireworks
display for which a permit has been issued under this section.
§ 132-6 (RESERVED) § 132-8
120:191
§ 132-8. Parental liability.
A parent, foster, or family-operated group home parent or legal guardian of
a minor who consents to the use of any statutory or novelty fireworks by the
minor who is under the age of 18 years of age is liable for damages caused
by the minor's use of the fireworks, and in addition shall be subject to the
penalty provided in § 132-11.
§ 132-9. Inspection, search and seizure of fireworks.
§ 132-10. Emergency revocation of permit or authority to use
statutory or novelty fireworks.
The Fire Chief, Fire Inspectors, and/or Village President may revoke a
permit or prohibit or terminate the sale, use or display of statutory or
novelty fireworks when, in the opinion of the Chief and President,
atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such sale, use or
display a fire hazard or other hazard to the safety of the public. During
such period of such prohibition, no person may use or display, or permit
the starting of any use or display of, or sell statutory fireworks or novelty
fireworks anywhere within the Village. The failure to allow the inspection
and/or search of a permitted premises pursuant to § 132-9A shall be
grounds for the immediate revocation of the permit. The presence of
statutory fireworks on premises permitted for commercial novelty fireworks
shall be grounds for the immediate revocation of a permit. The Fire Chief,
Fire Inspectors and/or Village President may reinstate a permit upon the
permittee's compliance with this chapter.
§ 132-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any regulation,
rule or order made hereunder, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code. Violation of this chapter shall
also constitute a public nuisance which may be enjoined in a civil action in
addition to prosecution therefore.
A. Inspection and search of permitted premises. An applicant for a permit
under this chapter thereby consents to the entry of the Fire Chief, Fire
Inspectors, Police, or authorized representatives of the Village upon the
permitted premises, including but not limited to storage areas,
containers and vehicles, at all reasonable hours for the purposes of
inspection and search and consents to removal from the premises and
introduction into evidence in prosecutions for violations of this chapter
of all things found therein in violation of this chapter or state law.
B. Seizure. The Police or Fire Department shall seize, at the expense of the
owner, all statutory or novelty fireworks stored, handled, sold,
possessed or used by any person who violates this chapter. Such seized
fireworks shall be destroyed after conviction for a violation. Statutory
or novelty fireworks that are seized as evidence of a violation for which
no conviction results shall be returned to the owner.
§ 132-8 WATERFORD CODE § 132-11
120:192
Chapter 137
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 137, Hazardous Materials, adopted 1-24-1994 by Ord.
No. 927 (§ 6.06 of the 1998 Code), as amended, was repealed
8-28-2017 by Ord. No. 654.]
Chapter 142
HEALTH DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 87.
Nuisances — See Ch. 165.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 178.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 223.
§ 132-11 (RESERVED) § 132-11
120:193

ARTICLE I
Local Board of Health, Local Health Department and Local Health
Officer
§ 142-1. Intermunicipal agreement.
By intermunicipal agreement, the Villages of Caledonia, Mount Pleasant,
Sturtevant and North Bay have created a Joint Local Board of Health,
established a Joint Local Health Department and appointed a Joint Local
Health Officer to serve the above villages, as well as other municipalities
that are added as members to the intermunicipal agreement ("member
municipalities"), or otherwise contract for the provision of public health
services ("contract municipalities"). This agreement is entered into
pursuant to the authority set forth in Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0301, 251.09 and
251.02(3r).
§ 142-2. Board, Department and Officer designated.
The Joint Local Board of Health created by the intermunicipal agreement
is hereby designated the "Central Racine County Board of Health" and is
established as the Joint Local Board of Health of the member municipalities
and contract municipalities pursuant to § 251.02(3r), Wis. Stats. The
Central Racine County Health Department established pursuant to the
intermunicipal agreement is hereby designated and established as the local
Health Department of the member municipalities and contract
municipalities pursuant to § 251.02(3r), Wis. Stats. The local Health Officer,
designated as the Health Officer/Director of Public Health, and provided for
in the intermunicipal agreement, is hereby designated as the local Health
Officer for the member municipalities and contract municipalities.
§ 142-3. Local Board of Health named; membership.
The local Board of Health shall be designated as the Central Racine County
Board of Health and pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 251.03(4r), the parties
determine that the membership of the Board of Health shall be comprised
as set forth in the intergovernmental agreement.
§ 142-4. Powers and duties of local Board of Health.
The Central Racine County Board of Health shall constitute the policymaking
body for the Central Racine County Health Department, and shall
exercise authority over financial and personnel matters, as set forth in the
intermunicipal agreement. The Board of Health shall be responsible for
operating and maintaining at least a Level II Health Department to jointly
serve the member municipalities and contract municipalities. The Board of
Health shall have the powers and perform such duties as are prescribed in
Wis. Stats. §§ 251.04 and 251.05, except as otherwise specifically provided
in the intermunicipal agreement or in joint ordinances adopted by member
municipalities and contract municipalities.
§ 142-1 (RESERVED) § 142-5
120:195
§ 142-5. Effect of intermunicipal agreement.
In all other respects, such intermunicipal agreement executed by the
member municipalities shall govern the administration of the Central
Racine County Board of Health, Health Department and Joint Local Health
Officer.
§ 142-6. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances.
The provisions of this article shall supersede any inconsistent provisions of
this Code of Ordinances, which inconsistent provisions shall be, and hereby
are, repealed as of the effective date of this article.
§ 142-5 WATERFORD CODE § 142-6
120:196
ARTICLE II
Human Health Hazards
§ 142-7. Purpose, general provisions.
§ 142-8. Legislative authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Ch. 251 and
254, Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time, which regulations are
hereby adopted, and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth
herein. The Health Officer or Code Official shall have the power to abate
human health hazards in accordance with this article and Wis. Stats.
§ 254.59, which statute is adopted by reference and made part of this article
as if fully set forth in this article.
§ 142-9. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this article, unless a different meaning is plainly intended:
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the municipality or his
or her authorized representative.
CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR — A device that detects the presence of
carbon monoxide gas.
A. This article is adopted for the purpose of preserving and promoting the
public health of residents and preventing the continuance of human
health hazards.
B. No person shall erect, construe, cause, continue, maintain or permit
any human health hazards. Any person who shall cause, create or
maintain a human health hazard, or who shall in any way aid or
contribute to the creation or maintenance thereof, shall be guilty of a
violation of this article, and shall be liable for all costs and expenses
attendant upon the abatement or removal of such hazards and subject
to penalties provided in this article.
C. It shall be the joint responsibility of the owner and occupant of a
dwelling or dwelling unit to maintain their property in a manner which
complies with this Code and any applicable state and federal laws.
D. This article does not prohibit the following activities so long as they are
conducted in accordance with the applicable ordinance or state statute:
the sanitary operation of licensed junkyards, or the storage and
accumulation of ashes and effuse by industrial establishments which
maintain adequate and sanitary facilities and the space for the
accumulation and storage of such materials.
§ 142-7 (RESERVED) § 142-9
120:197
CELLAR — A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground,
but having 1/2 or more of its clear floor-to-ceiling heights below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
CODE OFFICIAL — Building Inspector, municipal law enforcement officer,
Fire Chief, and/or the Health Officer, or their respective authorized
representatives.
DWELLING — Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be
used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating by one family.
EXTERIOR PREMISES — The open space on the premises or the portion of
the premises upon which there is not a structure.
EXTERMINATION — The control or elimination of insects, rodents or other
vermin by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by blocking their access
to a dwelling, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping, or by any
other legal pest elimination method approved by the Code Official.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Central Racine County
Health Department or his/her authorized representative.
HUMAN HEALTH HAZARD — A substance, activity or condition that is
known to have the potential to cause acute or chronic illness, to endanger
life, to generate or spread infectious diseases, or otherwise injuriously to
affect the health of the public.
IMMEDIATE HUMAN HEALTH HAZARD — A condition which exists or has
the potential to exist which should, in the opinion of the Health Officer,
be abated or corrected immediately, or at least within a twenty-four-hour
period, to prevent imminent and severe damage to human health.
MUNICIPALITY — A city, town, or village within the jurisdiction of the
Central Racine County Health Department.
OCCUPANT — Any person living, sleeping or eating or having actual
possession of a dwelling unit.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others shall
be the record holder of the title of any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without actual possession thereof, or who has charge, care or control of
any dwelling as agent of the owner or as executor, administrator, trustee or
guardian of the estate of the owner.
PERSON — Includes owners, occupants, their agents, tenants and any
individual, firm, corporation, partnership or association.
SMOKE DETECTOR — A device that detects the visible or invisible particles
of combustion.
VERMIN — Rats, mice, cockroaches or similar animals or insects that are
known to be vectors of human pathogens.
§ 142-9 WATERFORD CODE § 142-9
120:198
WORKMANLIKE — Work of such character so as to meet manufacturers'
specifications, accepted national standards or recognized trade practices,
and to provide a durable result as intended to ensure public safety, health
and welfare insofar as they are affected by building construction, use and
occupancy.
§ 142-10. Health standards for basic facilities; maintenance of
habitable living quarters.
No person shall occupy or allow another person to occupy any dwelling or
dwelling unit, for the purpose of living or sleeping therein, which does not
comply with the following requirements:
A. Toilet and lavatory. Every dwelling unit shall contain a water flush toilet
within a room which affords privacy to a person in such room. Every
dwelling unit shall contain a lavatory basin, preferably but not
exclusively in the same room as the toilet. Such toilet and lavatory
basins shall be connected and maintained in compliance with the
municipality's plumbing code.
B. Bathing facilities. Every dwelling unit shall contain, within a room
which affords privacy to a person in such room, a bathtub or shower
connected and maintained in compliance with the municipality's
plumbing code.
C. Egress. Every dwelling unit shall have access to at least two accessible,
unobstructed means of egress leading to a safe and open public street,
alley or court.
D. Heating facilities. Every dwelling or dwelling unit shall be equipped
with heating facilities which are properly installed and maintained in a
safe and good working condition and are capable of maintaining
minimum temperatures of 68° F. in all rooms with an outside
temperature of -10° F.
E. Electric service. Every outlet and fixture shall be properly installed and
shall be maintained in a good and safe working condition and shall be
connected and maintained in compliance with the municipality's
electric code.
F. Smoke detectors. Smoke detectors shall be installed outside of each
separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms and on
each additional story of the dwelling unit, including basements and
cellars, excluding crawl spaces and unfinished attics.
G. Carbon monoxide detectors. The owner of a dwelling shall install a
functional carbon monoxide detector in the basement of the dwelling
and on each floor level except the attic, garage, or storage area of each
dwelling unit. This subsection does not apply to the owner of a dwelling
that has no attached garage, no fireplace, and no fuel-burning
appliance.
§ 142-9 (RESERVED) § 142-10
120:199
§ 142-11. Enforcement.
Upon request of an owner or occupant, or upon receipt of a credible
complaint, a Code Official shall inspect or cause to be inspected the
dwelling, dwelling unit or exterior premises which is the subject of the
complaint or upon which there exists evidence of a violation of this article.
Such inspection shall be for the purpose of determining whether or not the
condition of the dwelling or dwelling unit complies with the standards set
forth in this article.
§ 142-12. Access to property.
After presenting proper identification, a Code Official shall be permitted
to enter upon any property at any reasonable time for the purpose of
making inspections to determine compliance with this article and related
ordinances. If denied access, the Code Official may acquire a special
inspection warrant for such access, pursuant to § 66.0119, Wis. Stats., as
amended from time to time.
H. Extermination of vermin. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a
single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any
vermin in or on the premises, and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a
dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible
for such extermination within the unit occupied by them whenever their
dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding such provisions,
whenever an infestation is caused by the failure of the owner to
maintain a dwelling in a reasonably rodent-proof or insect-proof
condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
Extermination of any infestation in an unoccupied dwelling unit shall be
the responsibility of the owner, even though the condition may have
been caused by a previous occupant. All extermination services shall be
performed by a licensed exterminator. Effective extermination shall
continue until all vermin are eliminated. The responsible person shall
submit completed extermination reports from the licensed exterminator
to the appropriate code official upon request.
I. Hazardous conditions. Every dwelling unit shall be structurally sound
and shall be free of conditions that constitute a human health hazard,
an immediate human health hazard to the health and safety of the
occupant(s) or which create an unreasonable risk of personal injury
resulting from any reasonably foreseeable use of the dwelling.
J. Discontinuance of service. No owner or occupant shall cause any
service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this article
to be removed or shut off from, or discontinued for, any occupied
dwelling which is let or occupied by such person, except for such
temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or
alterations are in progress, or during a temporary emergency when
discontinuance of service is approved by a code official.
§ 142-10 WATERFORD CODE § 142-13
120:200
§ 142-13. Declaration of dwelling as human health hazard.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, if a Code Official
determines that any dwelling or dwelling unit is a human health hazard
or immediate human health hazard, the Code Official shall placard such
dwelling and, within 24 hours thereafter, serve notice either by registered
mail, return receipt requested, or by personally served notice in the manner
provided for in the state statutes for service of process to the occupant and
owner that the dwelling is unfit for human habitation and that it shall be
vacated within a reasonable time as ordered by the Code Official. A dwelling
may be declared a human health hazard or immediate human health hazard
for any of, but not limited to, the following reasons:
§ 142-14. Execution and installation standards.
All repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are
required directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this article shall be
executed and installed in a workmanlike manner.
§ 142-15. Notice of violation; orders for corrective actions.
Whenever a code official determines that there has been a violation of
this article, notice shall be given to the property owner and occupant as
appropriate. Such notice shall:
§ 142-16. Service of notice.
Each notice or order, other than as provided in § 142-13, provided under
this article shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:
A. A dwelling is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, dangerous, unsanitary,
unsafe or vermin-infested that it creates a hazard to the health or safety
of the occupants or the public.
B. A dwelling lacks a potable water supply, a properly functioning public
or private sanitary sewer system, or a functioning heating system
adequate to protect the health and safety of the occupants.
C. A dwelling, because of its condition, has been implicated as the
potential source of a severe poisoning by a toxic substance, including
but not limited to lead-bearing paint.
A. Be in writing.
B. Include a statement of the violation with reference to the applicable
provision(s) of this article.
C. Include the correction(s) necessary to bring about compliance.
D. Contain an order to correct said violation by a date certain.
A. Personally served in the manner provided for in the state statutes for
service of process; or
§ 142-13 (RESERVED) § 142-16
120:201
§ 142-17. Appeal.
Any person affected by any notice or order which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article
may request, in writing, a review by the Health Officer or other Code
Official issuing such notice or order. Such request shall be submitted before
the date for the violation is to be corrected. Subsequent appeal shall be
pursuant to the Administrative Review section of this Code or Chapter 68 of
the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 142-18. Noncompliance with order.
§ 142-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be subjected to a forfeiture of not less than $300 nor more than $1,000
for each violation and in addition, shall pay the costs and expenses of
prosecution. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
B. Sent by United States first-class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
last known address; or
C. Posted in a conspicuous place on or about the main entrance to the
structure located at the last known address, where there is a structure.
A. Citation. A citation for any violation of this article may be issued by the
Police, Sheriff's Department or by an appropriate Code Official.
B. Abatement of human health hazards/emergency action. In extreme
cases where a violation poses an immediate human health hazard as
determined by the Health Officer or other implicated Code Official, the
Health Officer or Code Official may immediately commence the actions
authorized by this article, or any other statutory or ordinance authority,
to abate or removed the hazard.
§ 142-16 WATERFORD CODE § 142-19
120:202
ARTICLE III
Lodging, Recreation, and Food Protection
§ 142-20. Purpose; general provisions.
The purpose of this article is to preserve and promote the public health
of the residents. The Health Department is granted agent status under
§§ 97.41 and 463.16, Wis. Stats., and accordingly provides all licenses and
inspections for retail food establishments, restaurants, public swimming
pools, and water attractions, tattoo and body-piercing establishments,
recreational and educational camps, campgrounds, hotels, motels, tourist
rooming houses, bed-and-breakfast establishments and food vending
operations in accordance with the applicable Wisconsin Statutes and/or
Administrative Code Chapter.
§ 142-21. Legislative authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Chs. 251, 252,
254, Wis. Stats., and §§ 97.41 and 463.16, Wis. Stats., as amended from
time to time, which regulations are hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference as though fully set forth herein. The Health Officer, or his or her
designee, shall have the power to enforce the regulations of this article,
including by the issuance of citations.
§ 142-22. Adoption of state code; applications, permits, and
licenses required.
Except as otherwise provided in this article and pursuant to the authority
granted by Chapters 251, 252, 254, Wis. Stats., and §§ 66.0417 and 97.41,
Wis. Stats., the Village adopts Wis. Admin. Code chs. ATCP 75, SPS 390,
SPS 221, ATCP 76, ATCP 78, ATCP 79, DHS192, ATCP 72, and ATCP 73, as
amended from time to time, which are incorporated by reference as though
fully set forth herein. All applications, permits and licenses required by
such regulations are required by the municipality and shall be processed in
accordance with the applicable statute or Code section.
§ 142-23. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this article, unless a different meaning is plainly intended:
BODY PIERCER — A person who performs body piercing on another person
at that person's request.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — An operation that stores, prepares, serves,
vends, sells or otherwise provides food for human consumption. The term
"food establishment" includes a "restaurant" as defined in Ch. 97.01, Wis.
Stats.; a "retail food establishment" as defined in § 97.30, Wis. Stats.
TATTOOIST — A person who tattoos another person at that person's
request.
§ 142-20 (RESERVED) § 142-24
120:203
§ 142-24. Mobile food establishments.
A valid food establishment permit issued by the State of Wisconsin or any
other competent Health Department for any mobile restaurant or mobile
retail food establishment which chooses to operate within the jurisdiction
of the Central Racine County Health Department will be honored by the
Central Racine County Health Department. The mobile food establishment
will be required to be inspected by the Health Department and to satisfy
the relevant provisions of Wis. Admin. Code ch. ATCP 75. In addition, the
mobile food establishment shall pay an inspection fee for this inspection.
§ 142-25. Bloodborne pathogen training required.
All body piercers and tattooists shall annually complete a bloodborne
pathogen training course that is approved by the Health Department. Any
tattoo or body-piercing establishment allowing a tattooist or body piercer to
practice in the establishment without proof of bloodborne pathogen training
will be assessed a fee. This fee shall be established by the Board of Health
as part of the annual budget process.
§ 142-26. Application; permit.
Any license or permit required under this article shall make application on
a form provided by the Health Department. The Health Department shall
determine the contents of the application and may use a form provided
by the state. Applications for permits shall be submitted to the Health
Department along with the appropriate fee. Applications will be reviewed
for compliance with this article. Permits and licenses issued hereunder shall
be conspicuously displayed on the premises of the establishment.
§ 142-27. Inspection by Department.
Authorized employees of the Department, upon presenting proper
identification, shall have the authority to perform inspections prior to
issuance of any permit or license and from time to time of any establishment
for compliance with this Code, including the state laws incorporated in this
Code by reference.
§ 142-28. Fees.
All fees associated with the operation of any establishment governed by
this article shall be established as part of the annual budget process or by
resolution of the Board of Health.
§ 142-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be subjected to a forfeiture of not less than $300 nor more than $1,000
for each violation and in addition, shall pay the costs and expenses of
prosecution. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
§ 142-24 WATERFORD CODE § 142-30
120:204
§ 142-30. Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by any temporary order issued by the Health Officer
pursuant to § 66.0417(2)(a), Wis. Stats., shall be granted a hearing before
the Board of Health in accordance with the provisions of such Section.
Appeal from any order, notice or determination made by the Health Officer,
other than one controlled by § 66.0417, Wis. Stats., shall be to the Board of
Health pursuant to the applicable ordinance or Ch. 68, Wis. Stats., in the
absence of an administrative review ordinance. The Board of Health may
affirm, set aside, or modify the subject order by majority vote. The Board of
Health's decision shall be final but may be appealed to the Racine County
Circuit Court.
§ 142-30 (RESERVED) § 142-30
120:205

ARTICLE IV
Rabies Control
§ 142-31. Purpose; general provisions.
The purpose of this article is to preserve and promote the public health
of the residents. Pursuant to § 254.51, Wis. Stats., the Health Department
shall establish measures for the prevention, surveillance and control of
human disease that is associated with animal-borne disease transmission.
§ 142-32. Legislative authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Chs. 250, 251,
and 254, Wis. Stats. The law enforcement officer, Humane Officer, Health
Officer or their designees shall have the power to enforce the regulations
of this article, including by the issuance of one or more citations, as
warranted.
§ 142-33. Adoption of statute.
In addition to the provisions of this article and pursuant to the authority
granted by Chs. 250, 251 and 254, Wis. Stats., the municipality adopts
§ 95.21, Wis. Stats., which is incorporated by reference as though set forth
herein. To the extent any provision conflicts with another provision in this
article, the more restrictive provision applies.
§ 142-34. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this article, unless a different meaning is plainly intended:
BITE — To seize with teeth or jaws, so as to enter, wound, or pierce the skin.
CAT — Any member of the species Felis catus (the domestic cat).
CODE OFFICER — The municipality's law enforcement officer, Humane
Officer, Health Officer or their designees.
DOG — Any member of the species Canis familiaris (the domestic dog).
FERRET — Any member of the species Mustela putorius (the domestic
ferret).
§ 142-35. Rabies vaccination required for dogs.
The owner of a dog shall have the animal vaccinated against rabies. An
owner who fails to obtain a rabies vaccination for a dog shall be subject to
a forfeiture of not less than $50 and not more than $100, plus the costs of
prosecution.
§ 142-36. Duty to report bite.
Any person having knowledge or reason to believe that any dog, cat or
ferret has bitten a person shall immediately report, so far as is known, the
§ 142-31 (RESERVED) § 142-36
120:207
name and address of the owner of the animal and circumstances of such
bite. Such report shall be made to the Village/Town Police Department or
Sheriff's Department.
§ 142-37. Quarantine.
Any dog, cat or ferret within the municipality which is believed to have
bitten a person, to have been infected with rabies, or to have been in contact
with a rabid animal shall be subject to the quarantine requirements and
procedures set forth in § 95.21, Wis. Stats. If the Code Official, Chief of
Police, the Health Officer, or the Humane Officer determines that a dog,
cat, ferret or other domestically owned animal found in the municipality has
rabies, the Health Officer may order a district quarantine, as provided by
§ 95.21(3), Wis. Stats.
§ 142-38. Noncompliance with quarantine order.
If after a dog, cat or ferret bites a person, the animal's owner fails to
quarantine the animal and/or fails to have the animal examined by a
licensed veterinarian, the animal may be seized by the code official, Health
Officer, Police Officer, Deputy Sheriff, Humane Officer or their designees
and held at a designated facility until the quarantine time expires. The
owner or custodian of the animal shall pay all applicable fees associated
with the quarantine, veterinarian's examinations, vaccination and license
prior to releasing the animal from the quarantine facility.
§ 142-39. Appeal.
Any person affected by any notice or order which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article may
request, in writing, a review by the Health Officer or other code official
issuing such notice or order. Such request shall be submitted before the
date for the violation is to be corrected. Subsequent appeal shall be to the
Village/Town Board pursuant to the applicable ordinance or Ch. 68, Wis.
Stats., in the absence of an administrative review ordinance.
§ 142-40. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates any provision
of this article shall, upon conviction, be subjected to a forfeiture of not less
than $300 nor more than $1,000 for each violation and in addition, shall pay
the costs and expenses of prosecution. Each day such violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 142-36 WATERFORD CODE § 142-40
120:208
Chapter 148
INTOXICATING LIQUOR AND FERMENTED MALT
BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 82.
Dances and dance halls — See Ch. 115.
Licensing — See Ch. 154.
Minors — See Ch. 159.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 174.
Tobacco products — See Ch. 202.
§ 148-1. State statutes adopted.
The provisions of Wis. Stats. Ch. 125 relating to the sale of alcohol
beverages, inclusive of any provisions relating to the penalty to be imposed
or the punishment for violation of such statutes, are hereby adopted and
made a part of this chapter by reference. A violation of any such provisions
shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 148-2. Licenses.
§ 148-3. Classes of licenses and fees. [Amended 12-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 370; 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489;
2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 569; 4-28-2014 by Ord. No. 616; 12-12-2016
by Ord. No. 641]
The following classes and denominations of licenses may be issued by the
Clerk under the authority of the Village Board after payment of the fee
herein specified along with the nonrefundable cost of publication and the
nonrefundable cost of a background check, which, when so issued, shall
permit the holder to sell, deal or traffic in alcohol beverages as provided
in Wis. Stats. §§ 125.25, 125.26, 125.272, 125.32 and 125.51 and other
applicable sections of Wis. Stats. Ch. 125. Except as otherwise provided in
this section, the full license fee shall be charged for the whole or fraction
of any year. License, publication, and background check fees shall be in an
A. Required. No person, except as provided by Wis. Stats. § 125.06, shall
serve, sell, manufacture, rectify, brew or engage in any activity for
which this chapter or Wis. Stats. Ch. 125 requires a license, permit or
other authorization without holding the appropriate license, permit or
other authorization as provided in this chapter. See Wis. Stats.
§ 125.04(1).
B. Separate license required for each place of sale. Except for licensed
public warehouses, a license shall be required for each location or
premises which are in direct connection or communication to each
other where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are kept,
sold or offered for sale. See Wis. Stats. § 125.04(9).
§ 142-40 (RESERVED) § 148-3
120:209
amount set by the Village Board and placed on the Fee Schedule as set forth
in Chapter 154 of this Municipal Code. No application shall be processed
until the publication and background check fees have been paid, and no
license shall be issued until the fee for the license has been paid.
A. Class "A" fermented malt beverage retailer's license. The provisions of
Wis. Stats. § 125.25 apply. A Class "A" license authorizes retail sales of
fermented malt beverages in original packages, containers and bottles,
for consumption off the premises where sold, and for providing taste
samples in conformance with Wis. Stats. § 125.25(1). A license may be
issued after July 1, and that license shall expire on the following June
30. The fee for a license for fewer than 12 months shall be prorated
according to the number of months or fraction thereof for which the
license is issued.
B. Class "B" fermented malt beverage retailer's license. The provisions of
Wis. Stats. § 125.26 apply. A Class "B" license authorizes retail sales of
fermented malt beverages for consumption either on the premises
where sold or off the premises. A license may be issued after July 1, and
that license shall expire on the following June 30. The fee for a license
for fewer than 12 months shall be prorated according to the number of
months or fraction thereof for which the license is issued.
(1) Six-month. A license may be issued at any time for a period of six
months in any calendar year. The fee for the license shall be 50% of
the annual license fee. The license may not be renewed during the
calendar year in which issued.
(2) Temporary/picnic Class "B."
(a) A temporary/picnic Class "B" license may be issued to certain
entities pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.26(6) authorizing the sale
of fermented malt beverages at a particular picnic or similar
gathering and shall indicate whether the licensee is authorized
to permit underage persons to be on the premises for which
the license is issued.
[1] If the application is received at least seven days before the
issuance date, the Village Clerk is authorized to issue this
type of temporary/picnic Class "B" license for an event
lasting less than four days, provided that all other required
permits have been obtained.
[2] If the application is received at least 15 days before the
issuance date, the Village Clerk is authorized to issue this
type of license for an event lasting four or five days,
provided that all other required permits have been
obtained.
[3] All licenses for this type of event lasting six days or more
require application at least 15 days before the issuance
date and shall be authorized by the Village Board.
§ 148-3 WATERFORD CODE § 148-3
120:210
(b) Beer walks. Up to 20 temporary Class "B" licenses may be
issued to the same licensee pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 125.26(6)
and 125.32(3m)(j) for a single-day, multiple-location event if
each license is issued for the same date and times and the
licensee is the sponsor of an event held at multiple locations in
the Village on this date and at these times, and an admission
fee is charged for participation in the event and no additional
fee for service of fermented malt beverages is charged at the
event. There is no limit on the number of these licenses that
may be issued by the Village during any twelve-month period.
The licenses may authorize the presence of underage persons
to be on the licensed premises. No fermented malt beverages
may be served after 12:00 midnight. Application must be
submitted at least 15 days before issuance, and all licenses for
this type of event shall be authorized by the Village Board.
C. Retail "Class A" Cider Only license. The provisions of Wis. Stats.
§ 125.51(2)(e) apply. A "Class A" Cider Only license allows the sale of
cider, as defined in § 125.51(2)(e)1, and prohibits the retail sale of, or
the provision of taste samples of, any intoxicating liquor other than
cider. In the event that an applicant holds a Class "A" license for the
same premises and the application contains the condition that retail
sales of intoxicating liquor are limited to cider, the license shall be
issued and no license fee shall be charged, but publication and
background check fees apply.
D. Retail "Class A" liquor license. The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 125.51(2)
apply. A "Class A" license authorizes retail sales of intoxicating liquor in
original packages and containers, for consumption off the premises
where sold. A "Class A" license holder may also allow taste sampling in
accordance with Wis. Stats. §§ 125.06(13) and 125.51(2)(am).
(1) A license may be issued after July 1, and that license shall expire on
the following June 30. The fee for a license for less than 12 months
shall be prorated according to the number of months or fraction
thereof for which the license is issued.
(2) Six-month. A license may be issued at any time for a period of six
months in any calendar year. The fee for the license shall be 50% of
the annual license fee. The license may not be renewed during the
calendar year in which issued.
E. Retail "Class B" liquor license. The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3),
(3r) and (4), inclusive of the quota and reserve license provisions, apply.
A "Class B" license authorizes retail sales of intoxicating liquor for
consumption on the premises where sold, by the glass and not in the
original packages or container. It also authorizes its holder to sell liquor
in original packages or containers in multiples not to exceed four liters
at any one time, for consumption off the premises where sold pursuant
to Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3)(b). Wine, however, may be sold for
consumption off the premises in the original package or otherwise in
§ 148-3 (RESERVED) § 148-3
120:211
any quantity. Opened bottles of wine may be sold if ordered with a
meal and recorked prior to being taken off the premises pursuant to
Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3r). A "Class B" license issued to a winery shall be
subject to Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3)(am).
(1) A license may be issued after July 1, and that license shall expire on
the following June 30. The fee for a license for fewer than 12
months shall be prorated according to the number of months or
fraction thereof for which the license is issued.
(2) Six-month. A license may be issued at any time for a period of six
months in any calendar year. The fee for the license shall be 50% of
the annual license fee. The license may not be renewed during the
calendar year in which issued.
(3) A "Class B" license may be issued only to a holder of a Class "B"
license (see § 154-4B), except as provided in, and pursuant to, Wis.
Stats. § 125.51(3)(f), which exempts wineries from this
requirement.
(4) Temporary/picnic "Class B" Wine Only license.
(a) A temporary/picnic "Class B" Wine Only license may be issued
to certain entities pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.51(10) to
authorize the sale of wine in an original package, container or
bottle or by the glass at a particular picnic or similar gathering
and shall indicate whether the licensee is authorized to permit
underage persons to be on the premises for which the license
is issued. No fee shall be charged to a person who also applies
and pays for a temporary Class "B" license for the same event
under Subsection B. A temporary/picnic "Class B" wine license
shall not authorize its holder to sell any intoxicating liquor. No
more than two such licenses may be issued to any particular
qualified entity in any twelve-month period.
[1] If the application is received at least seven days before the
issuance date, the Village Clerk is authorized to issue this
type of temporary/picnic "Class B" license for an event
lasting less than four days, provided that all other required
permits have been obtained.
[2] If the application is received at least 15 days before the
issuance date, the Village Clerk is authorized to issue this
type of license for an event lasting four or five days,
provided that all other required permits have been
obtained.
[3] All licenses for this type of event lasting six days or more
require application submittal at least 15 days before the
issuance date and shall be authorized by the Village Board.
§ 148-3 WATERFORD CODE § 148-3
120:212
(b) Wine walks. Up to 20 temporary "Class B" licenses may be
issued to the same licensee pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 125.51(10)(b) for a single-day, multiple-location event if each
license is issued for the same date and times and the licensee is
the sponsor of an event held at multiple locations in the Village
on this date and at these times, and an admission fee is
charged for participation in the event and no additional fee for
service of wine is charged at the event. No more than two such
events may be licensed by the Village during any twelve-month
period. The licenses may authorize the presence of underage
persons to be on the licensed premises for the purpose of
acting as designated drivers. No wine may be served after 9:00
p.m. All licenses for this type of event require application
submittal at least 15 days before the issuance date and shall be
authorized by the Village Board.
(c) A temporary/picnic "Class B" Wine Only license shall not
authorize its holder to sell any intoxicating liquor.
F. Reserve "Class B" licenses. Pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats.
§ 125.51, if the Village has granted or issued a number of licenses equal
to or exceeding its quota for regular licenses, or has granted or issued a
number of licenses equaling its quota for Reserve "Class B" — Standard
licenses, the following types of licenses may be issued:
(1) Reserve "Class B" - Standard. Reserve "Class B" - Standard liquor
licenses may be issued as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 125.51(4)(a)4,
and the fee for the initial issuance of a reserve "Class B" - Standard
license shall be set by the Village Board pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 125.51(3)(e) and placed in the Fee Schedule.
(2) Reserve "Class B" - Restaurant. Reserve "Class B" - Restaurant
licenses may be issued if the Village has granted or issued a
number of licenses equal to or exceeding its quota and is allowed
by statute to issue a "Class B" license for a full-service restaurant,
hotel, or opera house or theater as described in Wis. Stats.
§ 125.51(4)(v). The fee for the initial issuance shall be set by the
Village Board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3)(e) and placed in
the Fee Schedule.
(3) Reserve "Class B" - Transfer. Reserve "Class B" - Transfer licenses
may be issued if the Village transfers a reserve "Class B" license
from another municipality pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.51(4)(e).
The initial fee for said license shall be set by the Village Board
pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3)(e) and placed in the Fee
Schedule, and upon receipt of the fee and issuance of the license,
the fee shall be remitted to the municipality that transferred the
license.
(4) Reserve "Class B" - Premier Economic Development District
licenses. Reserve "Class B" - Premier Economic Development
§ 148-3 (RESERVED) § 148-3
120:213
§ 148-4. License application. [Amended 12-16-1998 by Ord. No.
370; 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467; 10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 579;
12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 641]
District licenses may be issued if the Village creates a premier
economic development district and is authorized to issue additional
"Class B" licenses pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.51(4)(u). The
license fee shall be set by the Village Board pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 125.51(3)(e) and placed in the Fee Schedule.
G. Retail "Class C" wine license. The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3m)
and (3r) apply. A retail "Class C" wine license may be issued to certain
restaurants and shall authorize its holder to sell wine by the glass or in
an opened original container for consumption on the premises where
sold. An opened bottle of wine may be sold if ordered with a meal and
recorked prior to being taken off the premises pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 125.51(3r).
(1) A license may be issued after July 1 in any license year. The license
shall expire on the following June 30. The fee for the license shall
be prorated according to the number of months or fractions thereof
remaining until the following June 30.
(2) Licenses valid for six months may be issued at any time. The fee for
the license shall be 50% of the annual license fee. The license may
not be renewed during the calendar year in which issued.
H. Provisional licenses. Provisional retail licenses shall be issued as
follows: The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 125.185 apply. A provisional
retail license may be issued by the Village Clerk to a person who has
applied for a Class "A," Class "B," "Class A," "Class B," or "Class C"
license under the following conditions:
(1) The provisional license authorizes only the activities that the type
of retail license applied for authorizes.
(2) The provisional license expires 60 days after its issuance or when
the retail license applied for is issued to the holder, whichever is
sooner. The Village Clerk may revoke the license if the Clerk
discovers that the applicant made a false statement on the
application.
(3) The Village Clerk may not issue a provisional retail "Class B"
license if the Village's quota under Wis. Stats. § 125.51(4) prohibits
the Village from issuing a "Class B" license.
(4) No person may hold more than one provisional retail license for
each type of license applied for per year.
(5) The Village Clerk may only issue the provisional retail license if the
background check is completed and the applicant qualifies to
receive the retail license applied for.
§ 148-3 WATERFORD CODE § 148-4
120:214
A. Form. Application for a license to sell or deal in intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverages shall be made in writing on forms prescribed
by the State Department of Revenue, or the Village Board for operator's
licenses, and filed with the Clerk. If more than one type of license is
being applied for, one application which fulfills all of the requirements
of Wis. Stats. Ch. 125 may be submitted. The premises shall be
physically described to include every room, storage space and/or
outdoor area to be covered by the license, including all rooms joined by
connecting entrances or not separated by a solid wall. All applications
shall be accompanied by the fee for publication (if applicable) and the
fee for a background check. Submission of an application shall
constitute consent to a background investigation by the Village. All
applicants shall be investigated by the Police Department, and the
results of said investigation shall be forwarded to the Clerk.
B. Application to be notarized. Applications shall be signed and sworn to
by the applicant as provided by Wis. Stats. § 887.01.
C. Time of filing; late fee.
(1) License applications shall be filed as follows:
(a) Applications required to be published.
[1] The Village Clerk shall send one notice, along with an
application for renewal, to all holders of licenses for which
publication of the application is required under Wis. Stats.
§ 125.04(3)(g) no later than May 1. The completed
application must be received by the Village Clerk no later
than May 15.
[2] Applications for new licenses for which publication is
required shall be submitted no later than 60 days prior to
the date the license is required.
(b) Applications for which publication is not required. Applications
for licenses that are not required to be published shall be
submitted to the Clerk no later than 15 days prior to the date
the license is granted, unless an exception to this requirement
is provided in this chapter.
(c) Applications for temporary/picnic Class "B" licenses. See
§§ 148-3B and 148-3E of this Municipal Code.
(2) Late fee. Applications for renewal of licenses required to be
published that are received after May 15 will be assessed a late fee
in an amount set by the Village Board and reflected in the Fee
Schedule.
(3) Late applications; special meeting. In the event that a license
application is not submitted in time for consideration at a regularly
scheduled Board meeting so that statutory requirements are met,
§ 148-4 (RESERVED) § 148-4
120:215
§ 148-5. License restrictions. [Amended 12-16-1998 by Ord. No.
370; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 569;
7-28-2014 by Ord. No. 619; 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 641]
the applicant may request a special meeting of the Village Board
and pay the cost thereof at the time of request therefor as set forth
in § 76-16 of this Municipal Code. If no quorum can be obtained
for a special meeting, the application will be considered at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Board. No alcohol may be sold
from the premises or by the person for which a license is required
during any period in which a license is expired.
D. Issuance of license; payment of fees required. Prior to issuance of a
license, each applicant will deposit with the Village the full amount of
the fees required, including late fees. No license will be issued until all
fees are paid.
E. List of licensees. The Clerk shall forward such information to the state
regarding licenses issued as required by law.
A. Statutory requirements. Licenses required under this chapter shall be
issued only to persons eligible therefor under Wis. Stats. § 125.04.
B. Location.
(1) No retail Class "A," Class "B," "Class A," "Class B" or "Class C"
license, including any provisional license, shall be issued for
premises the main entrance of which is less than 300 feet from the
main entrance of any established public school, parochial school,
tribal school, hospital or church, except this prohibition may be
waived by a majority vote of the Village Board. Such distance shall
be measured by the shortest route along the highway from the
closest point of the boundary of such school, church or hospital to
the main entrance to such premises.
(2) This subsection shall not apply to premises licensed as such on June
30, 1947, nor shall it apply to any premises licensed as such prior to
the occupation of real property within 300 feet thereof by any
school, hospital or church building. This subsection shall not apply
to a restaurant located within 300 feet of a church or school if the
sale of alcohol beverages accounts for less than 50% of the
restaurant's gross receipts.
C. Criminal offenders. No license or permit related to alcohol beverages
may, subject to Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335, be issued
under this chapter to any person who has habitually been a law offender
or has been convicted of a felony unless the person has been duly
pardoned.
D. Health and sanitation requirements. No retail Class "B," "Class B" or
"Class C" license shall be issued for any premises which does not
conform to the sanitary, safety and health requirements of the state
§ 148-4 WATERFORD CODE § 148-5
120:216
pertaining to building, plumbing, health, restaurants and restaurant
sanitation and to all such ordinances and regulations adopted by the
Village.
E. License quota. The number of persons and places that may be granted
retail "Class B" liquor licenses or Reserve "Class B" liquor licenses
under this chapter is limited as provided in Wis. Stats. § 125.51(4). See
§ 148-3F.
F. Corporations, limited-liability companies and other legal entities. No
corporation, limited-liability company or other legal entity organized
under the laws of this state or of any other state or foreign country may
be issued any alcohol beverage license or permit unless such
corporation or limited-liability company meets the requirements of Wis.
Stats. § 125.04(6).
G. Age requirement. No license hereunder, except an operator's license,
shall be granted to any person who has not attained the legal drinking
age. Operator's licenses may be issued only to applicants who have
attained the age of 18.
H. Effect of revocation of license. Whenever any license is revoked, at least
six months from the time of such revocation shall elapse before another
license shall be granted for the same premises, and 12 months shall
elapse before any other license shall be granted to the person whose
license was revoked.
I. Delinquent taxes, assessments, forfeitures and other claims. No license
shall be granted to any person who or premises for which taxes,
assessments, forfeitures or other claims of the Village are delinquent
and unpaid. In the event that the applicant is applying for a new license,
the applicant shall be given notice and the opportunity to rebut the
charge of a delinquent payment due. In the event that the applicant is
applying for a renewal license, the provisions of § 148-11 shall apply.
This subsection does not apply if the applicant is appealing the
imposition of the amount due.
J. Issuance for sales in dwellings prohibited. No license shall be issued to
any person for the purpose of possessing, selling or offering for sale any
alcohol beverages in any dwelling house, flat or residential apartment.
K. Issuance for sales of intoxicating liquors in conjunction with premises
selling gasoline for vehicular consumption prohibited. No license for
the disbursement or sale of intoxicating liquors, as controlled and
directed in this chapter, shall be issued to any person where the
premises to be licensed are also used for the sale or disbursement of
gasoline for vehicular consumption. For the purposes of this subsection,
the term "vehicular" shall refer to motor vehicles designed for
operation upon public roadways and also off-road all-terrain vehicles
but shall not be intended to be applied to licensed premises where the
sole outlet for sales is to boat or boat-related traffic upon waterways
within the Village.
§ 148-5 (RESERVED) § 148-6
120:217
§ 148-6. Form and expiration of licenses. [Amended 12-16-1998 by
Ord. No. 370; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
641]
§ 148-7. Transfer of licenses.
§ 148-8. Posting licenses.
Every license issued under this chapter shall be posted and at all times
displayed as provided in Wis. Stats. § 125.04(10). No person shall post such
license or permit any other person to post it upon premises other than those
mentioned in the application, or knowingly deface or destroy such license.
§ 148-9. Regulation of licensed premises and licenses.
A. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and
shall state clearly the specific premises for which granted, the date of
issuance, the fee paid and the name of the licensee and, unless sooner
revoked, shall expire on June 30 thereafter, except as otherwise
provided.
B. Combination licenses. If an applicant requests more than one license,
the following licenses may be issued in combination: Retail "Class A,"
Intoxicating Liquor, and Retail Class "A," Fermented Malt Beverage;
Retail "Class A" Cider Only license and Retail Class "A" Fermented Malt
Beverage License, and Retail "Class B," Intoxicating Liquor, and Retail
Class "B," Fermented Malt Beverage. The fee for a combination license
shall be in an amount set by the Village Board.
A. As to person. No license shall be transferable as to a licensee except as
provided by Wis. Stats. § 125.04(12).
B. As to place. Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be
transferred as provided in Wis. Stats. § 125.04(12). Application for such
transfer shall be made on blanks furnished by the State Department of
Revenue. Proceedings for transfer shall be had in the same manner and
form as the original application.
A. Gambling and disorderly conduct prohibited. Each licensed premises
shall at all times be conducted in an orderly manner; and no disorderly,
riotous or indecent conduct or gambling shall be allowed at any time on
any licensed premises.
B. Employment of underage persons. No licensee shall employ any person
under the legal drinking age to serve, sell, dispense or give away any
alcohol beverage, unless such underage person is at least 18 years of
age and has a valid operator's license.
C. Sales by clubs. No club shall sell intoxicating liquors or fermented malt
beverages except to members and guests invited by members.
§ 148-6 WATERFORD CODE § 148-9
120:218
§ 148-10. Closing hours. [Amended 12-16-1998 by Ord. No. 370;
1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 569]
No premises for which an alcohol beverage license has been issued shall
remain open for the sale of alcohol beverages:
D. Safety and sanitation requirements. Each licensed premises shall be
maintained and conducted in a sanitary manner and shall be a safe and
proper place for the purpose for which used.
E. Dancing. [Added 7-12-1999 by Ord. No. 382]
(1) Any licensee or licensed premises under this chapter which also
meets the definition of a "dance hall" as found in § 115-2, or which
holds a public dance as defined in § 115-2 shall obtain the
appropriate dance hall license or permit and shall conform to the
regulations set forth in Chapter 115, Dances and Dance Halls.
(2) Any violation of the regulations found in Chapter 115 constitutes
sufficient grounds for suspending, revoking or not renewing an
alcohol beverage license under §§ 148-11 and 148-12.
A. If a retail Class "A," a retail "Class A" license, or a Combination Class A,
between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Grocery and other stores may remain
open for the conduct of their regular business but shall not sell
intoxicating liquors or fermented malt beverages during the hours
specified. [Amended 2-13-2012 by Ord. No. 584]
B. If a retail Class "B," a retail "Class B," a Combination Class B or "Class
C" license, between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and between
2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturdays and Sundays, except as follows:
(1) On January 1, premises operating under any Class B license are not
required to close.
(2) On the Sunday that daylight savings time begins pursuant to
Wisconsin law, no premises may remain open between 3:30 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
(3) No package, container or bottle sales, or sale of any opened bottle
of wine ordered with a meal pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3r)(a),
may be made between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
(4) No winery for which a "Class B" license has been issued shall
remain open between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(5) Hotels and restaurants, the principal business of which is the
furnishing of food or lodging to patrons, bowling centers, indoor
horseshoe pitching facilities, curling clubs, golf courses and golf
clubhouses may remain open for the conduct of their regular
business but shall not sell intoxicating liquors or fermented malt
beverages during the hours specified herein.
§ 148-9 (RESERVED) § 148-10
120:219
§ 148-11. Refusal to grant, revocation of, suspension of, and refusal
to renew licenses. [Amended 6-23-2008 by Ord. No. 531; 12-12-2016
by Ord. No. 641]
C. If a wholesaler's fermented malt beverage license, between the hours of
5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except on Saturday the premises may remain
open until 9:00 p.m.
D. The permittee, licensee, employees, salespersons, employees of
licensed wholesalers, employees of permittees on the permittee's
premises, and service personnel may be on the licensed premises
during hours when the premises are not open for business if those
persons are performing job-related activities.
A. Refusal to grant a license. Opportunity shall be given by the Village
Board to any person to be heard for or against the granting of any
license. The Village Board may refuse to grant a license as set forth in
Wis. Stats. § 125.12(3m), and if a license is refused, a written notice
thereof, including the reasons for the decision, shall be given to the
applicant.
B. Revocation and suspension of licenses. Proceedings for revocations and
suspensions of licenses shall be instituted pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 125.12 when a sworn complaint against the licensee is filed with the
Clerk by a resident of the Village. If the complaint is based on the
accrual of demerit points as set forth herein, the complaint shall specify
the violations constituting the demerit point accrual. If the complaint is
based upon violations outside of the accrual of demerit points, it shall
be so stated, and the procedures set forth in Wis. Stats. § 125.12 shall
be followed. When a penalty is imposed, the Clerk shall report the same
as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 125.13.
(1) Pursuant to the authority granted in Wis. Stats. § 125.10, the
Village Board, upon learning of a violation of state law, federal law
or Village ordinance which occurred on the licensed premises by
the licensee, agent, employee, or co-owner, may order a review of
the license and, depending on the seriousness of the violation, may
suspend or revoke the license. If the violation of state law falls
under Wis. Stats. Ch. 125 or 139, or the Wisconsin Administrative
Code, or Village ordinance, the violation will fall into the demerit
point schedule.
(2) Violations are assigned demerit points dependent on the severity of
the violation. When a licensee obtains 100 or more demerit points
for violations of Wis. Stats. Chs. 125 and/or 139, or violations of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code, or any other local ordinance, which
occur on the licensed premises by a licensee, agent, employee, or
co-owner within a twelve-month period, proceedings for revocation
or suspension may be commenced.
§ 148-10 WATERFORD CODE § 148-11
120:220
(a) If 100 demerit points are obtained, the Village Board shall hold
a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in the same manner
as found in Wis. Stats. § 125.12(2)(b), with the exception of the
penalties, which may be imposed by the Village Board as set
forth herein. If the Village Board finds the violations to be true,
the Village Board may suspend the license for not less than
three days nor more than five days or may impose such penalty
deemed appropriate by the Board.
(b) If the licensee obtains a combined total of 160 demerit points
within a twelve-month period, the Village Board shall hold a
hearing. The hearing process shall remain the same as the
above. The penalties, if the Village Board finds the violation to
be true, may be a suspension of not less than five days nor
more than 10 days or may be a penalty deemed appropriate by
the Village Board.
(c) If the licensee obtains a combined total of 200 demerit points
within a twelve-month period, the Village Board shall hold a
hearing as set forth above. The penalty, if the Village Board
finds the violation to be true, may be revocation of the license
or may be a penalty deemed appropriate by the Board.
(d) If the licensee does not appear at the hearing, the Village
Board shall find the violations to be true and shall recommend
the prescribed penalty that would be derived from the
combined point total.
(e) If the license is revoked, § 148-5H of this chapter shall be
applied after a hearing is held and the allegations found true.
(3) Suspension by the Village Board may run concurrent with any
court-imposed suspension if the Village Board so desires.
(4) The following is a list of violations and the respective demerit
points:
Violation Demerit Points
Allowing another to use a license
issued under this chapter: Wis. Stats.
Ch. 125 requires revocation
200
Violation of state or federal law which
occurs on the licensed premises
100
Failing to permit a liquor license
inspection of the premises
100
Violation of local ordinance which
occurs on the licensed premises
50
§ 148-11 (RESERVED) § 148-11
120:221
Violation Demerit Points
Underage person being served alcohol
on the licensed premises [Only one
violation will be counted in the event
that a citation is issued to a server
during an undercover law enforcement
investigation, pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 125.07(1)(b)6.]
50
Underage person on the licensed
premises
30
Permitting unauthorized person to sell
alcohol on the licensed premises
30
Unlicensed person selling alcohol 30
Serving an intoxicated person alcohol
on the premises
30
After-hours violation (serving or hours) 25
Disorderly house violation 25
All other violations of Wis. Stats. Ch.
125
20
Violations of Wisconsin Administrative
Code
20
(5) A licensee will be considered in violation if the licensee, agent,
employee, or co-owner was arrested or cited for said violation. A
dismissal of a criminal charge or civil forfeiture case which is
subject to demerit points shall not, as a matter of procedure, nullify
said charge for the purpose of a review before the Village Board
due to the differing burdens of proof and procedural requirements.
(6) Demerit points shall also be assessed on warnings issued. The
amount of points for the warning will be 1/2 of the above schedule
points.
(7) The Village Board may issue an order to the licensee along with the
imposed suspension to prohibit such activities that are directly
related to the licensed premises which may cause violations of
ordinances or state statutes off premises.
(8) The licensee will be notified of the impending suspension or
revocation hearing by a written summons from the Village Clerk,
pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.12(2)(ar). The summons shall have a
date and time when and where the Village Board will hold the
hearing.
(9) Upon completion of this process, if the suspended or revoked
licensee wishes to appeal the decision of the Village Board, the
§ 148-11 WATERFORD CODE § 148-11
120:222
§ 148-12. Operator's license. [Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 641]
The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 125.17 apply.
licensee may do so by following the procedures outlined in Wis.
Stats. § 125.12(2)(d).
C. Refusal to renew license. The Village may refuse to renew a license for
the reasons set forth in Wis. Stats. § 125.12(2)(ag) and this section and
shall follow the procedures for notice and hearing in such case as set
forth in Wis. Stats. § 125.12.
D. Revocation or nonrenewal for nonuse.
(1) In addition to all other grounds for revocation, suspension or
nonrenewal of a license provided in this chapter and in Wis. Stats.
Ch. 125, the following shall constitute a basis for the Village to
revoke or refuse to renew a license issued under this chapter:
(a) Failure to commence the sale of alcohol at the location for
which the license was approved within 180 days of the
approval of any license to sell fermented malt beverages or
intoxicating liquor or, in the case of new construction, within
180 days of the estimated completion date provided in writing
to the Village at the time of the application; or
(b) Discontinuation of the sale of alcohol beverages for which a
license has been issued for a period of 180 days.
(2) The Village Board shall follow the procedures for notice and
hearing set forth in Wis. Stats. § 125.12(3), and may extend the
time limits set forth herein at its discretion, for good cause shown.
If the Board finds good cause, it may set such terms as it deems
appropriate to the continuation of the license.
E. Automatic revocation. Any license issued under this chapter may be
revoked without further proceedings upon the conviction of the license
holder pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.11.
A. Authority. Operator's licenses may be granted by the Village Board, to
those applicants who are qualified under Wis. Stats. §§ 125.04(5) and
125.17(6), for the purposes of complying with Wis. Stats. §§ 125.32(2)
and 125.68(2) and this chapter.
B. Qualifications. Operator's licenses may be issued only after written
application on forms provided by the Clerk, accompanied by the license
and background check fees, which are not refundable if the license is
not issued. The applicant must meet the following qualifications:
(1) The applicant must be 18 years of age by the time of issuance.
(2) The applicant must have successfully completed a responsible
beverage server training course approved by the Wisconsin
§ 148-11 (RESERVED) § 148-12
120:223
Department of Revenue. Individuals are exempted from training
course requirements if they are renewing an existing operator's
license, have successfully completed the responsible beverage
server training course within the last two years, or have held
a retail license or manager's or operator's license anywhere in
Wisconsin in the last two years.
(3) Approval of a license is subject to the requirements of Wis. Stats.
§ 125.04(5) and the Wisconsin Fair Employment Law, Wis. Stats.
§§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.325.
C. Term. Operator's licenses may be issued for either one- or two-year
terms and shall be valid beginning on July 1 and expiring on June 30 of
the appropriate year.
D. Investigation and granting of licenses.
(1) Investigation. The Clerk shall order a background check of all
applicants, new or renewal. The Clerk will furnish a report of the
information derived from the background check to the Village
Board including a statement as to the following:
(a) Conviction of a felony within the last five years that
substantially relates to the alcohol beverage licensing activity.
(b) Conviction of any combination of two or more ordinance or
misdemeanor violations of the following within the last 24
months:
[1] Any violation relating to alcohol or controlled substances.
[2] Resisting arrest, battery to a police officer and/or
obstructing justice.
[3] Disorderly conduct if in conjunction with activity at a
licensed alcohol establishment.
[4] Any other conviction that the Clerk or the Clerk's designee
deems relevant.
(c) The Clerk shall indicate in the report whether there was any
incomplete, misleading or falsified statement in an application.
Any incomplete, misleading or falsified statement pertaining to
the identification of the applicant, the completion of the
required responsible beverage server training course, or any
matter occurring within the five years prior to the date of
application may be grounds for denial.
(d) The Clerk shall indicate whether the applicant has any
delinquent taxes, assessments, forfeitures and other claims.
No license shall be granted to any person who owes delinquent
taxes, assessments, forfeitures or other claims of the Village. In
the event that the applicant is applying for a new license, the
§ 148-12 WATERFORD CODE § 148-12
120:224
applicant shall be given notice and the opportunity to rebut
the charge of a delinquent amount due. In the event that the
applicant is applying for a renewal license, the provisions of
§ 148-11 shall apply. This subsection does not apply if the
applicant is appealing the imposition of the amount due.
(e) The Clerk shall indicate whether the applicant had a previous
license revoked. Twelve months shall elapse before any other
license shall be granted to the person whose license was
revoked.
(2) Granting of licenses.
(a) The Clerk will submit a list of regular operator's licenses for
consideration to the Village Board.
(b) If the investigation report includes any matters listed in the
preceding section, or if the Clerk or Village Board deem an
appearance by the applicant before the Village Board is
warranted, the applicant shall be notified in writing that he or
she has the right to appear in person before the Board and/or
respond in writing to the Village Board when the Village Board
considers the application. The notification shall include the
date and time of the Village Board meeting when the
application will be considered. In the event that the Village
Board denies the license after meeting with the applicant, its
reasons for doing so shall be reflected in the meeting minutes.
(c) In the event that the Board approves the license, it may do so
subject to a three-, six-, nine- or twelve-month review of the
license.
E. Revocation or suspension of licenses. Revocation or suspension of
regular operator's licenses granted pursuant to this chapter shall be
governed as follows:
(1) A complaint for revocation or suspension may be filed pursuant to
§ 148-11 of this chapter and Wis. Stats. § 125.12.
(2) Automatic revocation. Any regular operator's license issued under
this chapter may be revoked without further proceedings upon the
conviction of the license holder pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.11.
(3) No person may allow another to use his or her operator's license;
the license of a person who does so shall be revoked.
F. Temporary operator's licenses. The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 125.17(4)
apply. The Village Board may issue temporary operator's licenses to
persons qualified for an operator's license. The licenses may be issued
only to operators employed by or donating their services to nonprofit
corporations and are usually issued for the purpose of meeting licensed
operator requirements for an event requiring a temporary/picnic Class
§ 148-12 (RESERVED) § 148-12
120:225
§ 148-13. Violations by agents and employees. [Amended
12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 641]
A violation of this chapter by a duly authorized agent or employee of a
licensee or permit holder shall constitute a violation by the licensee or
permit holder unless otherwise provided by law.
§ 148-14. Underage and intoxicated persons; presence on licensed
premises; possession; penalties.
"B" or "Class B" license. No person may hold more than two temporary
operator's licenses per year. The license shall be valid for a period of
one to 14 days, and the period for which it is valid shall be stated on the
license.
G. Provisional operator's licenses. The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 125.17(5)
and (6) apply. The Village Clerk may issue provisional operator's
licenses as follows:
(1) A provisional operator's license may only be issued to a person who
has completed an application for an operator's license and paid the
required fees.
(2) The Village Clerk shall issue a provisional operator's license to a
person who, at the time the person applies for an operator's license
with the Village, files a certified copy of a valid operator's license
issued by another municipality, or who shows proof that the person
is enrolled in the required responsible beverage server training
course, or is qualified under Wis. Stats. § 125.17(6)(a), and who
otherwise meets the requirements of this section.
(3) The Village Clerk shall perform the required CIBR computer check
on the applicant prior to issuance of a provisional operator's
license.
(4) The Village Clerk may not issue a provisional operator's license to a
person who has been denied an operator's license by the Village.
(5) A provisional operator's license expires 60 days after its issuance
or when an operator's license is issued to the applicant, whichever
is sooner. If the provisional operator's license was issued to a
person upon proof that the person was licensed by another
municipality, the provisional operator's license shall expire 60 days
after its issuance, or when an operator's license is issued by the
Village, or upon expiration of the other municipality's license,
whichever is sooner.
(6) The Village Clerk may revoke the license if the Clerk discovers that
the holder of the provisional license made a false statement on the
application, the license issued by the other municipality is not valid,
or upon denial of the person's application for an operator's license.
§ 148-12 WATERFORD CODE § 148-14
120:226
§ 148-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No.
489]
Unless otherwise specified in a section of this chapter, any person who shall
violate any provision of this chapter or any regulation, rule or order made
hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided by Chapter 1, Article II,
of this Municipal Code.
Chapter 154
LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 82.
Animals — See Ch. 87.
Carriage services — See Ch. 109.
Dances and dance halls — See Ch. 115.
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 148.
Tobacco products — See Ch. 202.
A. The provisions of Wis. Stat. § 125.07 are hereby adopted and made a
part of this chapter by reference. A violation of any of the provisions of
Wis. Stat. § 125.07 shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a penalty as provided under Wis. Stat. § 125.07 and Chapter
1, Article II, of this Municipal Code.
§ 148-14 (RESERVED) § 148-15
120:227

ARTICLE I
Fees
§ 154-1. Licenses required. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
A license shall be required for each of the following businesses or activities
at a license fee in an amount set by the Village Board, which shall be for one
year unless otherwise indicated. The fee schedule is on file at the Village
Hall.
§ 154-2. Animal licenses.37 [Amended 3-28-2005 by Ord. No. 475]
Fees in an amount set by the Village Board shall be imposed for the
following:
§ 154-3. Dance hall licenses.38
Fees in an amount set by the Village Board shall be imposed for the
following classes of dance hall licenses:
Class "A"
Class "B"
Class "C"
Special Permit
§ 154-4. Intoxicating liquor licenses.39 [Amended 12-16-1998 by
Ord. No. 370; 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 477; 5-6-2005 by Ord. No. 478;
12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 641]
Fees in an amount set by the Village Board and set forth in the Fee Schedule
shall be imposed for the following classes of intoxicating liquor licenses:
A. Dogs and cats.
(1) Neutered males and spayed females.
(2) Unneutered males and unspayed females.
(3) The license fee shall be one-half the amount in Subsection A(1) and
(2) above if the dog or cat became five months of age after July 1.
(4) A late fee in an amount set by the Village Board shall be imposed if
the license is obtained after April 1, after such dog or cat becomes
five months of age, or if the owner failed to obtain the license
within 30 days of acquiring a licensable dog or cat.
B. Special permits.
37.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 87, Animals.
38.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 115, Dances and Dance Halls.
39.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 148, Intoxicating Liquor and Fermented Malt Beverages.
§ 154-1 (RESERVED) § 154-4
120:229
§ 154-5. Fermented malt beverage licenses.40 [Amended 12-12-2016
by Ord. No. 641]
Fees in an amount set by the Village Board shall be imposed for the
following classes of fermented malt beverage licenses:
Retail Class "A"
Retail Class "B"
Temporary/Picnic Class "B"
A. Retail "Class A" and Retail "Class A" Cider Only.
B. Retail "Class B."
C. Transfer.
D. Temporary/Picnic "Class B" (Wine).
E. Retail "Class C" (Wine).
F. Reserve "Class B" - Standard. The fee for a Reserve "Class B" - Standard
liquor license, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 125.51(4)(a)4, shall be an
amount set by the Village Board for initial issuance, except that the fee
for the initial issuance of a reserve Class B license to a bona fide club or
lodge situated and incorporated in the state for at least six years is the
fee established in Subsection B for such a club or lodge. The fee
established in this subsection is in addition to any other fee required
under this chapter. The annual fee for renewal of a Reserve "Class B"
license is the fee established in Subsection B.
G. If the Village has granted or issued a number of licenses equal to or
exceeding its quota, and is allowed by statute to issue a Reserve "Class
B" - Restaurant license for a full-service restaurant, hotel, or opera
house or theater as described in Wis. Stats. § 125.51(4)(v), the initial
license fee, in addition to that set forth in Subsection B, is an amount
set by the Village Board. Thereafter, the annual renewal fee is as
established in Subsection B.
H. The Village may issue a Reserve "Class B" - Transfer license if the
Village transfers a reserve "Class B" license from another municipality
pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.51(4)(e). The initial fee for said license
shall be an amount set by the Village Board, and upon receipt of the fee
and issuance of the license, the fee shall be transferred to the
municipality that transferred the license.
I. The Village may issue a Reserve "Class B" - Premier Economic District
License if the Village creates a premier economic development district
and is authorized to issue additional "Class B" licenses pursuant to Wis.
Stats. § 125.51(4)(u). The initial issuance fee for said license shall be an
amount set by the Village Board.
40.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 148, Intoxicating Liquor and Fermented Malt Beverages.
§ 154-4 WATERFORD CODE § 154-6
120:230
§ 154-6. Combination intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverage license.41 [Amended 12-16-1998 by Ord. No. 370]
The fee for a combination license shall be the total of the fees for the
individual licenses.
§ 154-7. Operator's license.42 [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
641]
The fee for a one-year operator’s license is $30, the fee for a two-year
operator’s license is $55, and the fee for a temporary operator’s license is
$10. The cost of a background check shall be added to the license fee and
shall be submitted with the application for the license.
§ 154-7.1. Provisional intoxicating liquor, fermented malt beverage
and operator's licenses. [Added 2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 569;
amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 641]
A fee of $15 each shall be imposed for the following classes of provisional
intoxicating liquor, fermented malt beverage and operator’s licenses:
Provisional Class "A"
Provisional Class "B"
Provisional "Class A"
Provisional "Class B"
Provisional "Class C"
Provisional Operator's
§ 154-8. Coin-operated amusement devices.43
The fee for coin-operated amusement devices shall be in an amount set by
the Village Board.
§ 154-9. Direct sellers.
The fee for a direct seller's license shall be in an amount set by the Village
Board.
§ 154-10. Cigarette and tobacco products retailer's license.44
[Added 1-10-2000 by Ord. No. 386]
The fee for a cigarette and tobacco products retailer's license shall be in an
amount set by the Village Board.
41.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 148, Intoxicating Liquor and Fermented Malt Beverages.
42.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 148, Intoxicating Liquor and Fermented Malt Beverages.
43.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 82, Amusement devices.
44.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 202, Tobacco Products.
§ 154-6 (RESERVED) § 154-11
120:231
§ 154-11. Carriage services.45 [Added 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 432]
The fee for a license for carriage services shall be in an amount set by the
Village Board.
45.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 109, Carriage Services.
§ 154-11 WATERFORD CODE § 154-11
120:232
ARTICLE II
Issuance and Revocation
§ 154-12. License required.
No person shall engage in any business or activity enumerated in Article
I without a license or permit therefor as provided by this chapter. The
words "license" and "permit" as used throughout this chapter shall be
interchangeable.
§ 154-13. Application. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
Application for a license under this chapter shall be made to the Village
Clerk on a form furnished by the Village. Such application shall contain such
information as may be required by the provisions of this chapter or as may
be otherwise required by the Village Board.
§ 154-14. Payment of license fee. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No.
467; 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 641]
Unless otherwise provided in this Code or by statute, license fees imposed
under Article I shall accompany the license application. If a license is
granted, the Village Clerk shall issue the applicant a receipt for his license
fee.
§ 154-15. Refund of license fee. [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
641]
Unless otherwise provided in this Code or by statute, no fee paid shall be
refunded unless the license is denied.
§ 154-16. Granting of licenses.
§ 154-17. Terms of licenses.
The terms of all licenses issued hereunder shall commence on or after July
1 and shall expire on the following June 30, unless issued for a specified
shorter term, when they shall expire at 12:00 midnight of the last effective
day of the license, unless otherwise provided by these ordinances or state
laws.
A. The Village Clerk may issue dog and cat licenses and direct seller's
permits subject to the standards established by this chapter without
prior approval of the Board. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
B. All other licenses shall be issued by the Board unless otherwise
designated.
§ 154-12 (RESERVED) § 154-18
120:233
§ 154-18. Form of license. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
All licenses issued hereunder shall show the date of issue, the activity
licensed and the term of the license and shall be signed by the Village Clerk.
§ 154-19. Record of licenses. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No.
467]
The Village Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued.
§ 154-20. Display of licenses.
All licenses issued hereunder shall be displayed upon the premises or
vehicle for which issued or, if carried on the person, shall be displayed to
any officer of the Village upon request.
§ 154-21. Compliance with ordinances required.
It shall be a condition of holding a license under this chapter that the
licensee comply with all ordinances of the Village. Failure to do so shall be
cause for suspension or revocation of the license.
§ 154-22. Transfer of licenses.
Except as otherwise provided, all licenses issued hereunder shall be
personal to whom issued and shall not be transferred except with the
consent of the Board.
§ 154-23. Exemptions.
No license, other than a liquor or beer license, shall be required under this
article for any nonprofit educational, charitable, civic, military or religious
organization where the activity which would otherwise be licensed is
conducted for the benefit of the members or for the benefit of the public
generally.
§ 154-24. Renewal of licenses. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No.
467]
All applications for renewal of licenses hereunder shall be made to the
Village Clerk by April 15, unless otherwise specified.
§ 154-25. Consent to inspection.
An applicant for a license under this chapter thereby consents to the entry
of police or authorized representatives of the Village upon the licensed
premises at all reasonable hours for the purposes of inspection and search
and consents to removal from the premises and introduction into evidence
in prosecutions for violations of this chapter of all things found therein in
violation of this chapter or state law.
§ 154-18 WATERFORD CODE § 154-26
120:234
§ 154-26. Revocation of licenses.
A. Except as otherwise provided, any license issued under this chapter
may be revoked for cause by the Village Board. No license shall be
revoked except upon written verified complaint filed with the Village
Board by the Village President, a member of the Village Board, the
Village Administrator, a law enforcement officer or a resident of the
Village. The licensee shall be served with a copy of the written charges
and shall be given an opportunity to be heard before the Village Board.
The licensee shall be given notice of the hearing before the Village
Board, which shall be not more than 20 nor fewer than five days after
notice, except as otherwise agreed between the parties. [Amended
1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
B. At such hearing, the licensee shall be entitled to be represented by
counsel, shall have the right to present and cross-examine witnesses
and, upon request, may have subpoenas issued by the Village President
or presiding officer of the Village Board to compel the attendance of
witnesses.
C. After hearing the evidence, the Village Board may revoke such license
or impose a limited period of suspension. The determination of the
Board shall be final, subject to review under Wis. Stat. ch. 68, provided
the licensee shall not be entitled to an additional hearing.
D. The Village President or Village Board may suspend the license of a
licensee hereunder without hearing for not to exceed ten days.
E. The Police Department shall repossess any license revoked hereunder.
F. If the licensee does not apply for a hearing within the time provided, the
license may be revoked by the Village Board.
§ 154-26 (RESERVED) § 154-26
120:235

ARTICLE III
Penalties
§ 154-27. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any regulation,
rule or order made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided by
Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code.
§ 154-27 (RESERVED) § 154-27
120:237
Chapter 159
MINORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 82.
Firearms and explosives — See Ch. 131.
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 148.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 174.
Tobacco products — See Ch. 202.
§ 154-27 WATERFORD CODE § 154-27
159:238
ARTICLE I
Curfew
[Adopted as § 9.08 of the 1998 Code]
§ 159-1. Hours. [Amended 3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 28846]
No child under the age of 18 years shall loiter, idle or remain upon any
street, alley or other public place (including any place of amusement or
hotel, motel or rooming house) or in any vacant lot in the Village between
10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the next day Sunday through Thursday, and
between 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday, unless this
child is accompanied by his parent, guardian, or other adult person having
legal custody of such child, and no child under the age of 14 years shall
loiter, idle or remain upon any street, alley or other public place (including
any place of amusement or hotel, motel or rooming house) or in any vacant
lot in the Village of Waterford between 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the next
day, unless such child is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult
person having legal custody of such child.
§ 159-2. Exceptions.
A. This article shall not apply to a child:
(1) Performing an errand as directed by his parent, guardian or other
person having lawful custody.
(2) Who is on his own premises or in the areas immediately adjacent
thereto.
(3) Whose employment makes it necessary to be upon the streets,
alleys or public places (including any place of amusement or hotel,
motel or rooming house) or any motor vehicle after such hour.47
(4) Returning home from a supervised school, church or civic function.
(5) Who is participating in, going to or returning from:48
(a) An emergency involving the protection of a person or property
from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial
damage;
(b) An activity conducted by a nonprofit or governmental entity
that provides recreation, education, training, or other care
under the supervision of one or more adults; or
(c) An activity involving the exercise of the child's rights protected
under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
48.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 159-1 MINORS § 159-2
159:239
§ 159-3. Parental violation.50
No parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of a child under
the age of 18 years shall permit such child to loiter, idle or remain upon
any street, alley or other public place (including any place of amusement or
hotel, motel or rooming house) or in a vacant lot in the Village during the
hours specified in § 159-1 unless such child is accompanied by his parent,
guardian or other adult person having legal custody of such child.
§ 159-4. Responsibility of operators of places of amusement.
No person operating a place of amusement or entertainment within the
Village, or any agent, servant or employee of such person, shall permit a
child under the age of 18 years to enter or loiter in such place of amusement
or entertainment during the hours specified in § 159-1 unless such child
is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having legal
custody of such child.
§ 159-5. Responsibility of hotels, motels and rooming houses.
No person operating a hotel, motel or lodging or rooming house within the
Village, or any agent, servant or employee of such person, shall permit any
child under the age of 18 years to visit, idle, wander or stroll in any portion
of such hotel, motel or lodging or rooming house during the hours specified
in § 159-1 unless such child is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other
adult person having legal custody of such child.
§ 159-6. Loitering in school and playground areas.
No person not in official attendance or on official school business shall
enter into, congregate, loiter, wander, stroll, stand or play in any school
building or in or about any playground area adjacent thereto within the
Village between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on official school days.
or Article I of the Constitution of the State of Wisconsin, or
both, such as freedom of speech or the right of assembly.
B. These exceptions shall not permit a child to unnecessarily loiter about
the streets, alleys or public places (including any place of amusement or
hotel, motel or rooming house) or vacant lots or be in a parked motor
vehicle on the public streets.49
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 159-2 WATERFORD CODE § 159-7
159:240
§ 159-7. Detaining a child.51
A child believed to be violating the provisions of this article shall be
reported to the Chief of Police or the Sheriff's Department for Racine
County, Wisconsin, for proper identification. Every law enforcement officer
while on duty shall make reasonable inquiry as to the reason for a child's
violation of the curfew set forth herein, and if no credible reason that would
constitute an exception under § 159-2 is presented by the child, may detain
any child violating this article pursuant to the detention provisions of Wis.
Stat. ch. 48.
§ 159-8. Warning.
The first time a child is detained by law enforcement officers as provided in
§ 159-7, a parent, guardian or person having legal custody shall be advised
as to the provisions of this article, and any violation of this article occurring
thereafter by this child or any other child under such person's care or
custody shall result in a penalty being imposed as provided in § 159-9.
§ 159-9. Violations and penalties.52
A. Any parent, guardian or person having legal custody of a child
described in this article who has been warned in the manner provided
in § 159-8 and who thereafter violates any of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article II,
of this Municipal Code.
B. Any child who violates this article after being detained and released
under § 159-7 shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1,
Article II, of this Municipal Code.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 159-7 MINORS § 159-9
159:241

ARTICLE II
Truancy
[Adopted as § 9.17 of the 1998 Code; amended in its entirety
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 365]
§ 159-10. Statutory authority.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, the statutory
provisions in Wis. Stat. Chs. 118 and 938, relating to compulsory school
attendance, truancy, habitual truancy, the penalties for contributing to
truancy and school district truancy plans, are adopted and by reference
made a part of this article as though fully set forth herein. Any future
amendments, revisions or modifications of the chapters incorporated herein
are intended to be made a part of this article. This article is enacted
pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 118.163.
§ 159-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DROPOUT — A person who has ceased to attend school, does not attend
a public or private school, technical college or home-based private
educational program on a full-time basis, has not graduated from high
school and does not have an acceptable excuse under Wis. Stat.
§ 118.15(1)(b) through (d) or (3).
HABITUAL TRUANT — A person who is absent from school without an
acceptable excuse under Wis. Stat. §§ 118.15 and 118.16(4) (the school's
written attendance policy) for part or all of five or more days on which
school is held during a semester.
TRUANCY — Any absence of part or all of one or more days from school
during which the school attendance officer, principal or teacher has not
been notified of the legal cause of such absence by the parent or guardian
of the absent pupil, subject to the limits of Wis. Stat. § 118.15(3)(c), and also
means intermittent attendance carried on for the purpose of defeating the
intent of Wis. Stat. § 118.15
TRUANT — A person who is absent from school without an acceptable
excuse under Wis. Stat. §§ 118.15 and 118.16(4) (the school's written
attendance policy) for part or all of any day on which school is held during
a semester.
§ 159-12. Truancy prohibited.
Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 118.15, all persons between the ages of six and
18 shall attend school. No person under the age of 18 shall be a truant,
habitual truant or a dropout.
§ 159-10 MINORS § 159-13
159:243
§ 159-13. Dispositions.
Upon a finding that a person has violated this article, the court shall enter
a dispositional order that may include any one or more of the following, as
appropriate:
A. Truant.
(1) An order that the person attend school.
(2) Forfeitures:
(a) First violation: not more than $50 plus costs.
(b) Second or subsequent violation within 12 months of a previous
violation: not more than $100 plus costs.
(c) Forfeitures are subject to Wis. Stat. § 938.37, and may not
exceed a cumulative amount of $500 for all violations
committed during a semester. All or part of the forfeiture plus
costs may be assessed against the person, the parents or
guardians of the person, or both.
B. Habitual truant.
(1) An order that the person attend school.
(2) A forfeiture of not more than $500 plus costs, subject to Wis. Stat.
§ 938.37. All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be assessed
against the person, the parents or guardians of the person, or both.
(3) Suspension of the person's operating privilege for not less than 30
days nor more than one year. The court shall immediately take
possession of the suspended license and forward it to the
Department of Transportation, along with notice of the reason for
and duration of the suspension.
(4) An order that the person participate in counseling, a supervised
work program or other community service work as provided in Wis.
Stat. § 118.163(2)(b). The cost of the counseling, program, or
community service work may be assessed against the person, the
parents or guardians of the person, or both.
(5) An order that the person remain at home except during religious
worship or school programs. Such order may allow the person to
leave his or her home if accompanied by a parent or guardian.
(6) An order that the person attend an educational program as
provided in Wis. Stat. § 118.163(2)(d).
(7) An order that the Department of Workforce Development revoke
the person's work permit, as provided in Wis. Stat. § 118.163(2)(e).
§ 159-13 WATERFORD CODE § 159-13
159:244
§ 159-14. Investigation of truants and dropouts.
§ 159-15. Jurisdiction.
§ 159-16. Sanctions.
(8) Any other reasonable conditions consistent with this article,
including a curfew, restrictions on associating with other children
or adults, and on going to or remaining on specified premises.
(9) An order placing the person on formal or informal supervision for
up to one year, as provided in Wis. Stat. § 118.163(2)(j).
(10) An order that the person's parent, guardian or legal custodian
participate in counseling (at the parent's, guardian's or legal
custodian's own expense) or attend school with the person, or both.
C. Dropout. The court may suspend the operating privilege of a person
who is at least 16 but is less than 18 years of age and is a dropout. The
court may suspend the person's operating privilege until the person
reaches the age of 18. The court shall immediately take possession of
the suspended license and forward it to the Department of
Transportation, along with notice of the reason for and duration of the
suspension.
A. A law enforcement agency may certify to the school district in writing
that a student is under investigation for truancy and may obtain the
student's attendance record pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 118.125(2)(cg).
The school district clerk who discloses the attendance record to the law
enforcement agency shall notify the student's parent or guardian of that
disclosure as soon as practicable after the disclosure.
B. A court may order a school district to provide a list of persons known to
be dropouts to the court. The court may request that the Department of
Transportation assist it to determine which dropouts have operating
privileges.
A. A person who is under 17 years of age on the date of disposition is
subject to Wis. Stat. § 938.342.
B. Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 938.17(2), the Municipal Court has jurisdiction
to enter dispositional orders under Wis. Stat. § 938.342, and to impose
sanctions for violation of dispositional orders under Wis. Stat.
§ 938.355(6m), regardless of the juvenile's age in proceedings for
habitual truancy, and for juveniles aged 12 and over in all other
proceedings under this article.
A. Violation of conditions of a dispositional order. Pursuant to Wis. Stat.
§ 938.17(2)(cm), the Municipal Court may impose any combination of
the sanctions authorized under Wis. Stat. § 938.355(6m) for violation of
a dispositional order entered under this article.
§ 159-13 MINORS § 159-16
159:245
§ 159-17. Contributing to truancy.
B. Penalties may become judgments. Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 895.035, if a
juvenile or a parent with custody of a juvenile fails to pay a forfeiture
and/or costs as ordered by the Municipal Court, or if a juvenile fails to
pay a surcharge as ordered by the Municipal Court, or if it appears
likely that the juvenile or the parent will not pay the forfeiture, costs
and/or surcharge as ordered, the Village Attorney or the law
enforcement agency that issued the citation to the juvenile may petition
the Municipal Court to order that the amount of the forfeiture,
surcharge and/or costs unpaid by the juvenile or parent be entered and
docketed as a judgment against the juvenile and the parent with
custody of the juvenile in favor of the Village. The petition under this
section may be filed after the expiration of the dispositional order under
which the forfeiture, costs or surcharge is payable, but no later than
one year after the expiration of the dispositional order or any extension
of the dispositional order.
A. Any person who, by an act or by omission, knowingly encourages or
contributes to the truancy of another, as defined in § 159-11 or as
defined in Wis. Stat. § 118.16(1)(c), shall be in violation of this article of
the Code, whether or not the truant child is adjudged to be in need of
protection or services, if the natural and probable consequences of that
act or omission would be to cause the child to be truant. This subsection
does not apply to a person who has under his control a child who has
been sanctioned under Wis. Stat. § 49.26(1)(h).
B. Violation of this section shall be subject to penalties as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, of this Code.
§ 159-16 WATERFORD CODE § 159-17
159:246
ARTICLE III
Possession of Ignition Devices
[Adopted 7-14-2003 by Ord. No. 435]
§ 159-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
IGNITION DEVICE — A match or matches, a lighter, or any other material
when used for the purpose of ignition.
SCHOOL GROUNDS — The entirety of the buildings and campus of any
public or private school located in the Village, inclusive of adjacent
sidewalks and parking lots.
§ 159-19. Possession on school grounds prohibited.
Except as provided in § 159-21, no person under the age of 18 years may
possess any ignition device on school grounds.
§ 159-20. Delivery on school grounds prohibited.
Except as provided in § 159-21, no person may sell, give, deliver or make
accessible any ignition device to a person under the age of 18 years on
school grounds.
§ 159-21. Exception.
A person under the age of 18 years may possess or have access to ignition
devices as may be required by, and under the supervision of, a teacher or
school employee, but only while participating in class during school hours. A
teacher or school employee may grant access to ignition devices to a person
under the age of 18 as may be required by the curriculum, but shall ensure
that the person does not remove the ignition device from the classroom.
§ 159-22. Confiscation.
Any ignition device possessed in violation of this article may be confiscated
by any peace officer. Once confiscated, these ignition devices shall become
the property of the confiscating authority and shall be kept accordingly as
evidence in the commission of a violation of this article, or made inoperable
and disposed of properly.
§ 159-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, or any regulation,
rule or order made hereunder, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code.
§ 159-18 MINORS § 159-23
159:247
Chapter 165
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 87.
Brush, noxious weeds and rank growth of
vegetation — See Ch. 95.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 137.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 142.
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 148.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 178.
Solid waste — See Ch. 186.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 191.
Trees — See Ch. 211.
Vehicles — See Ch. 218.
§ 165-1. Public nuisances prohibited.
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist
any public nuisance within the Village.
§ 165-2. Definition.
A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property
which continues for such length of time as to:
§ 165-3. Public nuisances affecting health.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are specifically
declared to be public health nuisances; but such enumeration shall not be
construed to exclude other health nuisances coming within the definition of
§ 165-2:
A. Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or
safety of the public;
B. In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property;
C. Greatly offend the public morals or decency; or
D. Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct
or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable
body of water or other public way or the use of public property.
A. Adulterated food: all decayed, adulterated or unwholesome food or
drink sold or offered for sale to the public.
B. Unburied carcasses: carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended for
human consumption or food which are not buried or otherwise disposed
of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death.
§ 159-23 WATERFORD CODE § 165-3
159:248
§ 165-4. Public nuisances offending morals and decency.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are specifically
declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and decency; but
such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances
offending public morals and decency coming within the definition of § 165-2:
C. Breeding places for vermin, etc.: accumulations of decayed animal or
vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing
material, scrap metal or any material in which flies, mosquitoes,
disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin can breed.
D. Stagnant water: all stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other
insects can multiply.
E. Privy vaults and garbage cans: privy vaults and garbage cans which are
not fly-tight.
F. (Reserved)53
G. Water pollution: the pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake,
canal or other body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes
or other substances.
H. Noxious odors, etc.: any use of property, substances or things within the
Village emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, noxious or
disagreeable odors, gases, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to
the physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure
or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons
within the Village.
I. Street pollution: any use of property which causes any noxious or
unwholesome liquid or substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter,
alley, sidewalk or public place within the Village.
J. Air pollution: the escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes,
gases, fly ash, industrial dust or other atmospheric pollutants within the
Village or within one mile therefrom in such quantities as to endanger
the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or cause
substantial injury to property in the Village.
A. Disorderly houses: all disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill
fame, gambling houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to
for the purpose of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or
gambling; any house, dwelling or premises where there are continuous
violations of Village ordinances, or there are repeated (more than two
in any six-month period) police calls for complaints regarding problems
including, but not limited to, noise, fights, violence, disorderly conduct,
or neighbor problems, whether or not a citation is issued or an arrest is
53.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection F, regarding noxious weeds, was repealed 3-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 571. See now Ch. 95, Brush, Noxious Weeds and Rank Growth of Vegetation.
§ 165-3 MINORS § 165-4
159:249
§ 165-5. Public nuisances affecting peace and safety.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are declared to
be public nuisances affecting peace and safety; but such enumeration shall
not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or safety
coming within the definition of § 165-2:
made. Citations under this section may be given to the residents,
tenants, lessees, and/or owners of the premises. [Amended 1-23-2006
by Ord. No. 489]
B. Gambling devices: all gambling devices and slot machines.
C. Unlicensed sale of liquor and beer: all places where intoxicating liquor
or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored, brewed,
bottled, manufactured or rectified without a permit or license as
provided for by the Village ordinances.54
D. Continuous violation of Village ordinances: any place or premises
within the Village where Village ordinances or state laws relating to
public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly, continuously,
repeatedly and intentionally violated.
E. Illegal drinking: any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of
drinking intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of
state laws.
A. Signs, billboards, etc.: all signs and billboards, awnings and other
similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or
places frequented by the public, so situated or constructed as to
endanger the public safety.
B. Illegal buildings: all buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation
of the provisions of the Village ordinances relating to materials and
manner of construction of buildings and structures within the Village.
C. Unauthorized traffic signs: all unauthorized signs, signals, markings or
devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or
railway crossing which purport to be or may be mistaken as official
traffic control devices, railroad signs or signals or which, because of
their color, location, brilliance or manner of operation, interfere with
the effectiveness of any such device, sign or signal.
D. Obstruction of intersections: all trees, hedges, billboards or other
obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets,
alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when
approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 148, Intoxicating Liquor and Fermented Malt Beverages.
§ 165-4 WATERFORD CODE § 165-5
159:250
§ 165-6. Abatement of public nuisances. [Amended 12-9-1996 by
Ord. No. 346; 2-25-2008 by Ord. No. 526]
E. Trees, plants and shrubs as defined to be public nuisances in Chapter
211, § 211-8, of this Municipal Code.55 [Amended 12-9-1996 by Ord.
No. 346]
F. Fireworks: all use or display of fireworks except as provided by state
laws and Village ordinances.
G. Dilapidated buildings: all buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or
out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit
for human use or which have been determined to be unreasonable to
repair under Wis. Stat. § 66.0413.
H. Wires and cables over streets. All wires and cables over streets, alleys
or public grounds which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface
thereof.
I. Noisy animals or fowl: the keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl
which, by frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing or
making of other noises, greatly annoys or disturbs a neighborhood or
any considerable number of persons within the Village.56
J. Street and sidewalk obstructions and excavations: all obstructions of
streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under
the same, except as permitted by the ordinances of the Village,57 or
those which, although made in accordance with such ordinances, are
kept or maintained for an unreasonable or illegal length of time after
the purpose thereof has been accomplished or do not conform to the
permit.
K. Unlawful assemblies: any unauthorized or unlawful use of property
abutting on a public street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley
or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing
traffic and free use of the streets or sidewalks. Any assembly of three or
more persons which tends to become loud, noisy or unruly or which
tends to obstruct traffic and the free use of the streets or sidewalks
shall be considered an unlawful assembly.58
A. Enforcement. The Chief of Police, the Chief of the Fire Department, the
Building Inspector, the Health Officer and the Village Forester shall
enforce those provisions of this chapter that come within the
jurisdiction of their offices, and they shall make periodic inspections
and inspections upon complaint to ensure that such provisions are not
55.Editor's Note: Former Subsection (6), which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 346.
56.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 87, Animals.
57.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 191, Streets and Sidewalks.
58.Editor's Note: Former § 10.06, Littering prohibited, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489.
§ 165-5 MINORS § 165-6
159:251
violated. No action shall be taken under this section to abate a public
nuisance unless the officer has inspected or caused to be inspected the
premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and is satisfied that a
nuisance does in fact exist.
B. Emergency abatement.
(1) Order of abatement. If the inspecting officer determines that a
public nuisance exists within the Village and that there is imminent
danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the
officer may issue an order reciting the existence of a public
nuisance constituting imminent danger to the public and requiring
immediate action be taken as the officer deems necessary to abate
the nuisance. The order shall be served personally on the owner of
the premises, as well as the occupant if different from the owner
and applicable to the described nuisance. If the owner is not
present in the Village, the order shall be communicated to the
owner by telephone, fax, or computerized communication, and the
original order shall be served personally or sent by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the owner. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this chapter, the order shall be effective immediately.
Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply with the
order immediately.
(2) Abatement by Village. Whenever the owner or occupant shall
refuse or neglect to remove or abate the condition described in the
order, the inspecting officer shall, in his or her discretion, enter
upon the premises and cause the nuisance to be removed or
abated, and the Village shall recover the expenses incurred thereby
from the owner or occupant of the premises or from the person who
has caused, permitted or maintained the nuisance.
C. Nonemergency abatement.
(1) Order to abate nuisance. If the inspecting officer determines that a
public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of
such nuisance is not such as to threaten imminent danger to the
public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the inspector shall
issue an order reciting the existence of a public nuisance and
requiring the owner or occupant of the premises to remove or
abate the condition described in the order within the time period
specified therein. The order shall be served personally on the
owner of the premises, as well as the occupant if different from the
owner and applicable to the described nuisance, or, at the option of
the inspecting officer, the notice may be mailed to the last known
address of the person, to be served by certified mail with return
receipt. If the owner or the occupant cannot be served in person or
by certified mail, the order may be served by posting it on the main
entrance of the premises and by publishing it as a Class 3 notice
under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats. The time limit specified in the order runs
§ 165-6 WATERFORD CODE § 165-6
159:252
§ 165-7. Cost of abatement. [Amended 2-25-2008 by Ord. No. 526]
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection,
contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the
cost of abating a public nuisance by the Village shall be collected as a debt
from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
nuisance; and if an order to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner,
and the cost remains unpaid, such cost shall be assessed against the real
estate as a special charge.
§ 165-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or permit or cause
a public nuisance shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1,
Article II, of this Municipal Code.
from the date of service or publication and shall be not less than 30
days.
(2) Abatement by Village. If the owner or occupant fails or refuses to
comply within the time period prescribed, the inspecting officer
shall enter upon the premises and cause the nuisance to be
removed or abated, and the Village shall recover the expenses
incurred thereby from the owner or occupant of the premises or
from the person who has caused or permitted the nuisance.
(3) Remedy from order. Any person affected by such order shall, within
30 days of service or publication of the order, apply to the Circuit
Court for an order restraining the Village and the inspecting officer
from entering on the premises and abating or removing the
nuisance, or be forever barred. The court shall determine the
reasonableness of the order for abatement of the nuisance.
D. Other methods not excluded. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the Village or its
officials in accordance with the laws of the State of Wisconsin.
E. Court order. Except when necessary under Subsection B, an officer
hereunder shall not use force to obtain access to private property to
abate a public nuisance but shall request permission to enter upon
private property if such premises are occupied and, if such permission
is denied, shall apply to any court having jurisdiction for an order
assisting the abatement of the public nuisance.
§ 165-6 MINORS § 165-8
159:253
Chapter 170
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 87.
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 148.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 174.
Sales — See Ch. 182.
Special events — See Ch. 188.
Vehicles — See Ch. 218.
§ 170-1. Use of Village parks.
A. Closing times.
(1) The public parks in the Village shall be closed to public use during
designated hours as follows:
(a) Cornerstone Crossing Nature Conservancy, River Bend Park,
Safety Building Park, Ten Club Park and Village Hall Park shall
be closed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. of
each successive following morning.
(b) Whitford Park shall be closed between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m. of each successive following morning.
(c) Huening Park (the public Village boat ramp located adjacent to
Village Hall Park on the Fox River) shall be closed between
10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of each successive following morning.
(2) No person shall use the parks, their facilities, or their drives or
walkways for any purposes during such closed hours.
(3) Individuals or sanctioned groups may apply for a reservation
exempting them from the closing times stated above for scheduled
events which are reasonably expected to commence prior to the
closing times stated and terminate after the closing times stated,
provided the reservation is obtained pursuant to § 170-2. No
variation of the closing time shall be available for the park(s) listed
in Subsection A(1)(c).
(4) Any walkway which connects Main Street and the Village parking
lot to the north of Main Street shall not be classified as a park and
shall not be subject to the closing times stated herein.
B. Vehicles. Vehicles are restricted to the roads, drives and parking areas.
Vehicles are allowed to drop off people and supplies when conditions
are appropriate, however, all vehicles must be parked on the street or in
designated parking areas, unless parked in a designated off-road
location pursuant to a direct sellers permit issued under § 182-5 or a
§ 165-8 WATERFORD CODE § 170-1
159:254
§ 170-2. Park reservations.
special event permit issued under § 188-1. Except as provided herein,
no person shall operate any vehicle, motorcycle, trail bike, truck or
other motorized vehicle in any park, playground or public area.
C. Alcohol use. The use of intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages is allowed in the Village parks under the following terms and
conditions.
(1) No intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage may be
consumed on any road, drive or parking area.
(2) No glass beverage bottles are allowed.
(3) No sale of intoxicating liquor is allowed.
(4) Fermented malt beverages and/or wine may be sold only if a
temporary/picnic license is obtained pursuant to Chapter 148 of
this Municipal Code59 and Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
Only bona fide clubs, churches, lodges, societies, veteran's
organization and fair associations in existence for longer than six
months are eligible for these licenses. Licensed operator(s) must be
present at all times. No person may give away fermented malt
beverages or wine in order to circumvent the provisions of this
subsection. See §§ 125.315 and 125.67, Wis. Stats.
D. Fires. No person shall start, tend or maintain a fire except in personal
grills, designated fireplaces, or pursuant to a special event permit.
Personal grills shall be used only in designated areas, and only if lawns
and vegetation are not endangered.
E. Loudspeakers and amplifying devices. Loudspeakers and amplifying
devices may only be used in the parks if approval is granted pursuant to
a special event permit. This subsection shall not apply to bona fide
Waterford area youth and adult leagues.
F. See also § 218-9C of this Municipal Code (no snowmobile may be
operated in any Village Park); §§ 218-21 and 218-22 (no all-terrain
vehicles may be operated in any Village Park unless under the
provisions of a special event permit); and § 87-1 (dogs not allowed in
public parks, except Cornerstone Crossing Nature Conservancy).
A. The municipality owned parks, park facilities and shelter areas in the
Village are primarily for the nonexclusive use of the residents of the
Village. However, under proper circumstances, exclusive use of a park
or area of a park may be permitted. This section is intended to regulate
exclusive use of municipally owned parks, park facilities and shelter
areas in the Village so that the general welfare of the Village is
protected.
59.Editor's Note: See Ch. 148, Intoxicating Liquor and Fermented Malt Beverages.
§ 170-1 MINORS § 170-2
159:255
B. A person or group, firm, organization, partnership or corporation may
reserve the use of a park, park facility or shelter area located in the
Village by written application for reservation filed with the Village
Clerk. Parks or areas of parks without restroom facilities may only be
reserved in conjunction with a special event permit issued under
§ 188-1.60
C. Applications shall be filed with the Village Clerk prior to the date on
which the exclusive use is requested. The adult signing the reservation
application is the duly authorized representative and is responsible for
any and all damages, missing items and cleanup. The application shall
set forth the following information regarding the proposed exclusive
use:
(1) The name, address, telephone number and identification
information of the applicant.
(2) If the exclusive use is proposed for a group, firm, organization,
partnership or corporation; the name, address and telephone
number of the headquarters of the entity, and the responsible and
authorized heads or partners of the entity.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
responsible for the use of the park, area or facility.
(4) The purpose of the proposed use, the date when the exclusive use is
requested and the hours of the proposed exclusive use.
(5) The anticipated number of persons to use the park, area or facility.
(6) Any additional information the Village Clerk finds reasonably
necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be
issued.
D. If the use of the park, park facility or shelter area may be classified as a
special event, as defined in § 188-1 of this Municipal Code, a special
event permit must be obtained in addition to a park reservation.
E. Reservations for the exclusive use of a park, park facility, or shelter
area may be approved by the Village Clerk, except:
(1) If a special event permit is required, the Village Clerk shall not
approve the reservation until the special event permit is approved
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 188; and
(2) If the hours of the reservation vary from the closing times set forth
in § 170-1A, the Village Board must approve the reservation.
F. The Village Clerk shall act as promptly as reasonably may be on all
applications for reservations after consulting with the applicant, if
necessary.
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 188, Special Events.
§ 170-2 WATERFORD CODE § 170-2
159:256
G. The application shall be denied for any of the following reasons:
(1) If it is for a use which would involve a violation of federal or state
law or any provision of this Code.
(2) If the granting of the permit would conflict with another
reservation already granted or for which application is already
pending.
(3) If the application does not contain the information required by
Subsection C above.
H. The application may be denied for any of the following reasons:
(1) If the applicant is not a resident of the Village.
(2) If the exclusive use is proposed for a group, firm, organization,
partnership or corporation and the said group, firm, organization,
partnership or corporation does not have its headquarters,
principal place of business or hold regular meetings in the Village.
(3) If it is for a use of a park, park facility or shelter area at a date and
time when, in addition to the proposed use, anticipated
nonexclusive use by others of the park, park facility or shelter area
is expected and would be seriously adversely affected.
I. A reservation is not required for exclusive use of a park, park facility or
shelter area sponsored by the Village.
J. The person holding the reservation shall fully reimburse the Village for
any expenses it incurs to repair any damage to the park or park
facilities, to clean the reserved area at the expiration of the reservation,
to replace any keys or rekey any locks upon a failure of the reservation
holder to return any keys to the Village, and any costs incurred in
obtaining such reimbursement, including reasonable attorneys fees.
K. The Village Clerk, after granting a reservation, or, in any event, the
Village Board, may revoke a reservation already made if it is deemed
that such action is justified by an actual or potential emergency due to
weather, fire, riot, other catastrophe or likelihood of a breach of the
peace or by major change in the conditions forming the basis of the
reservation.
L. Each reservation shall be in a form prescribed by the Village Clerk and
shall designate the park, park facility or shelter area involved, date,
hours of the reservation, purpose of the reservation and the name of the
person, group, firm, organization, partnership or corporation to which
the reservation is granted.
M. Reservation fees and deposits.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection M(2), all applications for park
reservations shall be accompanied by a deposit according to the fee
§ 170-2 MINORS § 170-2
159:257
§ 170-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any regulation,
rule or order made hereunder, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code.
Chapter 174
schedule approved by the Village Board. The fees may be based on
residency. A refundable cleaning deposit, in an amount established
by the Village Board, shall also be required.
(2) Bona fide Waterford area youth and adult leagues shall be exempt
from reservation fees required by Subsection M(1) for routine
league play. All leagues shall be subject to the fees outlined under
this section when requesting exclusive use of ball diamonds for
tournament play, and may, in addition, be required to obtain a
special event permit. This exemption is not intended to exempt
these leagues from payment of other fees for the use of Village
facilities as determined by the Village Board. Schools and other
public nonprofit entities shall be exempt from permit fees required
by Subsection M(1) for picnics and similar gatherings. Exemption
under this subsection does not relieve an entity from the
responsibility for costs incurred by the Village under Subsection J.
(3) Cleaning deposits made pursuant to this subsection shall be
returned to the applicant if the facilities for which the permit was
issued are surrendered in a clean and undamaged condition upon
expiration of the reservation and all keys issued for access to the
facilities are returned to the Village on the next business day. In the
event the holder of the reservation is liable to the Village for any
loss or damage as provided in Subsection J, the amount thereof may
be retained from the deposit and the balance, if any, returned to the
reservation holder. Any deposit retained shall be deemed partial
satisfaction of the reservation holder's liability to the Village and
neither the retention of the deposit nor return thereof shall
preclude the Village from recovering the balance of the amount due
under Subsection J.
(4) The Public Works and Utilities Committee shall have the authority
to waive permit fees upon request by the applicant and
consideration of the Committee. In considering such requests, the
Committee shall consider the proposed location of the event,
whether or not the proposed event is open to the public, any
admission or participant fees to be charged, and whether or not the
event is sponsored by a governmental or by a not-for-profit
organization. [Amended 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 574]
N. Interference with reservations. No person shall interfere with or
encroach on any properly reserved area of any park.
§ 170-2 WATERFORD CODE § 170-3
159:258
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 87.
Carriage services — See Ch. 109.
Dances and dance halls — See Ch. 115.
Direct sellers — See Ch. 120.
Firearms and explosives — See Ch. 131.
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 148.
Minors — See Ch. 159.
Nuisances — See Ch. 165.
Traffic and parking — See Ch. 207.
§ 174-1. Offenses against state laws subject to forfeiture.
The following statutes defining offenses against the peace and good order of
the state are adopted by reference to define offenses against the peace and
good order of the municipality, provided the penalty for commission of such
offenses hereunder shall be limited to a forfeiture imposed under Chapter
1, Article II, of this Municipal Code:
Citation Subject
110.075(7) Producing/using inspection sticker fraudulently
134.06 Motor vehicles sales/bonus to chauffeur prohibited
175.25 Illegal storage of junked vehicles
218.0146 Used cars/prohibited acts
218.0147 Motor vehicles/sale to minor
254.76 Causing fires by tobacco smoking
285.30(2) Pollution by motor vehicle/failure to repair
287.81 Littering
346.935 Drinking in motor vehicles on highway
939.05 Aiding and abetting
939.22 Words and phrases defined
940.19(1) Battery
941.10 Negligent handling of burning material
941.12(2) and (3) Interfering with fire fighting
941.13 False alarms
941.20(1) Endangering safety by use of dangerous weapon
941.23 Carrying concealed weapon
941.24 Possession of switchblade knife
943.01(1) Damage to property
943.017(1) Graffiti [Added 4-24-2000 by Ord. No. 397]
§ 170-3 MINORS § 174-1
159:259
Citation Subject
943.11 Entry into locked vehicle [Added 4-24-2000 by Ord.
No. 397]
943.125 Entry into locked coin box [Added 4-24-2000 by Ord.
No. 397]
943.13 Trespass to land
943.14 Criminal trespass to dwellings
943.145 Criminal trespass to medical facility [Added
4-24-2000 by Ord. No. 397]
943.15 Entry onto a construction site or into a locked building,
dwelling or room [Added 4-24-2000 by Ord. No.
397]
943.20 Theft (value under $1,000)
943.22 Use of cheating tokens [Added 4-24-2000 by Ord.
No. 397]
943.24(1) Issue of worthless checks
943.50 Retail theft (value under $1,000)
943.55 Removal of shopping cart [Added 4-24-2000 by Ord.
No. 397]
943.61 Theft of library material (value under $1,000) [Added
4-24-2000 by Ord. No. 397]
944.15 Fornication
944.20 Lewd and lascivious behavior
944.23 Making lewd, obscene or indecent drawings
944.30 Prostitution
944.31 Patronizing prostitutes
944.33(1) Pandering
945.01 Definitions (relating to gambling)
945.02 Gambling
945.04 Permitting premises to be used for commercial
gambling
946.40 Refusing to aid officer
946.41 Resisting or obstructing officer
946.42(1) and (2) Escape
946.70 Impersonating peace officers
946.72(2) Tampering with public records and notices
947.01 Disorderly conduct
947.06 Unlawful assemblies and their suppression
§ 174-1 WATERFORD CODE § 174-1
159:260
Citation Subject
947.011 Disrupting a funeral or memorial service [Added
2-25-2008 by Ord. 525]
947.012 Unlawful use of telephone [Added 2-25-2008 by Ord.
525]
947.0125 Unlawful use of computerized communication systems
[Added 2-25-2008 by Ord. 525]
948.51 Hazing
ch. 951 Crimes against animals [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 490]
961.41 Possession of marijuana; prohibited acts — penalties
961.571 Definitions [Added 6-12-2006 by Ord. No. 499]
961.572 Determination [Added 6-12-2006 by Ord. No. 499]
961.573 Possession of drug paraphernalia [Added 6-12-2006
by Ord. No. 499]
961.574 Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia [Added
6-12-2006 by Ord. No. 499]
961.575 Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor [Added
6-12-2006 by Ord. No. 499]
§ 174-2. Aiding escape of prisoner prohibited.
No person shall assist, aid or abet any person in the custody of any police
or peace officer to escape from such custody.
§ 174-3. Interference with Village officials prohibited.
No person shall, without reasonable excuse or justification, resist or
interfere with any officer of the Village while such officer is doing any act in
his official capacity and with lawful authority.
§ 174-4. Power machinery safety precautions.
No person shall leave unattended in the Village any power machinery or
equipment operated by hydraulic, air, mechanical or hand power if any
moving or movable part is in a raised or extended position without having a
safety lock attached to avoid the accidental falling or lowering of such part.
§ 174-5. Harassment prohibited. [Added 7-14-2003 by Ord. No. 435]
A. State statute adopted. Wis. Stats. § 947.013(1m) is adopted and further
broadened as set forth herein,
B. Definition. As used in this section, the following term shall have the
meaning indicated:
§ 174-1 MINORS § 174-5
159:261
§ 174-6. (Reserved)61
§ 174-7. Operating motor vehicle so as to disturb peace; disorderly
conduct with motor vehicle. [Added 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
§ 174-7.1. Skateboarding. [Added 11-12-2007 by Ord. No. 521]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride a skateboard in the
following places:
§ 174-7.2. Residency and loitering restrictions for sex offenders.
[Added 8-8-2016 by Ord. No. 639; amended 7-24-2017 by Ord. No.
653]
COURSE OF CONDUCT — A pattern of conduct composed of a series
of acts (consisting of at least two acts) over a period of time, however
short, evidencing a continuity of purpose.
C. Harassment prohibited. No person, with intent to harass or intimidate
another person, may:
(1) Strike, shove, kick or otherwise subject the person to physical
contact or attempt or threaten to do the same; or
(2) Engage in a course of conduct or repeatedly commit acts which
harass or intimidate the person and which serve no legitimate
purpose. Such course of conduct or repeated acts may consist of
conduct which is solely verbal, solely physical, or a combination of
both.
A. No operator of any motor vehicle shall cause, by excessive and
unnecessary acceleration, the tires of such vehicle to spin and emit loud
noises or to unnecessarily throw stones or gravel, nor shall such
operator cause to be made by excessive and unnecessary acceleration
any loud noise such as would disturb the public peace.
B. No operator of any motor vehicle shall operate a vehicle in a manner
which demonstrates carelessness or indifference to the person or
property of the operator or of others, or in a manner which is careless,
unsafe, boisterous, raucous, unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly.
A. On any public property where signs are posted prohibiting such use.
B. On private property (open to the public) where signs are posted
prohibiting such use, unless written permission has been given by the
owner, lessee or person in charge of the property.
A. Findings and intent.
61.Editor's Note: Former § 174-6, Drinking in public, was repealed 9-10-2018 by Ord. No.
668.
§ 174-5 WATERFORD CODE § 174-7.2
159:262
(1) Findings. The Village Board finds that repeat sex offenders, sex
offenders who use physical violence and sex offenders who prey on
children are persons who present an extreme threat to the public
safety. Sex offenders often commit many offenses, have many more
victims than are ever reported, and are prosecuted for only a
fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sex offender
victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly
exorbitant.
(2) Intent.
(a) It is not the intent of the Village Board to punish sex offenders,
but rather to serve the Village's compelling interest to
promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the Village by creating areas around locations
where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers,
wherein certain sex offenders are prohibited from establishing
temporary or permanent residence.
(b) Due to the high rate of recidivism for sex offenders, and
because reducing both opportunity and temptation would help
minimize the risk of reoffense, there is a compelling need to
protect children where they congregate or play in public
places.
(c) The restrictions in this chapter are limited to, and intended to
apply, to the group of designated sex offenders, defined below,
who present the most risk to the community.
B. Definitions. In the interpretation and enforcement of this section, the
following definitions apply:
CHILD — A person under the age of 18 years.
CHILDCARE FACILITY — A childcare facility that is operated by a
person under Wis. Stats. § 48.65 or certified under § 48.651 or that is
established or contracted for under Wis. Stats. § 120.13(4).
CRIME AGAINST A CHILD — Any of the following offenses set forth
within the Wisconsin Statutes, as amended, or the laws of this or any
other state or the federal government, having like elements necessary
for conviction, respectively: s. 940.22(2) Sexual Exploitation by
Therapist; s. 940.30 False Imprisonment where victim was a minor and
not the offender's child; s. 940.31 Kidnapping where victim was minor
and not the offender's child; s. 944.01 Rape (prior statute); s. 944.06
Incest where the victim was a minor; s. 944.10 Sexual Intercourse with
a Child (prior statute); s. 944.11 Indecent Behavior With a Child (prior
statute); s. 944.12 Enticing Child for Immoral Purposes (prior statute);
s. 948.02(1) First Degree Sexual Assault of a Child; s. 948.02(2) Second
Degree Sexual Assault of a Child; s. 948.025 Engaging in Repeated Acts
of Sexual Assault of the Same Child; s. 948.05 Sexual Exploitation of
a Child; s. 948.051 Trafficking of a Child; s. 948.055 Causing a Child
to View or Listen to Sexual Activity; s. 948.06 Incest with a Child; s.
§ 174-7.2 MINORS § 174-7.2
159:263
948.07 Child Enticement; s. 948.075 Use of a Computer to Facilitate a
Child Sex Crime; s. 948.08 Soliciting a Child for Prostitution; s. 948.085
Sexual Assault of a Child Placed in Substitute Care; s. 948.095 Sexual
Assault of a Student by School Staff; s. 948.11(2)(a) or (am) Exposing
Child to Harmful Material, felony sections; s. 948.12 Possession of
Child Pornography; s. 948.13 Convicted Child Sex Offender Working
with Children; s. 948.30 Abduction of Another's Child; s. 971.17
Commitment of Persons Found Not Guilty by Reason of Mental Disease
or Mental Defect of an offense included herein; s. 975.06 Sex Crimes
Law Commitment for an offense included herein; and s. 980.01 Sexually
Violent Person Commitment for an offense included herein.
DESIGNATED SEX OFFENDER —
MINOR — For purposes of this section, a person under the age of 18
years.
PRIVATE PARK — A park, playground, recreational trail, boat launch,
or marina that is owned or maintained by a homeowners' association,
condominium association, church, private school, or private entity.
PUBLIC LIBRARY — A library regulated under Wis. Stats. Ch. 43.
PUBLIC PARK — A park, playground, recreational trail, boat launch, or
marina that is owned or maintained by the state or by a city, village,
town or county.
RESIDENCE (RESIDE) — A place where a person sleeps, which may
include more than one location, and may be mobile or transitory.
SCHOOL — A public school, parochial or private school, or tribal
school, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 115.001 (15m), which provides an
educational program for one or more grades between grades 4-K and
12 and which is commonly known as a preschool, elementary school,
middle school, junior high school, senior high school, or high school.
SCHOOL PREMISES — Any school building, grounds, recreation area
or athletic field or any other property owned, used or operated for
school administration.
SEXUALLY VIOLENT PERSON — Has the meaning set forth in Wis.
Stats. § 980.01(7).
Any person who is required to register under Wis. Stats. § 301.45
for any crime against a child, as defined herein or any person who
is required to register under Wis. Stats. § 301.45 and who is subject
to the special bulletin notification process set forth in Wis. Stats.
§§ 301.46(2) and (2m).
(1)
Any person subject to the Sex Crimes Commitment provisions of
Wis. Stats. § 975.06 or Sexually Violent Person Commitment set
forth in Wis. Stats. § 980.01.
(2)
Any person found not guilty by reason of disease or mental defect
placed on lifetime supervision under Wis. Stats. § 971.17 (1j).
(3)
§ 174-7.2 WATERFORD CODE § 174-7.2
159:264
YOUTH CENTER — Any center that provides, on a regular basis,
recreational, vocational, academic, or social services activities for
persons younger than 18 years old or for those persons and their
families.
C. Residency restrictions.
(1) Restrictions.
(a) A designated sex offender shall not establish a residence or
reside within 750 feet of any childcare facility, private park,
public park, public library, school, school premises, or youth
center, as defined in this section and as shown on the list of
Designated Sex Offender Prohibited Locations, unless a
greater restriction is required as set forth in Subsection
C(1)(b).
(b) The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 980.08 are adopted for persons
subject thereto.
(2) Map of restricted locations. The Village Clerk shall maintain an
official map showing Designated Sex Offender Prohibited Locations
set forth in Subsection C(1)(a). The Village Clerk shall update the
map at least annually to reflect any changes in the location of
prohibited locations. These shall be designated on the map as
"child safety zones."
(3) Measurement of distance. For the purposes of determining the
minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured
by following a straight line from the outer property line of the
residence to the nearest outer property line of the prohibited
location set forth in Subsection C(1). Where a multibuilding
development, such as a condominium, apartment complex, or
manufactured home park, contains more than one building on a
single lot, the measurement shall be taken by following a straight
line from the building containing the residence to the nearest outer
property line of the prohibited location set forth in Subsection C(1).
D. Residency restriction exceptions. A sex offender residing within a
prohibited area as described in Subsection C does not commit a
violation of this section if any of the following apply:
(1) The person established a permanent residence or temporary
residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to
Wis. Stats. § 301.45, before the effective day of this section.
(2) The person was under 17 years of age and not required to register
under Wis. Stats. §§ 301.45 or 301.46.
(3) The child-care facility, public library, private park, public park,
school, school premises, or youth center within 750 feet of the
person's permanent residence or temporary residence was opened
§ 174-7.2 MINORS § 174-7.2
159:265
after the person established the residence and reported and
registered the residence pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 301.45.
(4) The residence is also the primary residence of the person's spouse,
parents, grandparents, legal guardian if the person is a minor,
siblings or children, provided that the spouse, parents,
grandparents, legal guardian, siblings or children established the
residence at least one year before the designated sex offender
established residence at the location.
E. Loitering.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person defined as a designated sex
offender in Subsection B to loiter or prowl in any location specified
in Subsection C(1)(a) in a place, at a time, or a manner not usual for
law-abiding individuals, under circumstances that warrant alarm
for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the
circumstances which may be considered in determining whether
such alarm is warranted is the fact that the actor takes flight upon
appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself
or herself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or
any object. Unless flight by the actor or other circumstances makes
it impractical, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest
for an offense under this section, afford the actor an opportunity to
dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by
requesting him or her to identify himself or herself or explain his or
her presence and conduct at the aforementioned location. No
person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law
enforcement officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or
if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the actor was
true, and, if believed by the law enforcement officer at the time,
would have dispelled the alarm.
(2) Exceptions. The prohibitions set forth in Subsection E(1) shall not
apply where the actor was with his or her parent or other adult
person having his or her care, custody or control; or the actor was
exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, including freedom of speech, free exercise of religion
and the right of assembly.
F. Violations and penalties. See the general penalty provisions set forth
under Chapter 1 of this Municipal Code. Each day a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense. In addition:
(1) A person who violates any provision of Subsection C shall be
subject to a forfeiture of not less than $500 and no more than
$1,000 for each violation.
(2) Any person violating Subsection E shall forfeit not less than $1,000
and no more than $2,000 for each violation.
§ 174-7.2 WATERFORD CODE § 174-7.2
159:266
§ 174-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any regulation,
rule or order made hereunder, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code.
Chapter 178
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building, plumbing, electrical and
mechanical codes — See Ch. 98.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 142.
Nuisances — See Ch. 165.
Solid waste — See Ch. 186.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 223.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
(3) In addition, the Village may undertake all other legal and equitable
remedies available.
G. Severability. The provisions of this section shall be deemed severable
and it is expressly declared that the Village Board would have passed
the other provisions of this section irrespective of whether or not one or
more provisions may be declared invalid. If any provision of this section
or the application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
remainder of the section or the application of such other provisions to
other persons or circumstances shall not be affected.
§ 174-7.2 MINORS § 174-8
159:267

ARTICLE I
Residential Structures
§ 178-1. Unsafe and unsanitary buildings.
Whenever the Building Inspector finds any building or part thereof within
the Village to be in his judgment so old, dilapidated or so out of repair as to
be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use and so that it would be unreasonable to repair the same,
he shall order the owner to raze and remove such building or part thereof
or, if it can be made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or
to raze and remove at the owner's option. Such order and proceedings shall
be as provided in Wis. Stat. § 66.0413.
§ 178-2. Applicability of standards.
§ 178-3. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply only to the interpretation and
enforcement of this chapter:
APPROVED — Approved by or in accordance with regulations under this
chapter, enforced and interpreted by the Building Inspector or others as
indicated elsewhere in this chapter.
BASEMENT — A story having part, but not more than one-half, of its floor
to clear ceiling height below the average finished ground grade adjoining
the building walls. When a basement is used for storage garages for use of
occupants of the building or facilities common for the operation of the rest
of the building other than facilities for dwelling or lodging, it shall not be
counted as a story.
BEDROOM — A habitable room within the dwelling unit which is used or
intended to be used primarily for the purpose of sleeping.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The official of the Village appointed and
designated as the Building Inspector.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all structures in the Village
containing one or more rental dwelling units and to all dwelling units
which are either rented for human habitation or permitted by the owner
thereof to be occupied for human habitation by the owner or a person
other than the owner.
B. This chapter establishes minimum standards for the human habitation
or occupancy of premises in the Village and does not replace or modify
the standards otherwise established for the construction, replacement
or repair of buildings contained in the Building, Plumbing, Electrical
and Mechanical Code, except such as are in conflict with the provisions
of this chapter. 62
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 178-1 MINORS § 178-3
159:269
CELLAR — A story having more than one-half of the floor to clear ceiling
height below the average finished ground grade at the building walls. A
cellar is not included in computing the number of stories for the purpose of
height measurement.
DWELLING UNIT — A suite of habitable rooms, occupied by or intended to
be occupied by not more than one family as a residence and forming a single
habitable unit with cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
ENGINEER, VILLAGE — The official of the Village appointed and
designated as the Village Engineer.
FAMILY — The body of persons who live together in one dwelling unit as a
single housekeeping entity.63
HABITABLE ROOM — Every room in any building in which persons sleep,
eat or carry on their usual domestic or social vocations or avocations,
but shall not include private laundries, bathrooms, toilet rooms, pantries,
storerooms, corridors, rooms for mechanical equipment for service in the
building or other similar spaces not used by persons frequently or during
extended periods.
HEALTH OFFICER — The person appointed and designated as the Health
Officer pursuant to § 50-18.64
OWNER — Any person, firm or corporation who alone, jointly or severally
with others shall own or have charge, care or control of any dwelling unit
within the Village as owner, lessee, employee or agent of the owner or as
trustee or guardian of the estate or person of the title holder and all such
other persons shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter
to the same extent as the owner.
RENTED PREMISES — All premises which are actually rented under verbal
or written lease to one or more tenants and also to the use of premises by
one or more persons other than the owner thereof, who may be permitted
by such owner to occupy such premises rent free or without consideration
being paid to the owner for such use.
§ 178-4. Minimum standards for lighting, ventilation and heating.
No person shall occupy as owner or occupant or let to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein
which does not comply with the following requirements:
A. Every habitable room, kitchen, bathroom and toilet room shall have a
window or windows with a total glass area equal to at least 8% of its
floor area unless, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, the structure
of the building precludes the use of windows, in which case other
means of lighting and ventilation approved by the Building Inspector
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 178-3 WATERFORD CODE § 178-4
159:270
may be used. Such windows shall open onto a street, alley, yard, court
or easement open to the sky. Such window or windows shall be so
constructed that at least one-half may be fully opened and so that
the sash can be opened and securely closed. Approved mechanical
ventilation may be substituted.
B. Every public hall and stairway of every dwelling containing four or
more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted by means of properly
located electric light fixtures at all times, provided that such electrical
lighting may be omitted from sunrise to sunset where there are
windows or skylights opening directly to the outside and where the total
window or skylight area is at least one-tenth of the combined horizontal
area of such hall and stairway and if such skylights provide adequate
natural light to all parts of each such public pathway. Every public hall
and stairway in dwellings containing two or three dwelling units shall
be supplied with convenient light switches controlling adequate
lighting systems, which may be turned on when needed instead of fulltime
lighting. Adequate bulbs shall be provided in every public hall and
on every public stairway so that a minimum of two footcandles of light is
delivered to all parts in the public hall or stairway.
C. At least one window in each bedroom, bathroom and kitchen shall be
supplied with a screen covering at least 33% of the window area,
provided that such screens shall not be required in rooms deemed by
the Building Inspector to be located sufficiently high in the upper
stories of dwellings as to be free of mosquitoes, flies and other flying
insects. Such screens shall have a wire mesh not less than number 16
or, in lieu thereof, mechanical ventilation. [Amended 9-22-2014 by
Ord. No. 621]
D. Every kitchen and habitable room within every dwelling or dwelling
unit shall contain at least two separate wall-type electric convenience
outlets or one such convenient outlet and one supplied ceiling or walltype
electric light fixture. Every toilet room, bathroom, furnace room,
laundry room and public hall shall contain at least one supplied ceilingtype
or wall-type electric light fixture. Every outlet and fixture shall be
installed and maintained in good working condition and connected with
the source of electric power in conformance with Chapter 98, Building,
Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical Codes, of this Municipal Code.
These must be serviced by approved wiring.
E. Each dwelling unit shall have supplied heating facilities and such
facilities shall be properly installed, maintained in reasonably good
working condition and capable of adequately heating all habitable
rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms contained therein where intended
for use by the occupants thereof to a temperature of at least 68° F. at a
distance of three feet above floor level when the outdoor temperature is
at 10° below 0° F. Every supplied central heating system shall comply
with the following requirements:
§ 178-4 MINORS § 178-4
159:271
§ 178-5. Responsibility of owners to maintain dwellings and
dwelling units.
No person shall occupy, let or offer to let to another for occupancy any
dwelling unit or portion thereof for the purpose of living therein which does
not comply with the following requirements:
(1) The central heating unit shall be in reasonably good operating
condition.
(2) Every heat duct, steam pipe and hot water pipe shall be free of
leaks and shall function so that an adequate amount of heat is
delivered where intended.
A. Every foundation, exterior wall and roof shall be reasonably
weathertight and rodent-proof and kept in a good state of maintenance
and repair.
B. Every interior partition wall, floor and ceiling shall be capable of
affording privacy, kept in a reasonably good state of repair and
maintained so as to permit them to be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
C. All water shall be conveyed and drained from every roof and structure
so as not to cause dampness or damage to the exterior or interior of the
structure. Such water, including sump pump drainage, shall be drained
and directed in a manner which will in no way damage the adjoining
premises. [Amended 4-10-2006 by Ord. No. 494]
D. Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be
reasonably weathertight and rodent-proof and shall be kept in
reasonably good working condition and a good state of maintenance
and repair.
E. All exterior surfaces shall be protected from the elements and against
decay and deterioration by paint or by other approved protective
coating applied in workmanlike fashion.
F. Every inside and outside stairway, porch and appurtenance thereto
shall be so constructed as to be reasonably safe to use and capable of
supporting such a load as normal use may cause to be placed thereon
and shall be kept in sound condition and a reasonably good state of
maintenance and repair.
G. Every supplied plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be
properly installed and maintained in good, sanitary working condition.
H. Every chimney and supplied smoke pipe shall be adequately supported,
reasonably clean and maintained in a reasonably good state of repair.
I. Every toilet room floor surface and bathroom floor surface shall be
maintained so as to be reasonably impervious of water and so as to
permit such floors to be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
§ 178-4 WATERFORD CODE § 178-5
159:272
§ 178-6. Minimum space use and location requirements.
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does not comply with
the following requirements:
J. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required
under this chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it shall
function properly and shall be maintained in reasonably good working
condition.
K. No owner or operator shall cause any service facility, equipment or
utility which is required to be supplied under the provisions of this
chapter to be removed from, shut off from or disconnected from any
occupied dwelling or dwelling unit let or occupied by him except for
such temporary interruptions as may be necessary while actual repairs,
replacement or alterations are in the process of being made.
L. Every owner of a building containing one or more dwelling units shall
be responsible for the extermination of insects, rodents or pests on the
premises. Wherever infestation exists in any of the dwellings or in the
shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling
units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
M. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall
be responsible for maintaining in a reasonably clean, sanitary condition
all communal, shared or public areas of dwellings or premises thereof
which are used or shared by the occupants of two or more dwelling
units.
N. No owner shall occupy, rent to any other person for occupancy or allow
any other person to occupy any vacant dwelling unit unless it is
reasonably clean and sanitary and complies with all provisions of this
chapter and all rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
O. A written contract assigning any or all of the above responsibilities to
the occupant shall be deemed sufficient to place the responsibilities of
this article upon the occupant.
A. No dwelling unit shall be occupied by more than one family, including
two occupants who are not related to the family.
B. At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a
ceiling height of not less than seven feet six inches, and the floor area of
that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than seven feet six
inches shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the
total area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum
permissible occupancy or habitable area.
C. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 160 square feet of floor space
for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 square feet of additional
floor space for every additional occupant.
§ 178-5 MINORS § 178-6
159:273
§ 178-7. Responsibility of owners to maintain nondwelling
structures, fences and premises.
No owner shall permit any nondwelling structure or fence to exist on
any premises or maintain any premises which does not comply with the
following requirements:
D. No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms
shall have such room arrangement that access to a bathroom or toilet
room intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can
be had only by going through another sleeping room, nor shall such
room arrangements exist that access to a sleeping room can be had only
by going through another sleeping room or bathroom or a toilet room.
E. In every dwelling unit at least one room occupied for sleeping purposes
by one or more occupants shall contain at least 100 square feet of floor
space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than
one occupant shall contain at least 40 square feet of floor space for each
occupant thereof.
F. Every occupant of every dwelling unit shall have unrestricted access to
a toilet and to a kitchen sink or lavatory basin located within the
dwelling unit.
G. No basement or cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or
dwelling unit unless: [Amended 4-10-2006 by Ord. No. 494]
(1) The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness.
(2) The total window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum window area size, location, and other requirements of the
Uniform Dwelling Code for such areas.
A. All exterior surfaces of nondwelling structures shall be properly
protected from the elements and against decay and decomposition by
paint or other approved protective coating applied in a workmanlike
manner.
B. Every fence shall be kept in a good state of maintenance and repair or
shall be removed. See also § 245-14. [Amended 2-9-2004 by Ord. No.
443]
C. Every lot shall be graded and maintained so that all water is diverted
away from buildings and drained from the lot and so as to prevent
standing water and soil saturation detrimental to structures and lot use.
Such water, including sump pump drainage, shall be drained and
directed in a manner which will in no way damage the adjoining
premises. [Amended 4-10-2006 by Ord. No. 494]
D. The entirety of every driveway and parking area shall be paved within
18 months after an occupancy permit is issued or within one year after
§ 178-6 WATERFORD CODE § 178-7
159:274
§ 178-8. Inspection by Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector or his designated representative is authorized to
make, and upon receipt of complaint shall make, exterior inspections to
determine whether the buildings, structures and premises located within
the Village conform to the requirements of this chapter. For the purpose of
making exterior inspections, the Building Inspector is authorized to enter,
examine and survey at all reasonable times the exterior portions of all
buildings, structures or premises. Every owner or occupant shall give the
Building Inspector free access to any such premises. The Building Inspector
or his delegated representative, having probable cause to believe a violation
of this chapter exists, shall have authority to enter any of such premises
after written notice has been given to the owner, occupant or his agent. If
after such notice is given access is denied to the Building Inspector, he may
apply to the circuit court for a special inspection warrant.
§ 178-9. Enforcement; identification and conduct of Building
Inspector.
the public road servicing the property is completed, whichever event
occurs later, with a permanent surface consisting of either 2 1/2 inches
of asphaltic concrete over a six-inch crushed stone base, four inches
of cement concrete over a four-inch crushed stone base, or, if no stone
base is installed, six inches of cement concrete. [Amended 2-9-2004
by Ord. No. 442; 4-10-2006 by Ord. No. 494]
E. All open spaces or areas of lots containing a dwelling unit for which an
occupancy permit has been issued shall be seeded or sodded with
grass, except for such areas set aside for and planted with trees,
shrubbery and gardens, within two years after an occupancy permit
was issued. [Amended 2-9-2004 by Ord. No. 442]
F. Every premises shall be maintained in a presentable and reasonably
well-kept condition. Every lawn and property shall be kept mowed, and
every tree, shrubbery or garden area shall be kept free of weeds
pursuant to Chapter 95 of this Municipal Code. [Amended 2-9-2004
by Ord. No. 442; 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 571]
G. No person shall store firewood in the front yard, required side yard,
side yard area that adjoins a public street or within 10 feet of the rear
lot line on any lot in a residential district, except that a person may
temporarily, not to exceed 14 days, store firewood in the front yard.
A. The Building Inspector is hereby made responsible for the enforcement
of this chapter. All inspections, enforcement, orders or matters relating
to violations of this chapter shall be under his direction and supervision.
He may appoint or designate such other public officials or employees of
the Village to perform duties as may be necessary to the enforcement.
B. The Building Inspector shall be supplied with official identification and,
upon request, shall exhibit such identification when entering any
§ 178-7 MINORS § 178-9
159:275
§ 178-10. Notice. [Amended 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 625]
Whenever the Building Inspector determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this
chapter, written notice of such alleged violation shall be given to the owner
of the property, as follows:
§ 178-11. Placarding buildings.
premises subject to this chapter. The Inspector shall conduct himself as
to avoid intentional embarrassment or inconvenience to occupants.
A. Except as set forth in Subsection C, the notice shall be in writing;
include the tax identification number and address of the property;
include a statement of the violation(s) and why the notice is being
issued; and include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to
make the repairs and improvements required to bring the premises up
to compliance with this chapter. The notice shall advise the owner of the
right to request a hearing before the Village Board and that the notice
shall become an order of the Building Inspector five days after receipt
unless such a hearing is requested within five days after the notice was
received. The notice shall notify the person responsible of the right of
the Village, in the event the violation continues, to perform the work
and charge the cost thereof as a special charge pursuant to § 178-12
and § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
B. For all violations that do not include a raze order, the notice shall be
delivered personally or sent by priority mail with delivery confirmation
(USPS tracking), addressed to the owner's last known address; or, if the
notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy
thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the structure affected
by the notice.
C. A notice to raze, or to raze or repair a property under § 178-1 shall
conform to the requirements of § 66.0413, Wis. Stats.
A. The Building Inspector shall cause to be placed upon a building,
structure or premises a placard which will state the determinations of
the Building Inspector as to the building, structure or premises being
unfit for use or occupancy whenever all of the following occur:
(1) Any building, structure or premises does not substantially comply
with the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Building Inspector has given notice of the violations involved
as provided for in § 178-10.
(3) The owner, occupant or operator has failed to correct the violations
set forth in such notice.
(4) The Building Inspector has further determined that the building,
structure or premises is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsafe
§ 178-9 WATERFORD CODE § 178-11
159:276
§ 178-12. Noncompliance; remedy of defects.
§ 178-13. Transfer of ownership of noncomplying buildings.
No owner of any building, structure or premises who has received a
compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served shall
sell, transfer, mortgage, leave or otherwise dispose of to another until the
provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied
or vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or
safety of the occupants or of the public and is therefore unfit for
use or occupancy.
B. The form of the placard placed under the provisions of this section shall
be determined by the Building Inspector but shall also substantially
state the specific violations of this chapter.
C. No person shall deface or remove the placard from any building,
structure or premises which has been placed by the Building Inspector
until removal of such placard is authorized by the Building Inspector.
D. Any building, structure or premises which has been determined by the
Building Inspector as being so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsafe
or vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health and
safety of the occupants and which such building, structure or premises
has been placarded by the Building Inspector shall be vacated within
such reasonable time as is determined and ordered by the Building
Inspector.
E. No building, structure or premises which has been determined by the
Building Inspector as unfit for use or occupancy and placarded as
provided herein shall again be used or occupied until written approval
is secured from and such placard is removed by the Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector shall grant such approval and remove such
placard in the event that the violations have been corrected and the
Building Inspector determines that the building, structure or premises
is now fit for use or occupancy.
A. The owner, occupant or operator of any building, structure or premises
shall have the time as specified in the notice under § 178-10 to remedy
the violations specified in such notice.
B. In the event the Building Inspector shall determine in his discretion that
the owner, occupant or operator is within such time making a good faith
effort to correct the violation, he may extend the time for compliance.
C. If the owner, occupant or operator of building, structure or premises
shall fail or refuse after notice and order of the Building Inspector to
remedy the violations specified in such notice, the Building Inspector
may cause such work to be done and certify the cost thereof to the
Village Clerk, who shall extend such cost against the property upon the
next tax roll of the Village. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
§ 178-11 MINORS § 178-13
159:277
with or until such owner shall first furnish to the Building Inspector a
signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee
or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of
violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making
the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of
violation.
§ 178-13 WATERFORD CODE § 178-13
159:278
ARTICLE II
Nonresidential Structures
§ 178-14. Maintenance of structures, premises and accessory
buildings.
A. Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum
conditions for maintenance of those structures, premises and accessory
buildings within the Village not covered by §§ 178-1 through 178-13,
including, but not limited to, commercial and industrial structures,
premises and accessory buildings. All structures, premises and
accessory buildings within the Village subject hereto shall comply with
the conditions herein prescribed insofar as they are applicable.
B. Adoption of sections.
(1) The following sections shall be made a part herein, incorporated
herein and shall apply to all structures, premises and accessory
buildings subject hereto:
§ 178-1 Unsafe and unsanitary buildings
§ 178-3 Definitions
§ 178-8 Inspection by Building Inspector
§ 178-9 Enforcement; identification and conduct of
Building Inspector
§ 178-10 Notice
§ 178-11 Placarding buildings
§ 178-12 Noncompliance; remedy of defects
§ 178-13 Transfer of ownership of noncomplying buildings
(2) The sections listed in Subsection B(1) are for the purpose of
establishing minimum standards for structures, premises and
accessory buildings subject hereto and do not replace or modify the
standards otherwise established for the construction, replacement,
repair or use of buildings contained in Chapters 98, Building,
Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical Codes, and 245, Zoning, or
other applicable ordinances, statutes or regulations, except as such
are in conflict with the provisions of this article.
C. Maintenance of vacant structures and land.
(1) Clean and sanitary. All vacant structures, premises and accessory
buildings and yards connected thereto shall be maintained in a
clean, safe and sanitary condition.
(2) Exterior and interior maintenance. [Amended 10-24-1994 by
Ord. No. 306; 9-11-1995 by Ord. No. 320]
(a) Exteriors maintained. The exteriors of the vacant structures,
premises and accessory buildings must be maintained in the
§ 178-14 MINORS § 178-14
159:279
same manner as if they were in use so as not to cause a
blighting effect on the neighborhood.
(b) Interiors maintained. The interiors of the vacant structures,
premises and accessory buildings must be maintained in the
same manner as if they were in use so as not to cause a
blighting effect on the neighborhood.
(c) With respect to the requirements of Subsection C(2)(a) and (b)
above set forth, in addition to all other prohibited conduct, and
in addition to all other proscribed conduct, there shall be a
specific prohibition against the use of materials to cover
windows and door openings in a manner other than would be
appropriate in the course of conduct were the structure
occupied, in the discretion of the Building Inspector, as well as
a prohibition against the use of materials which are in a
condition of disrepair so as to cause a blighting effect upon the
neighborhood. Further, in addition to the enforcement
procedures set forth specifically elsewhere in this chapter, the
Village Building Inspector, together with the Village Plumbing
Inspector, the Village Electrical Inspector, and the Village
Health Officer, as well as the Village Fire Inspector, shall, upon
notice to the owner which is reasonable under the
circumstances, have the right to enter the premises from time
to time to inspect with regard to safety from fire hazard, health
hazard, and structural hazard, and violations determined in
such inspections shall be brought to the attention to the Village
Attorney for the purposes of prosecution under this and other
enforcement sections of this code.
(3) Closed condition; sanitary considerations.
(a) Owner's responsibility. The owner shall have the responsibility
for maintaining all structures, premises and accessory
buildings and yards attached thereto:
[1] Free from rubbish, debris or material which might
constitute a fire hazard.
[2] Free from rodents or vermin or any food or other material
which may attract rodents or vermin.
[3] All such structures, except accessory buildings, shall be
kept in a locked or closed condition so that they cannot be
entered without an unlawful break-in.
(b) Notice; assessment. If, after a reasonable notice, the owner
fails to maintain the property in a closed condition or free of
material which can constitute a fire hazard or an attraction for
rodents or vermin, the Building Inspector may request the
Department of Public Works, either by Village personnel or by
§ 178-14 WATERFORD CODE § 178-14
159:280
§ 178-15. Condition of premises.
§ 178-16. Exterior structure.
contract, to correct the situation and charge the cost thereof
upon the tax rolls of the property.
A. Sanitation.
(1) All exterior property areas and premises shall be maintained free
from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
(2) Every owner of any structure, premises or accessory building shall
furnish the premises with adequate garbage and rubbish storage
and disposal facilities.
B. Premises landscaped, drained and graded.
(1) Required maintenance. Every premises shall be graded and
drained so no stagnant water will accumulate or stand on the
premises or within any building or structure located on the
premises, and every premises shall be continuously maintained in a
sanitary, erosion-free and dust-free condition by suitable
landscaping with grass, tree, shrubs or other planted ground cover,
by paving with asphalt, concrete; or by such suitable means as shall
be approved by the Building Inspector.
(2) Leased premises. Where a premises is leased from the owner, the
continued maintenance of the premises in the above condition shall
also be the responsibility of the lessee.
(3) Enforcement. Whenever a premises is not in compliance with
Subsection B(1), the Building Inspector shall give 30 days' notice to
the owner or owners or the agent of such owners and the lessee, if
any, of the premises to correct the violation. If such violation is not
corrected, the Building Inspector shall have the power and hereby
is authorized and directed, after the expiration of such thirty-day
notice and noncompliance therewith, to cause such premises to be
landscaped, seeded and/or sodded, as necessary, by the
Department of Public Works at the expense of the owner.
(4) New construction. All yards or premises shall be suitably graded
and landscaped so as to comply with this subsection within one
year after completion of construction of the principal building.
C. Public areas. All sidewalks, steps, driveways, parking spaces and
similar paved or gravel areas for public use shall be kept in a proper
state of repair and free of all debris.
D. Fences. Every fence shall be maintained in a good state of repair.
A. General. The exterior of the structure or accessory building shall be
maintained in a structurally sound and sanitary manner.
§ 178-14 MINORS § 178-16
159:281
B. Structural members. All supporting structural members of all
structures shall be kept structurally sound, free of deterioration and
maintained, capable of safely bearing the dead and live loads imposed
upon them.
C. All exterior surfaces. Every foundation, exterior wall and roof shall be
weathertight, watertight, rodent-proof and insect-proof and shall be
kept in a good state of maintenance and repair.
(1) Wooden surfaces protected. All exterior wood surfaces shall be
reasonably protected from the elements and against decay by paint
or other approved protective coating applied in a workmanlike
manner.
(2) Ferrous metal surfaces protected. All ferrous metal surfaces shall
be properly surface-coated when required to prevent deterioration.
(3) Cornices, entablatures, etc. All cornices, entablatures, belt
courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar
decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper
anchorage and in a safe condition.
(4) Signs, marquees and awnings. All canopies, marquees, signs, metal
awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts and
similar overhang extensions shall be maintained in good repair and
be properly anchored so as to be kept in a safe and sound condition.
They shall be protected from the elements and against decay and
rust by the periodic application of a weather-coating material, such
as paint or other protective treatment.
(5) Chimneys and supplied smoke pipes. Every chimney and every
supplied smoke pipe shall be adequately supported, reasonably
clean and maintained in a reasonably good state of repair.
(6) Stairways.
(a) Every inside and outside stairway, every porch and every
appurtenance thereto shall be constructed as to be reasonably
safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use
may cause to be placed thereon and shall be kept in sound
condition and in a reasonably good state of maintenance and
repair.
(b) Every exit from every structure or accessory building shall
comply with the following requirements:
[1] It shall be unobstructed at all times.
[2] All exit stairways of more than three risers shall have at
least one handrail, and all stairways which are five feet or
more in width or which are open on both sides shall have a
handrail on each side. Stairways which are less than five
§ 178-16 WATERFORD CODE § 178-16
159:282
§ 178-17. Interior structure.
feet in width shall have a handrail on the left-hand side as
one mounts the stairs on the open side, if any.
[3] All handrails shall not be less than 30 inches vertically
above the nose of the stair treads and not less than 42
inches above the stairway platforms.
[4] Every stairway of every structure or accessory building
shall be provided with convenient light switches
controlling an adequate lighting system which may be
turned on when needed.
D. Windows, doors and basement hatchways.
(1) In good repair. Every window, exterior door and basement
hatchway shall be reasonably weathertight and rodent-proof and
shall be kept in a reasonably good state of maintenance and repair.
(2) Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall
be capable of being easily opened and shall be held in position by
window hardware.
(3) Insect screens.
(a) Every window required for ventilation, including bath and
toilet rooms, shall be supplied with approved screening
covering at least 33 1/3% of window area, except that such
screens shall not be required for window areas above the fifth
floor.
(b) Every structure having two or more basement windows shall
have at least two window screens which cover the entire
window. Where there is only one basement window, it shall be
similarly screened. Such screens shall have a wire mesh of not
less than number 16.
(4) Door hardware. Every exterior door, door hinge and door latch
shall be maintained in good condition. Door locks shall be in good
repair and capable of tightly securing the door.
E. All water shall be conveyed and drained from every roof and structure
so as not to cause dampness or damage to the exterior or interior of the
structure. Such water, including sump pump drainage, shall be drained
and directed in a manner which will in no way damage the adjoining
premises. [Amended 4-10-2006 by Ord. No. 494]
F. Roof gutters and conductors required. Except for private detached
accessory buildings not more than 1,000 square feet in area, all roofs of
all buildings and structures shall be provided with approved type
gutters and conductors. Such gutters and conductors shall be properly
installed and maintained in good repair at all times.
§ 178-16 MINORS § 178-17
159:283
A. General. The interior of a structure and its equipment shall be
maintained structurally sound and in a sanitary condition.
B. Structural members. The supporting structural members of every
building shall be maintained structurally sound, not showing any
evidence of deterioration which would render them incapable of
carrying the imposed loads.
C. Interior surfaces.
(1) To be clean. Every interior partition, wall, floor and ceiling shall be
kept in a reasonably good state of repair and maintained so as to
permit them to be kept in a clean and sanitary manner.
(2) Bathrooms and kitchens. Every toilet, bathroom and kitchen floor
surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be
substantially impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to
be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
D. Free from dampness. In every building, cellars, basements and crawl
spaces shall be maintained reasonably free from dampness to prevent
conditions conducive to decay or deterioration of the structure.
E. Sanitation. The interior of every structure shall be maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition, free from any accumulation of rubbish, refuse or
garbage. Rubbish, garbage and other refuse shall be properly kept
inside temporary storage facilities as required.
F. Insect and rodent harborage. All structures shall be kept free from
insect and rodent infestation, and where insects or rodents are found,
they shall be promptly exterminated by acceptable processes which will
not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper
precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation.
G. Exit facilities. All exterior stairs and railings and other exit facilities of
every structure shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair
by replacing treads and risers that evidence excessive wear or are
broken, warped or loose. Every inside stair shall be so constructed and
maintained as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the
anticipated loads.
§ 178-17 WATERFORD CODE § 178-17
159:284
ARTICLE III
Penalty
§ 178-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter or any
regulation, rule or order made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code. Each violation and
each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
This section shall not preclude the Village from maintaining any appropriate
action to prevent or remove a violation of this chapter.
§ 178-18 MINORS § 178-18
159:285
Chapter 182
SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 154.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 174.
Special events — See Ch. 188.
§ 178-18 WATERFORD CODE § 178-18
159:286
ARTICLE I
Direct Sellers
[Amended 9-24-2007 by Ord. No. 519; 3-10-2014 by Ord. No. 615]
§ 182-1. Permit required.
No direct seller shall engage in direct sales within the Village without
obtaining a permit for that purpose as provided herein.
§ 182-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic
or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation for whom
or which there is provided proof of tax-exempt status pursuant to Section
501(c)(3) or (4) of the United States Internal Revenue Code.
CLERK — The Clerk of the Village of Waterford.
DIRECT SELLER — Any person who, individually or for a partnership,
association, corporation or other entity, sells goods or services or takes
sales orders for later delivery of goods or services at any location other than
the permanent business place or residence of the individual, partnership,
association, corporation or other entity. The sale of goods and services
includes donations requested or required by the direct seller for the
retention of goods or services by a donor or prospective customer. Solicitors
and transient merchants, as defined herein, are direct sellers.
GOODS AND/OR SERVICES — Includes personal property of any kind,
merchandise, materials, services of any nature, goods provided incidental
to services offered or sold, products, insurance, and anything else offered
for sale by a direct seller. The sale of goods includes donations required by
the seller for the retention of goods or services by a donor or prospective
customer.
PERIOD OF HEAVY TRAFFIC CONGESTION — The periods of time between
6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between 3:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. have been
determined by the Village to be periods of heavy traffic congestion in the
downtown area through Village observation and through the traffic studies
conducted by Strand Associates, Inc., and set forth in the "Report for
Wisconsin Department of Transportation, WIS 20 Alternate Route Analysis"
dated August 2010.
PERMANENT MERCHANT — A direct seller or one representing a direct
seller who, for at least six months prior to the submission of an application
pursuant to this chapter, has continuously operated an established place of
business in this Village or has continuously resided in this Village and now
does business from his/her residence.
SOLICITOR — Any individual who, for him-/herself or any other person,
organization, society, association or corporation, personally solicits money,
§ 182-1 MINORS § 182-2
159:287
property or financial assistance of any kind from persons other than
members of such organization, society, association or corporation.
SPECIAL EVENT VENDOR — A vendor, solicitor, transient merchant or
direct seller doing business at a special event under the supervision of a
person or entity that holds a special event permit issued under Chapter 188
of this Municipal Code.65 The special event vendor must be sponsored by the
holder of the special event permit and must receive written authorization to
operate at the special event.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any individual who engages in the retail sale
of goods at any place in this state temporarily and who does not intend
to become and does not become a permanent merchant of such place. For
purposes of this chapter, sale of merchandise includes a sale in which the
personal services rendered upon or in connection with the merchandise
constitutes the greatest part of value for the price received, but does not
include a farm auction sale of personal property used on the farm or the sale
of produce or other perishable products at retail or wholesale by a resident
of this state.
§ 182-3. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this article:
A. Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods
to regular customers on established routes.
B. Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods.
C. Any person selling agricultural products which such person has grown.
D. Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders away
from the established place of business for goods regularly offered for
sale by such merchant within this county and who delivers such goods
in their regular course of business.
E. Any person who has an established place of business where the goods
being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis, and in which the
buyer has initiated contact with, and specifically requested a home visit
by such person.
F. Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has
had, a prior business transaction such as a prior sale or credit
arrangement, with the prospective customer.
G. Any person offering a direct sale only to businesses. If a building
contains both a business and a dwelling, the direct seller may not call
on the dwelling without a permit.
H. Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court
and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law.
65.Editor's Note: See Ch. 188, Special Events.
§ 182-2 WATERFORD CODE § 182-3
159:288
§ 182-4. Application for permit.
I. Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who
engages in direct sales for or on behalf of such organization, provided
that there is submitted to the Clerk proof that such charitable
organization is registered under § 440.42, Wis. Stats. Any charitable
organization not registered under § 440.42, Wis. Stats. or which is
exempt from that statute's registration requirements, unless the
organization is exempt from said requirements and has a permanent
location within the Village limits, shall be required to obtain a permit
under this article.
J. Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant, but against whom
complaint has been made to the Clerk that such person is a transient
merchant; provided that there is submitted to the Clerk proof that such
person has leased for at least one year or purchased the premises from
which he/she is conducting business, or proof that such person has
conducted such business in this Village for at least one year prior to the
date complaint was made.
K. Special event vendors. Special event vendors, as defined in § 182-2, are
exempt from the provisions of this article, except:
(1) Special event vendors who do not have a place of business in the
Village of Waterford and prepare food on site or sell food that is not
prepackaged. (Vendors selling raw produce grown in Wisconsin are
exempt.)
(2) Special event vendors who are not legal residents of the State of
Wisconsin or who do not have a permanent place of business in the
State of Wisconsin.
L. A person engaged in activity involving the exercise of the person's
rights protected under the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution or Article I of the Constitution of the State of Wisconsin, or
both, such as freedom of speech, the distribution or sales of printed
material, or the right of assembly.
M. A person who has a current statewide peddler's license for ex-soldiers
as provided in § 440.51, Wis. Stats.
A. Applicants for permits shall complete and return to the Clerk an
application form furnished by the Clerk which shall require the
following information:
(1) Name, permanent address and telephone number, and temporary
address, if any.
(2) Age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes.
§ 182-3 MINORS § 182-4
159:289
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the person, partnership,
association, corporation or other entity that the direct seller
represents or is employed by or whose merchandise is being sold.
(4) Temporary address and telephone number from which business will
be conducted, if any.
(5) Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the
goods offered and any services offered.
(6) Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable.
(7) Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by
applicant in the conduct of his/her business.
(8) Last cities, villages, towns, not to exceed three, where applicant
conducted similar business.
(9) Place where applicant can be contacted for at least seven days
after leaving this Village.
(10) Statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any crime
or ordinance violation related to applicant's direct seller activities
within the last five years; the nature of the offense and the place of
conviction.
B. Applicants shall present to the Clerk for examination:
(1) A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be
reasonably required.
(2) A state certificate of examination and approval from the Sealer of
Weights and Measures where applicant's business requires use of
weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities.
(3) Any applicable state, Health Department or other certificate where
applicant's business involves the handling of goods or food and is
required to be certified under state law valid on the date the
application for license is made and at least through the end of the
period during which the applicant will do business in the Village.
[Amended 9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 621]
(4) A current seller's permit issued by the Wisconsin Department of
Revenue, if applicable.
(5) Information reasonably necessary to investigate other licensing
required by the state for the type of direct sales activities intended
by the applicant.
C. At the time the application is submitted, a fee in an amount set by the
Village Board shall be paid to the Treasurer to cover the cost of
processing the application.
D. Bond.
§ 182-4 WATERFORD CODE § 182-4
159:290
§ 182-5. Issuance of permit; investigation; denial.
(1) No permit shall be issued unless the applicant files a surety bond by
a bonding company authorized to do business in this state. Every
such bond filed with the Village Clerk shall contain an endorsement
that the same shall not be cancelled by the obligor, shall not expire
and shall not be reduced in amount until 10 days after notice
thereof by registered U.S. mail has been sent to the Village Clerk.
Upon receipt of such notice, the Village Clerk shall immediately
send the permit holder at his or her last known address by
registered U.S. mail, return receipt requested, a notice advising
that unless a new bond is filed, the permit shall be revoked at the
time such cancellation, expiration or reduction becomes effective.
If a new bond is not filed in accordance with such notice, the Village
Clerk must revoke the permit at such time.
(2) The surety bond shall be in the penal sum of $5,000 and in such
form as may be prescribed by the Village Clerk for the purpose of
protecting the public against fraud. The bond shall be conditioned
to pay any judgment that may be obtained against the permit
holder for civil liability arising out of engaging in the business or
occupation of the permit holder within the Village.
(3) In lieu of the surety bond provided under Subsection E(1) and (2),
the applicant may deposit with the Village Clerk a certified check in
the amount of $5,000. The Village Clerk shall return the certified
check to the permit holder 30 days after the completion of his or
her business activity in the Village.
(4) The applicant is not required to provide the surety bond until the
application is approved.
E. Before a permit may be issued, the applicant shall sign and file with the
Village Clerk an irrevocable power of attorney appointing the Village
Clerk as agent to accept service of the summons for all causes of action
against him or her arising out of the conduct of his or her business or
occupation as a permit holder. Service of a summons in all causes of
action described in this section may be made upon the permit holder by
sending two copies of such summons to the Village Clerk by registered
U.S. mail. The Village Clerk shall immediately upon receipt of thereof
endorse upon each copy the date and hour received, and shall file one
copy whereupon service of said summons shall be deemed to be
completed upon the permit holder. The Village Clerk shall on the same
day send to the permit holder the other copy of the summons so
received by registered U.S. mail, return receipt requested.
A. Investigation. Upon receipt of each application, payment of the fee and
the signing of the statement, the Clerk shall refer it immediately to the
Village Police Department, which shall make and complete an
investigation of the statements made in such application.
§ 182-4 MINORS § 182-5
159:291
§ 182-6. Appeals.
Any person refused a permit may appeal the same through the appeal
procedure provided by ordinance or resolution of the Village Board or, if
none has been adopted, under the provisions of Wis. Stats. Chapter 68.
§ 182-7. Prohibited practices.
B. The Clerk shall refuse to issue the permit if it is determined, pursuant to
the investigation above, that:
(1) The application contains any material omission or materially
inaccurate statement;
(2) Complaints of a material nature have been received against the
applicant by authorities in the last cities, villages and towns, not
exceeding three, in which the applicant conducted similar
business;
(3) The applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or
ordinance violation within the last five years, the nature of which is
directly related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling;
or
(4) The applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision of
§ 182-4B above.
C. Upon satisfactory completion of the investigation, the Clerk shall
approve the application and shall notify the applicant that the permit
will be issued upon the presentation of the required bond (if the bond
has not yet been received).
D. Upon satisfactory submission of the bond, the Clerk shall issue the
applicant a direct seller's permit and date the entry.
E. Such permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of
entry, subject to subsequent revocation as provided in § 182-10 below.
A. A direct seller shall be prohibited from:
(1) Calling at any dwelling or other place between 9:00 p.m. and 9:00
a.m. except by appointment;
(2) Calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed
bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors" or words of
similar meaning;
(3) Calling at the rear door of any dwelling place or remaining on any
premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or other
person having authority over such premises.
B. A direct seller shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or
misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity or character of
§ 182-5 WATERFORD CODE § 182-7
159:292
§ 182-8. Disclosure requirements.
any goods offered for sale, the purpose of his/her visit, his/her identity
or the identity of the organization he/she represents. A charitable
organization direct seller shall specifically disclose what portion of the
sale price of goods being offered will actually be used for the charitable
purpose for which the organization is soliciting. Such portion shall be
expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the goods.
C. No direct seller shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by
pedestrians and vehicles.
(1) Where sales are made from vehicles, all traffic and parking
regulations shall be observed.
(2) No direct seller shall sell or offer for sale any item while the person
is on a median or safety island, except when the roadway has been
legally closed to traffic for a special event and the seller is in
compliance with the provisions of the special event permit.
(3) No direct seller shall display goods or products outside of a vehicle
on the public right-of-way without a right-of-way permit issued
under Chapter 191 except during Village-wide or special events
allowing such activities.
(4) No direct seller shall park for the purpose of making sales from a
vehicle on Main Street between Milwaukee Street and Jefferson
Street, or on First Street between Main Street and St. Thomas
Street, during any period of heavy traffic congestion.
(5) No direct seller may conduct business within 10 feet of a fire
hydrant or within 20 feet of a driveway or crosswalk.
(6) No direct seller shall solicit or accept money or any other item from
an occupant of any vehicle on a public street. No direct seller shall
hand anything to an occupant of any vehicle on a public street.
D. No direct seller shall make any loud noises or use any sound-amplifying
device to attract customers if the noise produced is capable of being
plainly heard outside a one-hundred-foot radius of the source.
E. No direct seller shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around
the area in which he/she is conducting business.
F. No direct seller shall make sales in a Village park without obtaining a
park reservation or special event permit therefor pursuant to Chapter
170 or 188.
G. A direct seller is prohibited from selling goods or taking orders on the
premises of any public building at any time without the express written
consent of the such premises, or on any other public premises
dedicated to a special purpose and posted.
§ 182-7 MINORS § 182-8
159:293
§ 182-9. Records.
The Village Police Department shall report to the Clerk all convictions for
violation of this article, and the Clerk shall note any such violation on the
record of the direct seller convicted.
§ 182-10. Revocation of permit.
A. After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to a
prospective customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose his/her
name, the name of the company or organization he/she is affiliated with,
if any, and the identity of goods or services he/she offers to sell.
B. If any sale of goods is made by a direct seller, or any sales order for the
later delivery of goods is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have the
right to cancel such transaction if it involved the extension of credit or
is a cash transaction of more than $25 in accordance with the
procedure as set forth in § 423.202, Wis. Stats.; the seller shall give the
buyer two copies of a typed or printed notice of that fact. Such notice
shall conform to the requirements of § 423.203(1), (2), (3) and (3m),
Wis. Stats.
C. If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of goods, he/
she shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a
written statement containing the terms of the agreement, the amount
paid in advance, whether full, partial or no advance payment is made,
the name, address and telephone number of the seller, the delivery or
performance date and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided
and, if so, the terms thereof.
D. If the direct seller is regulated by the State of Wisconsin and the
statutory regulation is in conflict with the disclosure requirement
herein, the statutory regulation shall control.
A. A permit may be revoked by the Village Board, after notice and hearing,
if the permittee made any material omission or materially inaccurate
statement in the application for the permit, made any fraudulent, false,
deceptive or misleading statement or representation in the course of
engaging in direct sales, violated any provision of this article or was
convicted of any crime or ordinance or statutory violation which is
directly related to the permittee's fitness to engage in direct selling.
B. Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally on the
permittee at least 72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing; such
notice shall contain the time and place of hearing and a statement of
the acts upon which the hearing will be based.
§ 182-8 WATERFORD CODE § 182-11
159:294
§ 182-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article shall forfeit
$100 for each violation plus costs of prosecution. Each violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 182-11 MINORS § 182-11
159:295

ARTICLE II
Rummage Sales
§ 182-12. Permitted sales; hours and location; signs; violations and
penalties.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Property which is owned, utilized and
maintained and acquired in the normal course of living in or
maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise which was
purchased for resale or obtained on consignment.
RUMMAGE SALE — Includes all general sales, open to the public,
conducted from or on a residential premises, including but not limited
to all sales titled "rummage," "lawn," "yard," "porch," "room,"
"backyard," "patio" or "garage" sale.
B. Property permitted to be sold. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell
or offer for sale at a rummage sale property other than personal
property.
C. Hours and place of operation. Rummage sales shall be conducted only
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. No more than three
rummage sales in one calendar year may be conducted from any
premises. Each sale may last no longer than three consecutive days and
must be conducted on the seller's property.
D. Signs. "Rummage Sale," "Garage Sale" or similar signs shall be
permitted to advertise the rummage sale. There shall not be more than
one such sign per lot, except that on a corner lot two signs are allowed,
one facing each street. A sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area
and shall be located not less than eight feet from the nearest lot line.
Said signs may be placed only upon the property of the residence where
the sale is being held or upon other residential property with
permission of the owner or other person in charge of such, at the time
of sale. No signs shall be placed within the area of any public lands or
right-of-way. Any sign must contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the person holding the rummage sale.
(2) The dates of the sale.
(3) The location of the sale.
E. Removal of signs. All signs, no matter where placed, must be removed
within 24 hours of the close of the rummage sale.
F. Penalty. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of
this section shall, on the first offense, be issued a warning. Upon
conviction of a second offense thereof, a person shall forfeit not less
§ 182-12 MINORS § 182-12
159:297
than $50 nor more than $500, plus statutory surcharge, plus the costs
of prosecution.
§ 182-12 WATERFORD CODE § 182-12
159:298
Chapter 186
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Burning — See Ch. 100.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 137.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 142.
Nuisances — See Ch. 165.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 178.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 191.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 223.
§ 182-12 MINORS § 182-12
159:299

ARTICLE I
Garbage and Refuse
[Adopted as §§ 11.08 and 11.15 of the 1998 Code]
§ 186-1. Littering prohibited.
No person shall deposit, throw or scatter or shall permit the accumulation
of straw, stones, grass, wood, leaves, paper, iron, tin, wire, nails, bottles,
glass or any other rubbish or waste material in, upon or along any street,
alley, bridge, sidewalk, lake, lake frontage, stream, river or river banks or in
any park or on any public grounds or thoroughfare within the Village. See
§ 174-1, adopting Wis. Stat. § 287.81.
§ 186-2. Garbage containers. [Amended 2-10-2003 by Ord. No. 428;
12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 546]
§ 186-3. Refuse in sewers.
No person shall deposit in any sewer any garbage, grease, rags, sand or
earth or any other substance which may obstruct the sewer.
§ 186-4. Burning or burying garbage.
No person shall burn garbage or other noxious substances in open
incinerators or bury garbage or other noxious or unwholesome substances
on private property.
§ 186-5. Yard waste. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 546]
A. Every garbage container used in the Village shall be metal or metallined
or of plastic and watertight with a flytight and watertight metal or
plastic cover. In the event that the Village contracts with a disposal
company that provides containers for residential properties, those
residential units must use the containers provided by the Village
contractor.
B. No person shall place on any street or sidewalk any garbage container,
as above prescribed, when the placement of such garbage container
will be injurious to the public health, will create a public nuisance or
will obstruct any such sidewalk or street so as to interfere with the use
of the same by the public.
C. All such garbage containers shall be fitted with a cover and shall be
kept covered, except when depositing materials therein or removing
contents therefrom. In addition to garbage containers as above defined,
the Village shall require the use of recycling containers, which shall be
the composition and a size and dimension required by the Village, and
which may be used only pursuant to the recycling rules and regulations
from time to time promulgated. See Article II of this chapter.
§ 186-1 MINORS § 186-5
159:301
§ 186-6. Publicly provided refuse containers. [Amended 12-14-2009
by Ord. No. 546]
§ 186-7. Definitions; residential, commercial and construction
refuse and recycling. [Amended 6-12-1995 by Ord. No. 314;
4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 450; 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 546]
A. For purposes of this section, the phrase "yard waste" shall be defined as
leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush, including
clean woody vegetative material no greater than six inches in diameter.
The term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact root balls.
B. No yard waste may be deposited for regular garbage collection.
C. Except as provided in Subsection D below, at no time shall property
owners deposit yard waste in street lines, curblines or in piles near the
pavement edge for collection purposes or otherwise.
D. The Village may from time to time pass regulations regarding the
collection of certain yard waste and may from time to time pass on to
property owners using the procedure the cost of such collection and
shall from time to time prescribe the method in which the disposal is to
be accomplished. The Village may charge for collection of brush and for
an annual permit in an amount set by the Village Board, which shall
allow residents to dispose of certain yard waste at the Village
Department of Public Works building. See § 186-19.
A. The Village may, at its discretion and from time to time, provide public
refuse and/or recycling containers for use by Village residents and/or
commercial units, and, if said refuse containers or recycling containers
are provided for the use of commercial units, the Village shall charge a
fee for their use. The fee for the use of the containers by commercial
units shall be a special charge and shall be billed to the property
owners quarterly, and all special charges that are due and unpaid 30
days after the date of billing shall be deemed delinquent and shall be a
lien on the property. Delinquent special charges that are unpaid on
November 1 of each year shall be included on the tax roll as set forth in
Wis. Stats. § 66.0627.
B. No person other than a Village resident or authorized commercial unit
shall use such containers, and all persons using such containers shall
do so only within the posted and prescribed times and conditions.
Failure to comply herewith shall be considered a violation under § 186-8
below.
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply.
[Amended 8-22-2016 by Ord. No. 638]
COMMERCIAL UNITS — Those buildings in the Village that contain at
least one commercial, retail, institutional, governmental or industrial
unit. In addition, every building in the Village which houses in excess
of four customer units of whatever nature, including multifamily
§ 186-5 WATERFORD CODE § 186-7
159:302
residential, but excluding condominium units, are commercial units.
Home businesses, where the primary use of the unit is residential, are
not commercial units under this chapter. [Amended 11-28-2016 by
Ord. No. 644]
RESIDENTIAL UNITS — Single-family and two- to four-family
residential dwellings, and residential condominiums, regardless of the
number of dwelling units.
B. Residential refuse and recycling. [Amended 8-22-2016 by Ord. No.
638]
(1) The Village requires that all residential units receive weekly waste
and biweekly recyclable material collection by the contractor the
Village selects. The costs of collection are authorized to be included
in the general tax levy or levied and collected as special charges
imposed on each property served pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627,
at the option of the Village. If the Village determines that the costs
of collection are to be levied as special charges against the
properties served, the special charges shall be shown in the fee
schedule, and the special charges shall be included on the property
tax bills and collected as set forth in said statute.
(2) The Village shall, from time to time and in coordination with the
garbage collection contractor for the Village, provide specifications
for garbage and recycling containers to be used by residential units
within the Village. Failure to comply with the specifications for
residential units will be considered a violation under § 186-8.
(a) The Village, or the Village through its contracting garbage
collection agency, shall pick up garbage and recycling from
such containers under a systematic plan implemented by the
Village and with procedures as defined from time to time by the
Village.
(b) On every designated collection day as is established from time
to time by the Village, all materials deposited for collection
pursuant to this section shall be placed inside the designated
container at the curb or pavement edge in a safe location. The
use of plastic bags placed outside of the containers for refuse
pending collection is not allowed.
(c) Containers provided for automated systems shall be placed
strictly in conformance with the instructions of the Village or
the contractor. Questions regarding such placement shall be
determined by the Village or the Village through its
contracting garbage collection company. No vehicles,
recreational apparatus or other obstacles shall be placed in
such a way so as to prevent access to the container, and such
obstruction shall be the sole responsibility of the customer.
§ 186-7 MINORS § 186-7
159:303
(d) If the Village contracts with a disposal company for automated
pickup, no residential unit may place any item for pickup as
garbage if that refuse does not fit inside the designated cart.
The residential unit may contract with the Village contractor,
or a contractor of its choosing, at its own expense, for the
disposal of oversized and bulk items.
(e) In the event that a residential unit is a rental property, the
property owner is required to inform the tenant of the
requirements for collection.
C. Commercial unit refuse and recycling.
(1) The property owner shall be responsible for collection and disposal
of refuse and recycling from commercial units.
(a) The property owner may utilize the services of the Village's
contracting garbage collection company at its own expense.
The cost for said optional commercial use, when the same
collection procedures that are provided for residential units
are used, shall be set forth in the Village's contract with the
disposal company.
(b) Each commercial unit shall provide for disposal and recycling
using the size and type of container adequate for the use(s)
present. In the event that a rear-load refuse bin (dumpster) is
used, it shall be emptied at a frequency that provides that the
cover is kept closed when refuse is not being deposited or
emptied. Failure to provide an adequate dumpster and/or
empty the dumpster as necessary shall be considered a
violation of § 186-8. In the event that litter is blown out of the
dumpster and onto adjacent properties or public ways, the
property owner may be charged with littering pursuant to
§ 186-1.
(2) Placement of commercial unit refuse bins.
(a) No person may place or store a dumpster, garbage bin, refuse
bin, rubbish or any combustible material within 20 feet of a
commercial, industrial or multifamily structure unless the
same is enclosed in a masonry enclosure.
(b) Structures in existence on February 10, 2003, may be
exempted from this requirement by the Fire Inspector,
provided that the Inspector, in his or her discretion, identifies a
safe alternative location and the property owner or tenant
places the dumpster, garbage bin, rubbish or combustible
material at the alternative location. The property owner or
tenant may appeal the Fire Inspector's decision to the Plan
Commission, which may uphold, modify or overturn the Fire
Inspector's determination.
§ 186-7 WATERFORD CODE § 186-7
159:304
§ 186-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, or any regulation,
rule or order made hereunder, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code.
D. Construction refuse.
(1) The Village or the Village through its contracting garbage
collecting company shall in no event be responsible for the
collection of construction waste derived from building sites within
the Village.
(2) Construction site requirements.
(a) In every instance where new construction is commenced upon
a site within the Village of Waterford for which a building
permit is required and has been issued, the owner and the
building permit applicant shall be jointly and severally
responsible for a provision at the construction site of a rear
load refuse bin (dumpster), and, where appropriate, a
recycling container, of sufficient size to adequately contain,
from time to time, the waste and recyclable material generated
at such site, or, if approved by the Building Inspector, shall
provide an adequate method of on-site recycling at such site.
(b) In every instance where a building permit is issued for
improvement, remodeling, reconstruction, addition, or
partition, of an existing structure in the Village of Waterford,
the owner and the building permit applicant shall be jointly
and severally responsible for the placement on the site of a
rear load refuse bin (dumpster), and, where appropriate, a
recycling container, of a sufficient size to handle the refuse and
recyclable material generated from time to time, if, in the
determination of the Building Inspector, a dumpster and/or
recycling container are required based upon the nature and
extent of the work to be accomplished.
§ 186-7 MINORS § 186-8
159:305

ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 11-28-1994 by Ord. No. 310 (§ 11.09 of the 1998 Code)]
§ 186-9. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted as authorized under Wis. Stats. § 287.09(3)(b).
§ 186-10. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any existing rules, regulations, ordinances or permits
previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this
article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall apply.
§ 186-11. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be
held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where
any term or requirements of this article may be inconsistent or conflicting,
the more restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply. Where a
provision of this article is required by Wisconsin Statutes, or by a standard
in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 544, and where the article provision is unclear,
the provision shall be interpreted in light of the Wisconsin Statutes and NR
544 standards in effect on November 28, 1994, or in effect on the date of
the most recent text amendment to this article.
§ 186-12. Applicability.
The requirements of this article apply to all persons within the Village limits
of Waterford.
§ 186-13. Administration. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
The provisions of this article shall be administered by the Department of
Public Works of the Village of Waterford and the Village Administrator.
§ 186-14. Effective date. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 546]
The provisions of this article shall take effect on January 1, 1995, and
revisions hereto shall be effective upon the effective date of the amending
ordinance.
§ 186-15. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BI-METAL CONTAINER — A container for carbonated or malt beverages
that is made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum.
§ 186-9 MINORS § 186-15
159:307
CONTAINER BOARD — Corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of
shipping containers and related products.
FOAM POLYSTYRENE PACKAGING — Packaging made primarily from foam
polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria:
HDPE — High-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #2.
LDPE — Low-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #4.
MAGAZINES — Magazines and other materials printed on similar paper.
MAJOR APPLIANCE — A residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes
dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven,
refrigerator, furnace, boiler, dehumidifier, water heater or stove.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A property which contains five or more
residential units, including those that are occupied seasonally. (Note:
Condominiums, regardless of the number of dwelling units, are considered
residential properties under Article I, and collection from these
condominium properties is provided and regulated the same as singlefamily
and two- to four-unit residences. The language in this Article II is
adopted to conform to the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code § NR 544.06,
which does not distinguish between condominiums and commercial
apartments containing five or more residential units. For residential
condominiums with five or more dwelling units, the requirements set forth
in § 186-21 are satisfied through the Village's recycling program and
regular notice of the program to its residents.)[Amended 1-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 489; 8-22-2016 by Ord. No. 638]
NEWSPAPER — A newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint.
NONRESIDENTIAL FACILITIES AND PROPERTIES — Commercial, retail,
industrial, institutional and governmental facilities and properties. This
term does not include multiple-family dwellings.
OFFICE PAPER — High-grade printing and writing papers from offices in
nonresidential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer
printouts are examples of office paper generally accepted as high grade.
This term does not include industrial process waste.
OTHER RESINS or MULTIPLE RESINS — Plastic resins labeled by the SPI
code #7.
PERSON — Includes any individual, corporation, limited-liability company,
partnership, association, local governmental unit, as defined in Wis. Stat.
§ 66.0131(1)(a), state agency or authority or federal agency.66
PETE — Polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI code #1.
A. Is designed for serving food or beverages.
Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the
packaged article in a shipping container.
B.
Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged
article in a shipping container.
C.
§ 186-15 WATERFORD CODE § 186-15
159:308
PLASTIC CONTAINER — A rigid plastic container, including those made of
PETE (#1), HDPE (#2), PVC (#3), LDPE (#4), PP (#5), PS (#6), and other
resins or multiple resins (#7).67
POSTCONSUMER WASTE — Solid waste other than solid waste generated
in the production of goods, hazardous waste, as defined in Wis. Stat.
§ 291.01(7), waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap
automobiles, or high-volume industrial waste, as defined in Wis. Stat.
§ 289.01(17).
PP — Polypropylene, labeled by the SPI code #5.
PS — Polystyrene, labeled by the SPI code #6.
PVC — Polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI code #3.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Includes lead acid batteries; major
appliances; waste oil; yard waste; aluminum containers; corrugated paper
or other container board; foam polystyrene packaging; glass containers;
magazines; newspaper; office paper; plastic containers, including those
made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and other resins or multiple
resins; steel containers; waste tires; and bi-metal containers.68
SOLID WASTE — The meaning specified in Wis. Stat. § 289.01(33).69
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — The meaning specified in Wis. Stat.
§ 289.01(35).
SOLID WASTE TREATMENT — The meaning specified in Wis. Stat.
§ 289.01(39).70
TREATMENT — Includes incineration.
WASTE TIRE — A tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose
because of wear, damage or defect.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush,
including clean woody vegetative material no greater than six inches in
diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact
root balls.
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 186-15 MINORS § 186-16
159:309
§ 186-16. Separation of recyclable materials.71
Occupants of single-family and two- to four-unit residences, multiple-family
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties shall separate the
following materials from postconsumer waste:
§ 186-17. Separation requirements exempted.
The separation requirements of § 186-16 do not apply to the following:
A. Lead acid batteries;
B. Major appliances;
C. Waste oil;
D. Yard waste;
E. Aluminum containers;
F. Bi-metal containers;
G. Corrugated paper or other container board;
H. Foam polystyrene packaging;
I. Glass containers;
J. Magazines;
K. Newspaper;
L. Office paper;
M. Plastic containers;
N. Steel containers; and
O. Waste tires.
A. Occupants of single-family and two- to four-unit residences, multiplefamily
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties that send
their postconsumer waste to a processing facility licensed by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources that recovers the
materials specified in § 186-16 from solid waste in as pure a form as is
technically feasible.72
B. Solid waste which is burned as a supplemental fuel at a facility if less
than 30% of the heat input to the facility is derived from the solid waste
burned as supplemental fuel.
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 186-16 WATERFORD CODE § 186-17
159:310
§ 186-18. Care of separated recyclable materials.
To the greatest extent practicable, the recyclable materials separated in
accordance with § 186-16 shall be clean and kept free of contaminants such
as food or product residue, oil or grease, or other nonrecyclable materials,
including but not limited to household hazardous waste, medical waste, and
agricultural chemical containers. Recyclable materials shall be stored in a
manner which protects them from wind, rain, and other inclement weather
conditions.
§ 186-19. Lead acid batteries, major appliances, waste oil and yard
waste. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 12-14-2009 by Ord.
No. 546]
Occupants of single-family and two-to-four-unit residences, multiple-family
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties shall manage lead
acid batteries, major appliances, waste oil and yard waste as follows:
§ 186-19.5. Responsibility for collection of recyclable materials.
[Added 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 546]
C. A recyclable material specified in § 186-16E through O for which a
variance has been granted by the Department of Natural Resources
under Wis. Stat. § 287.11(2m) or Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 544.14.
A. Lead acid batteries shall be disposed of by the resident/occupant to a
private contractor. A list of resources is available at the Village Hall.
B. Major appliances shall be disposed of by the resident/occupant to a
private contractor. A list of resources is available at the Village Hall.
C. Waste oil shall be disposed of by the resident/occupant to a private
contractor. A list of resources is available at the Village Hall.
D. Yard waste generated by single-family and two-to-four-family
residences shall be disposed of by the resident/occupant at the
Department of Public Works Building in the Village of Waterford, or to a
private contractor of the property owner's choosing. A fee for an annual
permit to allow the disposal of yard waste from such units may be
charged in an amount set by the Village Board. Yard waste generated by
multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties,
including mixed-use properties, shall be disposed of by the property
owner to a private contractor of the property owner's choosing.
A. Occupants and tenants of single-family and two-to-four-unit residences
shall prepare and provide for collection of recyclable materials as
specified in § 186-20.
B. The owners of multiple-family dwellings shall be responsible for the
collection and disposal of recyclable materials and shall proceed as set
forth in § 186-21.
§ 186-17 MINORS § 186-19.5
159:311
§ 186-20. Preparation and collection of recyclable materials.
[Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 546]
Except as otherwise directed by the Village of Waterford, occupants of
single-family and two-to-four-unit residences shall prepare for the collection
of the separated materials specified in § 186-16E through O as set forth.
Recycling containers specified shall be placed for collection as set forth in
§ 186-7B.
C. The owners of nonresidential facilities and properties, including mixed
use properties, shall be responsible for the collection and disposal of
recyclable materials and shall proceed as set forth in § 186-23.
A. Aluminum containers shall be rinsed free of product residue and placed
in recycling containers. The recycling containers shall be collected
curbside.
B. Bimetal containers shall be rinsed free of product residue and placed in
recycling containers. The recycling containers shall be collected
curbside.
C. Corrugated paper or other container board shall be free of debris,
flattened, and placed in recycling containers. The recycling containers
shall be collected curbside.
D. Foam polystyrene packaging shall be free of residue and placed in
recycling containers for collection curbside, or according to the thencurrent
DNR regulations.
E. Glass containers shall be rinsed free of product residue, and lids shall
be removed and discarded. The glass containers shall be placed in
recycling containers. The recycling containers shall be collected
curbside.
F. Magazines shall be free of debris and placed in recycling containers.
The recycling containers shall be collected curbside.
G. Newspaper shall be free of debris and placed in recycling containers.
The recycling containers shall be collected curbside.
H. Office paper shall be free of debris and placed in recycling containers.
The recycling containers shall be collected curbside.
I. Rigid plastic containers shall be prepared and collected as follows:
(1) Containers made of PETE and HDPE (including milk jugs and
detergent bottles) shall be rinsed free of product residue; caps
removed and discarded, and placed in recycling containers to be
collected curbside.
(2) Containers made of PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, or other resins or multiple
resins shall be rinsed free of product residue, and placed in
recycling containers to be collected curbside.
§ 186-19.5 WATERFORD CODE § 186-20
159:312
§ 186-21. Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of
multiple-family dwellings.
§ 186-22. (Reserved)73
§ 186-23. Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of
nonresidential facilities and properties.
J. Steel containers shall be rinsed free of product residue and placed in
recycling containers. The recycling containers shall be collected
curbside.
K. Waste tires shall be disposed of by the resident/occupant to a private
contractor. A list of resources is available at the Village Hall.
A. Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings shall do all of
the following to recycle the materials specified in § 186-16E through O:
(1) Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
(2) Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the
dwelling and at least semi-annually thereafter about the
established recycling program.
(3) Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the tenants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling
facility.
(4) Notify tenants of reasons to reduce and recycle, which materials
are collected, how to prepare materials in order to meet the
processing requirements, collection methods or sites, locations and
hours of operations, and a contact person or company, including a
name, address and telephone number.
B. The requirements specified in Subsection A do not apply to the owners
or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings if the postconsumer
waste generated within the dwelling is treated at a processing facility
licensed by the Department of Natural Resources that recovers for
recycling the materials specified in § 186-16E through O from solid
waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
A. Owners or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and properties
shall do all of the following to recycle the materials specified in
§ 186-16E through O:
(1) Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
(2) Notify in writing, at least semi-annually, all users, tenants and
occupants of the properties about the established recycling
program.
73.Editor's Note: Former § 186-22, Special provision for owners of multiple-family dwellings,
was repealed 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 546.
§ 186-20 MINORS § 186-23
159:313
§ 186-24. Prohibitions on disposal of recyclable materials separated
for recycling.
No person may dispose of in a solid waste disposal facility or burn in a
solid waste treatment facility any of the materials specified in § 186-16E
through O which have been separated for recycling, except waste tires may
be burned with energy recovery in a solid waste treatment facility.
§ 186-25. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(3) Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the users, tenants and occupants and the delivery of the
materials to a recycling facility.
(4) Notify users, tenants and occupants of reasons to reduce and
recycle, which materials are collected, how to prepare materials in
order to meet the processing requirements, collection methods or
sites, locations and hours of operations, and a contact person or
company, including a name, address and telephone number.
B. The requirements specified in Subsection A do not apply to the owners
or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and properties if the
postconsumer waste generated within the facility or property is treated
at a processing facility licensed by the Department of Natural
Resources that recovers for recycling the materials specified in
§ 186-16E through O from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically
feasible.
A. For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this
article, any authorized officer, employee or representative of the Village
of Waterford may inspect recyclable materials separated for recycling,
postconsumer waste intended for disposal, recycling collection sites
and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of multiple-family
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties, and any records
relating to recycling activities, which shall be kept confidential when
necessary to protect proprietary information. No person may refuse
access to any authorized officer, employee or authorized representative
of the Village of Waterford who requests access for the purpose of
inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. No person may
obstruct, hamper or interfere with such an inspection.
B. Any person who violates a provision of this article may be issued a
citation by the Village of Waterford to collect forfeitures. The issuance
of a citation shall not preclude proceeding under any other ordinance or
law relating to the same or any other matter. Proceeding under any
other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter shall
not preclude the issuance of a citation under this subsection.
C. Penalties for violating this article may be assessed as follows:
[Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
§ 186-23 WATERFORD CODE § 186-25
159:314
(1) Any person who disposes of in a solid waste disposal facility or
burns in a solid waste treatment facility any of the materials
specified in § 186-16A through D in violation of this chapter may be
required to forfeit $50 for a first violation, $200 for a second
violation, and not more than $2,000 for third or subsequent
violations.
(2) Any person who violates any provision of this article [except as
specified in Subsection C(1)] may be required to forfeit not less
than $10 nor more than $1,000 for each violation.
§ 186-25 MINORS § 186-25
159:315

ARTICLE III
Solid Waste and Recycling Storage and Placement Regulations
[Adopted 5-9-2010 by Ord. No. 554]
§ 186-26. Solid waste and recycling storage and placement.
§ 186-27. Time for curb placement and removal.
§ 186-28. Refusal of service; removal of items not collected.
Only containers placed in accordance with the regulations set forth in this
article will be serviced. Refuse, recycling, trash or other items placed at the
curb or in the public right-of-way in violation of the regulations set forth
in this article will not be collected with the regular collection. Items not
collected must be removed by the occupant from the curb or public right-ofway
by 11:30 p.m. on the collection day.
§ 186-29. Notice and special charge for items placed in violation.
A. Containers. Solid waste and recycling containers shall be stored in a
garage, in the side yard or in the rear yard. Containers may only be
stored in the front yard when no other suitable place is available or
accessible, and then only when such storage abuts the main dwelling or
other structure.
B. Solid waste and recycling not placed in an approved container,
including but not limited to heavy items, appliances, tires, trash, and
yard waste placed or stored on private property for longer than seven
days shall be considered a public nuisance subject to the provisions of
Chapter 165 of this Municipal Code.
A. Approved solid waste and recycling containers shall be placed at the
curb for collection no earlier than noon on the day before the collection
day. Containers shall be removed from the curb and returned to their
regular storage location by 11:30 p.m. on the day they are serviced.
B. Items for which a special collection has been arranged may be placed at
the curb no earlier than noon on the day before the day they will be
collected.
A. Notice. If solid waste, garbage, recycling, refuse or any other item is
placed at the curb or within the limits of the public right-of-way for
collection in violation of this article, the Village may deliver a notice to
the occupant, and to the property owner if different, requiring the
removal of the item within seven days of the receipt of the letter. The
letter will be delivered by a representative of the Village in person to
the occupant when possible, and when not possible, shall be sent by
certified mail. If the property owner is not the occupant, the letter shall
be sent by certified mail to the owner.
§ 186-26 MINORS § 186-29
159:317
§ 186-30. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The first offense for a violation of this article shall result in a warning to the
occupant and the property owner, if different. Any person who violates any
provision of this article, or any regulation, rule or order made hereunder,
after having been warned, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code. The issuance of a citation shall
not preclude proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the
same or any other matter.
B. Removal; special charge. If the item or items for which a notice was
sent pursuant to Subsection A are not removed within the time given,
the Village shall arrange with the Village's collection contractor for
removal of the item, and shall charge the cost thereof to the property
owner as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.0627. If the
special charge is not paid within 30 days of billing therefor, the special
charge shall be a lien on the property and, together with an
administrative charge in an amount set by the Village Board, shall be
added to the current or next tax roll for collection. The special charge
provided for herein shall not preclude proceeding under any other
ordinance or law relating to the same or other matter.
C. Appeal. The imposition of a special charge hereunder may be appealed
solely to the Village Board. Appeals filed pursuant to this section shall
be filed no later than 30 days from the date the bill is received for the
special charge. The Village Board shall hear and consider the matter at
a regular meeting held within 15 days after receipt of the appeal, and
may affirm, reverse or modify the imposition of the charge.
§ 186-29 WATERFORD CODE § 186-30
159:318
Chapter 188
SPECIAL EVENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 170.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 174.
Sales — See Ch. 182.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 191.
Traffic and parking — See Ch. 207.
§ 188-1. Applications; notice; exemptions; regulations; fees;
violations and penalties.
A. Definition. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
SPECIAL EVENT — Any planned extraordinary occurrence on the
public right-of-way or public premises, including but not limited to
parades, processions, bicycle or foot races, and festivals.
B. Application. No person may hold a special event on the public right-ofway
or public premises without obtaining a special event permit.
Application forms and general information shall be available from the
Village Clerk's office. The applicant must contact the Police Department
and the Department of Public Works to review and approve an event
and to determine related costs prior to submitting a special event
application to the Village Clerk's office. The applicant shall indicate
whether it intends to sponsor special event vendors in connection with
the special event, either on private land or at reserved Village locations.
If the applicant intends to sponsor special event vendors, the applicant
shall indicate the proposed locations and types of the special event
vendors. If required by the state, a copy of the applicant's current
Wisconsin seller's permit shall be provided. If more than 50 persons are
expected to attend the special event, the permit must be approved by
the Public Works and Utilities Committee and the Village Board.
[Amended 9-24-2007 by Ord. No. 519; 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 574]
(1) Mapped routes. All permit applications for special events featuring
foot or bicycle races, runs, rides or parades shall include a detailed
map of the proposed route for approval by the Police Department
and the Department of Public Works. Routes for annual special
events must be submitted with the application regardless of the
historical precedent. Proposed routes may be altered at the
discretion of the Police Department and the Department of Public
Works. In the event the organizers or sponsors of any special event
deviate from the route submitted without the approval of the
Village, the organizers or sponsors of such special event shall be
§ 186-30 MINORS § 188-1
159:319
denied a permit for any special event for the following calendar
year.
(2) Approval. After approval by the Police Department and the
Department of Public Works, applications for special event permits
shall be submitted to the Village Clerk, who shall forward the
application to the Village Administrator for consideration and
approval if attendance at the event is expected to be 50 or fewer
persons. If attendance at the event is expected to be more than 50
persons, the Clerk shall schedule the application for consideration
at the next Public Works and Utilities Committee meeting. If the
application is approved by the Public Works and Utilities
Committee, the Clerk shall schedule the application for
consideration at the following Village Board meeting. Once all
required approvals are obtained, the Village Clerk shall ensure that
all of the conditions of the permit have been fulfilled.
(3) Notice to neighbors.
(a) Except as provided in Subsection B(3)(b), the applicant shall be
required to mail notice of the special event to the neighboring
property owners no less than two weeks prior to the event. The
applicant shall provide a copy of the notice, proof that the
notice was mailed or delivered, and a list of the persons to
whom it was mailed or delivered prior to the special event.
(b) The Village Administrator may waive the requirement for
notice to neighbors in cases of community-related events, and/
or may determine that an alternate form of notice may be
provided.
(4) Exemption. A permit is required, but a fee is not required, for:
(a) Special events not requiring the services of the Police
Department or the Department of Public Works.
(b) Special events sponsored by the Village or otherwise exempted
by the Village Board.
(c) Special events sponsored by veterans' organizations.
(d) Public and parochial elementary and secondary school civicoriented
events.
(e) Demonstrations as public displays of sentiment for or against a
person or cause.
(5) Fees. After the application has been approved by the Police
Department, the Department of Public Works and, if applicable, the
Public Works and Utilities Committee and the Village Board, the
applicant for a special event permit shall pay a fee based on the
per-man-hour rate for Village services as determined in the
application review and approval process. No special event permit
§ 188-1 WATERFORD CODE § 188-1
159:320
requiring a fee is valid until the fee has been paid. The Director of
Public Works may establish fees for provision of additional Village
services not set forth herein. A deposit of the estimated fee shall
be required, and after the final costs are calculated, a refund of the
unused portion shall be made, or a bill for additional costs shall
be presented. If the permittee fails to pay the additional costs, no
further permits shall be issued to that permittee until and unless
the costs are paid.
(6) Refunds. Permit fee payments may be refunded if notification of
cancellation of a permitted special event is received by the Village
Clerk at least 10 working days prior to the special event.
C. Permit regulations.
(1) Village not liable. The special event permit application shall contain
a statement that: "The applicant agrees to indemnify and save
harmless the Village from and against all liabilities, claims,
demands, judgments, losses, and all suits at law or in equity, costs
and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees, for injury or
death of any person or loss or damage to the property of any
person, firm, organization or corporation, including both parties
hereto and their employees, arising from the holding of such
special event." No permit may be issued unless the applicant has
agreed to the terms of this statement on the written application.
(2) Special event vendors. [Added 9-24-2007 by Ord. No. 51974]
(a) If a special event permit includes provisions for sponsored
special event vendors, the permit holder shall provide the
Village Clerk with a complete list of Vendors who are not
exempt from the direct seller provisions of this Code under
§ 182-3K no later than 10 days prior to the event, and shall
refer the vendors to the Village Clerk. The vendors sponsored
by the special event permit holder are not required to obtain
direct sellers permits from the Village, except:
[1] Special event vendors who do not have a place of business
in the Village of Waterford and prepare food on site or sell
food that is not prepackaged. These vendors (except
vendors selling raw produce grown in Wisconsin) must
obtain a direct sellers permit from the Village Clerk in
addition to written permission to participate from the
special event permit holder.
[2] Special event vendors who are not legal residents of the
State of Wisconsin or who do not have a permanent place
of business in the State of Wisconsin. These vendors must
obtain a direct sellers permit from the Village Clerk in
74.Editor's Note: Pursuant to this ordinance former Subsection C(2) was redesignated as
Subsection C(3).
§ 188-1 MINORS § 188-1
159:321
addition to written permission to participate from the
special event permit holder.
(b) Malt beverage or wine sales. Any entity selling fermented malt
beverages or wine in connection with the special event shall be
required to obtain a temporary/picnic license therefor
pursuant to Chapter 148 of this Municipal Code.75 An
application for a temporary/picnic license must be submitted to
the Village Clerk at least 20 days prior to the event.
(c) Placard required.
[1] During a special event, no person or organization shall
display, sell, or offer to sell, on any street, sidewalk, alley
or other public grounds within the Village reserved by a
special event permit holder, any goods, wares, foodstuffs
or anything of value or service of any kind except pursuant
to written permission granted by the special event permit
holder, which shall be displayed on a placard issued by the
special event permit holder.
[2] This section shall not apply to any of the following:
[a] A person or organization conducting sales on public
lands immediately adjacent to a properly zoned
business establishment operated by such person or
organization. No sale of alcoholic beverages may be
made on the exterior of any business unless such sales
have been preapproved as part of the licensing
procedure set forth in Chapter 148.
[b] Sales by approved vendors at any Village-sponsored
event.
[3] Permission to operate under this section shall authorize
the holders to conduct business only at the times and in
the locations enumerated in the placard and subject to the
regulations of this section. Where the vending is to occur
in connection with a Village sponsored area-wide event,
direct sellers permits shall be required.
(d) Recordkeeping. The special event permit holder sponsoring
vendors under this section shall, at a minimum, obtain and
keep on file for a minimum of one year the following
information regarding the vendors it sponsors:
[1] Name, permanent address and telephone number.
[2] Age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes.
75.Editor's Note: See Ch. 148, Intoxicating Liquor and Fermented Malt Beverages.
§ 188-1 WATERFORD CODE § 188-1
159:322
[3] Name, address and telephone number of the person,
partnership, association, corporation or other entity that
the vendor represents or is employed by or whose
merchandise is being sold.
[4] Nature of business and a brief description of the goods
offered and any services offered.
[5] Make, model and license number of any vehicle used by
the vendor.
(e) Sponsorship; Village not liable. The special event permit holder
sponsoring special event vendors under this section is
responsible under the terms of the permit for the vendors it
sponsors pursuant to § 188-1C(1).
(3) Insurance.
(a) Requirements.
[1] Except as provided in Subsection C(3)(a)[2], each
applicant for an event requiring Village services shall
furnish with the application fee submitted to the Village
Clerk a certificate of insurance showing insurance written
by a company licensed in the State of Wisconsin, approved
by the Village and covering any and all liability or
obligations which may result from the operations by the
applicant's employees, agents, contractors or
subcontractors, and including workers' compensation
coverage in accordance with Wis. Stat. Ch. 102. The
certificate shall provide that the company will furnish the
Village with a ten-day written notice of cancellation,
nonrenewal or material change. The insurance shall be
written in comprehensive form and shall protect the
applicant and Village against all claims arising from
injuries to members of the public or damage to property of
others arising out of any act or omission of the applicant,
its employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors.
[2] The Village Administrator may determine that the
insurance required in Subsection C(3)(a)[1] is not
necessary for the protection of the Village for the special
event, and may waive or amend the insurance
requirement.
(b) The policy of insurance shall provide minimum combined
single limits for bodily injury and property damage of
$1,000,000 or such other insurance as deemed adequate by
the Village Administrator.
D. Permit restrictions. Scheduling of special events shall be subject to
approval by the Village.
§ 188-1 MINORS § 188-1
159:323
Chapter 191
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Official Map — See Ch. 54.
Carriage services — See Ch. 109.
Solid waste — See Ch. 186.
Traffic and parking — See Ch. 207.
Trees — See Ch. 211.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 235.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
§ 191-1. Street and sidewalk grades. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord.
No. 467; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
§ 191-2. Sidewalk construction and repairs. [Amended 8-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 426]
E. Violations and penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of
this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1,
Article II, of this Municipal Code.
A. Establishment. The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be
established and described by the Village Engineer, and records thereof
shall be kept by the Department of Public Works and/or the Village
Engineer. No street, alley or sidewalk shall be worked until the grade
thereof is established, and once established, the entire width of the
right-of-way shall be graded to accommodate the sidewalk
requirements set forth in § 235-21 of this Municipal Code.
B. Altering grade prohibited. No person shall alter the grade of any street,
alley, sidewalk or public grounds or any part thereof once the same is
approved and established by the Village (whether by ordinance or
otherwise), unless authorized or instructed to do so by the Village.
A. Wis. Stat. § 66.0907 is adopted in its entirety to govern the
circumstances of sidewalk construction and repair. In addition, the
initial construction of a sidewalk may be required as part of zoning
approval and/or land division pursuant to Chapter 235, Subdivision of
Land, and Chapter 245, Zoning, of this Municipal Code.
B. Construction and repairs.
(1) Initial construction. In every event where a sidewalk is initially
constructed, the cost of construction and all related costs thereto
shall be borne by the abutting property owner.
§ 188-1 WATERFORD CODE § 191-2
159:324
§ 191-3. Occupancy of rights-of-way. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord.
No. 467; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 4-23-2007 by Ord. No. 511]
(2) Repair or replacement. The Village shall notify a property owner of
the required repair or replacement of a sidewalk pursuant to the
notice requirements of Wis. Stat. § 66.0907.
(a) Except as provided in Subsection B(2)(b), in every instance
where an existing public sidewalk is repaired or replaced, the
Village and the abutting property owner shall each be liable for
50% of the cost thereof.
(b) If a tree located on private property heaves an existing
sidewalk, the property owner shall be liable for the entire cost
of the sidewalk repair or replacement upon notification by the
Village; however, if the property owner removes the offending
tree and grinds the stump at his or her own expense, the
Village will bear 50% of the cost of the sidewalk repair or
replacement. If a tree located on a Village treelawn or other
public right-of-way heaves the sidewalk, the Village shall be
liable for the entire cost of the removal of the offending tree
and the repair or replacement of the sidewalk; and the
property owner may plant an approved-variety, replacement
public tree in the treelawn upon the grant of a permit therefor
(at no charge) by the Village Forester.
C. Costs. The Village shall determine the costs of laying, removing,
repairing and replacing sidewalks, inclusive of engineering, legal and
other collateral costs, and shall pay those costs or charge them to the
property owner(s) pursuant to this section and Wis. Stat. § 66.0907.
A. General provisions.
(1) Purpose and findings.
(a) Purpose.
[1] In the exercise of governmental functions the Village has
priority over all other uses of the public rights-of-way. The
Village desires to anticipate and minimize the number of
obstructions and excavations taking place therein and to
regulate the placement of facilities in the rights-of-way to
ensure that the rights-of-way remain available for public
services and safe for public use. The taxpayers of the
Village bear the financial burden for the upkeep of the
rights-of-way and a primary cause for the early and
excessive deterioration of its rights-of-way is the frequent
excavation by persons who locate facilities therein.
[2] The purpose of this section is to provide the Village a legal
framework within which to regulate and manage the
public rights-of-way, and to provide for recovery of the
§ 191-2 MINORS § 191-3
159:325
costs incurred in doing so. This section provides for the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Village
as they use the rights-of-way of the Village, as well as to
ensure the structural integrity of the public rights-of-way.
(b) Findings.
[1] The Village finds increased use of the public rights-of-way
and increased costs to the taxpayers of the Village and that
these costs are likely to continue into the foreseeable
future.
[2] The Village finds that occupancy and excavation of its
rights-of-way causes costs to be borne by the Village and
its taxpayers, including, but not limited to:
[a] Administrative costs associated with public right-ofway
projects, such as permitting, inspection and
supervision, supplies and materials.
[b] Management costs associated with ongoing
management activities necessitated by public right-ofway
users.
[c] Repair or restoration costs to the roadway associated
with the actual excavation into the public right-of-way.
[d] Depreciation caused to the roadway in terms of
decreased useful life, due to excavations into the
public rights-of-way.
(2) In response to the foregoing facts, pursuant to Wis. Stat. §§ 61.34,
61.36, 196.58, and any other statute granting the Village the power
to manage and control its rights-of-way and the utilities operating
in the Village, the Village hereby enacts this section of the Code,
relating to administration of and permits to excavate, obstruct and/
or occupy the public rights-of-way. This section imposes reasonable
regulations on the placement and maintenance of equipment
currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some
future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of
state and federal agencies.
B. Definitions. The following definitions apply in this section. References
hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to
subsections in this section. Defined terms remain defined terms
whether or not capitalized.
APPLICANT — Any person requesting permission to excavate, obstruct
and/or occupy a right-of-way.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Public Works of the Village of
Waterford.
EMERGENCY — A condition that:
§ 191-3 WATERFORD CODE § 191-3
159:326
ENGINEER — The Village Engineer or his/her designee.
EXCAVATE — To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
FACILITIES — All equipment owned, operated, leased or subleased in
connection with the operation of a service or utility service, and shall
include but is not limited to poles, wires, pipes, cables, cabinets, boxes,
underground conduits, ducts, manholes, vaults, fiber optic cables, lines,
and other structures and appurtenances.
IN — When used in conjunction with "right-of-way," means over, above,
within, on or under a right-of-way.
LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE — A local person or persons, or designee
of such person or persons, authorized by an applicant or permittee to
accept service and to make decisions for that applicant or permittee
regarding all matters within the scope of this chapter.
OBSTRUCT — To place any object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free
and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
PERMITTEE — Any person to whom a permit to occupy, excavate or
obstruct a right-of-way has been granted by the Village under Chapter
191 of this Code.
PERSON — Corporation, company, association, firm, partnership,
limited-liability company, limited-liability partnership and individuals
and their lessors, transferees, assignees and receivers.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Has the meaning provided in Wis. Stat. § 196.01(5).
RESTORE or RESTORATION — The process by which an excavated
right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation,
is reconstructed, per the Standard Specifications for Public Works
Construction and Department specifications.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The surface and space above and below an improved
or unimproved public roadway, highway, street, bicycle lane and public
sidewalk in which the Village has an interest, including other dedicated
rights-of-way for travel purposes.
VILLAGE — The Village of Waterford, Wisconsin, a Wisconsin municipal
corporation.
Poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health, or of a
significant loss of property; or
(1)
Requires immediate repair or replacement in order to restore
service to a customer.
(2)
C. Administration. The Director of Public Works and the Village
Administrator, or their designees, are responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, and the permits and ordinances
related thereto.
(1) Requirements for right-of-way occupancy.
§ 191-3 MINORS § 191-3
159:327
(a) Each person who has, or seeks to have, facilities located in any
right-of-way shall meet the requirements set forth herein.
(b) No person may construct, install, maintain, repair, remove,
relocate or perform any other work on, or use any equipment
or any part thereof in, any right-of-way unless that person
meets the requirements set forth herein.
(c) Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the
provisions of a Village ordinance requiring persons to plant or
maintain the tree lawn in the area of the right-of-way between
their property and the street curb or pavement or other similar
activities. Persons performing such activities shall not be
required to obtain any permits under this chapter. See also
Chapter 211 for permit requirements for street trees.
(2) Reporting obligations. It is in the best interests of all affected
parties to attempt to coordinate construction in the public right-ofway
whenever it is reasonably possible. Therefore, periodic
reporting by persons intending to work in the right-of-way of known
construction plans will be useful to achieve this objective.
(a) Every person intending to work in the right-of way shall, no
later than January 1 of each year, file a construction and major
maintenance plan with the Department. The Department shall
make available at the time of such filing, and on January 15 of
each year, the Department's construction and major
maintenance plan. The person's plan and the Department's
plan shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the
Department and shall contain the information determined by
the Department to be necessary to facilitate the coordination
and reduction in the frequency of excavations of rights-of-way.
The plan shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following
information:
[1] The locations and the estimated beginning and ending
dates of all projects planned to be commenced during the
next calendar year; and
[2] The tentative locations and estimated beginning and
ending dates for all projects contemplated for the two
years following the next calendar year.
(b) By February 15 of each year, the Department will have
available for inspection in its office a composite list of all
projects of which the Department has been informed in the
annual plans. All persons are responsible for keeping
themselves informed of the current status of this list.
(c) Thereafter, by February 1, each person may change any project
in its list and must notify the Department of all such changes in
said list. The Department will make all such changes available
§ 191-3 WATERFORD CODE § 191-3
159:328
for inspection in its office. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
person may at any time join in a project of another person
listed by the other person or undertake any maintenance or
construction project not listed in person's plan.
D. Permit to excavate and/or place facilities in right-of-way required.
[Amended 5-8-2017 by Ord. No. 652]
(1) Right-of-way permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this
chapter or other chapters of the Code of the Village of Waterford,
no person shall excavate or place any facilities in any right-of-way
without first having obtained a right-of-way permit from the
Department. A copy of any permit issued under this chapter shall
be made available at all times by the permittee at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the Department
upon request.
(2) Right-of-way permit application. Application for a permit shall be
made to the Department. Permit applications shall contain, and will
be considered complete only upon compliance with the
requirements of, the following provisions:
(a) Applicant information. The information provided to the
Department at the time of application shall include, but not be
limited to:
[1] Each applicant's name, Diggers Hotline registration
certificate number, address and e-mail address, if
applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers. If the
applicant intends to hire a contractor, the name and
contact information for the contractor shall be provided,
but the applicant shall be liable for the requirements
herein.
[2] The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and
telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative.
The local representative or designee shall be available at
all times. Current information regarding how to contact
the local representative in an emergency shall be provided
at the time of application.
[3] A certificate of insurance approved by the Village
Administrator, naming the Village of Waterford as an
additional insured, and/or a cash or performance bond, in
an amount determined by the Village Engineer and/or the
Director of Public Works, if the Department has reasonable
grounds to question the financial responsibility or
compliance ability of the applicant.
[4] Execution of an indemnification agreement in a form
prescribed by the Department.
§ 191-3 MINORS § 191-3
159:329
[5] If the applicant regularly performs work in the Village
rights-of-way, the applicant may provide the information
required in Subsection D(2)(a)[1] through [4] herein
annually, provided that the applicant shall be liable to keep
said information up-to-date and shall notify the
Department within 10 calendar days following the date on
which the applicant has knowledge of any change. If
applicable, the applicant's insurer shall be required to
notify the Village 30 days prior to a cancellation or
reduction of coverage or limits.
(b) Submission of a completed permit application form, including
all required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the
location and area of the proposed project and the location of all
existing and proposed facilities that are part of applicant's
proposed project, whether above or below the ground.
(c) Payment of all money due to the Village for:
[1] Applicable permit fees and costs as set forth below;
[2] Subject to Subsection D(2)(d), unpaid fees or costs due for
prior excavations or right-of-way occupancies; or
[3] Subject to Subsection D(2)(d), any loss, damage, or
expense suffered by the Village because of the applicant's
prior excavations or occupancies of the rights-of-way or
any emergency actions taken by the Village.
(d) The Department shall not deny an applicant a right-of-way
permit because of a dispute between the Village and the
applicant, related to Subsection D(2)(c)[2] or [3] if:
[1] The dispute has been adjudicated in favor of the applicant;
or
[2] The dispute is the subject of any appeal filed by the
applicant and no decision in the matter has as yet been
rendered.
(e) The Department may deny an applicant a permit pursuant to
the provisions of this section. See specifically Subsection I.
(3) Right-of-way permit fee. The right-of-way permit fee shall be
established by the Village Board in an amount sufficient to recover
the costs incurred by the Village. This fee shall recover
administrative and inspection costs. Payment of said fees shall be
collected prior to issuance of the permit. However, the Village
Administrator may, with the advice and consent of the Treasurer,
establish a fee collection process from governmental agencies and
private utilities in order to expedite the permitting system and
§ 191-3 WATERFORD CODE § 191-3
159:330
recognize that certain excavations or occupancies are deemed
emergencies.
(4) Waiving of fees. Fees shall not be waived unless the work involved
is a direct result of the Department's demand that facilities owned
by a utility be removed or relocated or unless waived by the
Finance Committee on appeal.
(5) For those permit applications which provide for a substantial
undertaking of excavation or occupancy within the public right-ofway
attended by disruption of the general public and traffic, the
Department is authorized to assess the actual cost of the Village
employee's time engaged in the review and inspection of the
anticipated work multiplied by a factor determined by the
respective department to represent the Village's cost for statutory
expense, benefits, insurance, sick leave, holidays, vacation and
similar benefits, overhead and supervision, said factor not to
exceed 2.0, plus the cost of mileage reimbursed to Village
employees which is attributed to the work, plus all consultant fees
associated with the work at the invoiced amount plus 10% for
administration.
(6) Village exemption. The Village and its contractors shall not pay
permit fees for excavations or occupancies due to general
government functions.
(7) Permit fees paid for a permit that the Department has revoked are
not refundable.
E. Right-of-way work; locating wires; restoration.
(1) Working in the right-of-way.
(a) Frozen ground. No openings shall be permitted when the
ground is frozen in any Village street, sidewalk or parking area
between November 15 and April 1 except where necessary or
in an emergency as determined by the Director of Public
Works.
(b) Removal of paving. In opening any street or other public way,
all paving or ballasting materials shall be saw cut and removed
with the least possible loss of or injury to surfacing materials
and, together with the excavated material from trenches, shall
be placed so as to cause the least practicable inconvenience to
the public and permit free flow of water along gutters. All
pavement shall be straightedge or saw cut in a straight line, on
all sides of the opening to a minimum depth of two inches.
(c) State and county trunk highways. Notwithstanding any other
provision to the contrary, state and county trunk highway
crossings to install services, laterals, etc., shall be effected
through auguring, jacking or tunneling as opposed to making
§ 191-3 MINORS § 191-3
159:331
an opening in the highway itself. The applicant shall also obtain
the necessary permits from the respective highway
commissioners.
(d) Protection of public. Every permittee shall enclose with
sufficient barriers each opening which he/she may make in the
rights-of-way of the Village. All machinery and equipment shall
be locked or otherwise effectively safeguarded from
unauthorized use when not being used by the permittee, his/
her agents or employees. Amber lights shall be placed at each
end of the opening and in other locations necessary to give
adequate warning to the traveling public. Except by special
permission from the Director of Public Works, no trench shall
be excavated more than 250 feet in advance of pipe laying nor
left unfilled for more than 500 feet where pipe has been laid.
All necessary precautions shall be taken to guard the public
effectually from accidents or damage to persons or property
through the period of the work.
(e) Restoring street surface. In making any opening, the paving
materials, sand, gravel and earth or other material moved or
penetrated and all surface monuments or hubs shall be
removed and replaced as nearly as possible to their original
condition or position and the same relation to the remainder as
before. Any excavated material which, in the opinion of the
Director of Public Works, is not suitable for refilling shall be
replaced with approved backfill material. When the sides of the
trench will not stand perpendicular, sheathing and braces shall
be used to prevent caving. All trench backfilling under
pavement, driveways, shoulders and sidewalk shall be of
thoroughly compacted granular backfill. All rubbish shall be
immediately removed. In refilling the opening, the granular
material shall be puddled or laid in layers not more than six
inches deep and in each layer rammed, tamped or flushed to
prevent caving. No timber, bracking, lagging, sheathing or
other lumber shall be left in any trench. All street openings
shall have at least eight inches of compacted crushed road
gravel placed on the top of the opening and shall have the
original surface restored to the same type and thickness.
(f) Backfilling trenches. All trenches shall be backfilled within 24
hours after being opened, unless otherwise permitted by the
Department, and the surface shall be restored within 72 hours
after being opened. The Department reserves the option to
complete restoration of any excavation if the above-mentioned
time limits are exceeded, assessing any cost thereof pursuant
to Subsection E(5).
(g) Tree lawns. Tree lawns shall be restored with sod or seed.
§ 191-3 WATERFORD CODE § 191-3
159:332
(2) Locating wire required. Any person installing a nonconductive
main or lateral shall also install a locating wire for marking the
location of the main or lateral, as follows:
(a) If the main to which the main or lateral is being connected
contains a locating wire, the person shall connect one end of
the locating wire for the main or lateral to the existing wire
located on the stub or the main.
(b) If the main to which the main or lateral is being connected does
not contain a locating wire, the person shall attach the locating
wire for the main or lateral to its junction with the stub or
main.
(c) The person shall continue the installation of the locating wire
for the full length of the main installed, and from the lateral to
point where the lateral enters the structure. The person shall
continue to run the locating wire vertically up the outside of
the structure, from the location where the lateral entered the
structure, and shall encase the uppermost four feet (or more)
of the vertical portion of the locating wire in a one-inch
Schedule 80 PVC conduit, with cap, which shall be accessible
and uniform. The conduit shall extend at least four inches
above the final grade, and shall hold at least one foot of excess
wire. There shall be no plantings at the site that would damage
the conduit or locating wire, or prevent the detection of the
location of the locating wire.
(3) The permittee shall be required to restore the public right-of-way in
accordance with the Standard Specifications for Public Works
Construction and Department specifications, subject to inspection
and acceptance by the Village Engineer. In addition to restoring its
own work, the permittee must restore the general area of the work,
and the surrounding areas, including the paving and its
foundations, to the Standard Specifications for Public Works
Construction and the specifications of the Department. The Village
Engineer shall inspect the area of the work and accept the work
when it determines that proper restoration has been made, per the
Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction and the
specifications of the Department. The permittee shall not be
required to restore the right-of-way or the general area
surrounding the work to a condition which improves the preexcavation
condition.
(4) Guarantees. The permittee shall guarantee its work and shall
maintain it for 12 months following its completion. During this
period it shall, upon notification from the Department, correct all
work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the
Department or the Village Engineer. Said work shall be completed
within 10 calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the
§ 191-3 MINORS § 191-3
159:333
Department, not including days during which work cannot be done
because of circumstances constituting force majeure.
(5) Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way
in the manner and to the condition required by the Village Engineer
or the Department, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all
work required by the Department, the Village, at its option, may do
such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to the Village,
within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way.
F. Inspection; as-built drawings.
(1) Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder
is begun and completed, the permittee shall notify the Department.
Upon completion, the permittee shall submit as-built drawings to
the Village if required by the Department of Public Works.
(2) Site inspection. The permittee shall make the work site available to
the Village Engineer and the Department and to all others as
authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the
execution of and upon completion of the work.
(3) Authority of Department. At the time of inspection, the Village may
order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a threat to
the life, health, safety or wellbeing of the public. The Village may
issue an order to the applicant or permittee for any work that does
not conform to the applicable Village standards, conditions or
codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the violation will
be cause for revocation of the permit. Within 10 days after issuance
of the order, the applicant or permittee shall present proof to the
Department that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has
not been presented within the required time, the Department may
revoke the permit pursuant to Subsection I.
G. Ongoing management fees. The cost of trimming trees or maintaining
landscaping around facilities is an ongoing cost to the Village. The
specific cost will be determined, and a fee to offset those costs may be
assessed in the future.
H. Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a permit to excavate and/or
occupy the right-of-way does not relieve the permittee of its duty to
obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all
fees required by any other Village, county, state, or federal rules, laws
or regulations. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of local,
state and federal laws. A permittee shall perform all work in
conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and
regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way
pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work. If an applicant
is required to obtain a franchise or enter into an agreement pursuant to
any other section of this Code, it shall do so prior to making application
hereunder.
§ 191-3 WATERFORD CODE § 191-3
159:334
I. Revocations, suspensions, refusals to issue or extend permits.
(1) The Department may refuse to issue a permit or may revoke,
suspend or refuse to extend an existing permit if it finds any of the
following grounds:
(a) The applicant has not submitted the required application
materials;
(b) Issuance of a permit for the requested date would interfere
with an exhibition, celebration, festival or other event;
(c) Misrepresentation of any fact by the applicant or permittee;
(d) Failure of the applicant or permittee to maintain required
bonds and/or insurance;
(e) Failure of the applicant or permittee to complete work in a
timely manner;
(f) The proposed activity is contrary to the public health, safety or
welfare;
(g) The extent to which right-of-way space where the permit is
sought is available;
(h) The competing demands for the particular space in the rightof-
way.
(i) The availability of other locations in the right-of-way or in other
rights-of-way for the facilities of the permittee or applicant;
(j) The applicability of ordinances or other regulations of the
right-of-way that affect location of facilities in the right-of-way;
(2) Discretionary issuance. The Department may issue a permit where
issuance is necessary:
(a) To prevent substantial economic hardship to a customer of the
permittee or applicant; or
(b) To allow such customer to materially improve its utility service;
or
(c) To allow the permittee or applicant to comply with state or
federal law or Village ordinance or an order of a court or
administrative agency.
(3) Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Department
revoking, suspending, refusing to issue or refusing to extend a
permit may file a request for review with the Public Works and
Utilities Committee. A request for review shall be filed within 10
days of the decision being appealed. Following a hearing, the
Public Works and Utilities Committee may affirm, reverse or modify
§ 191-3 MINORS § 191-3
159:335
the decision of the Department. A decision of the Public Works
and Utilities Committee may be appealed to the Village Board.
[Amended 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 574]
J. Work done without a permit.
(1) Emergency situations.
(a) Each person shall immediately notify the Village, by verbal
notice on an emergency phone number provided by the Village,
of any event regarding its facilities that it considers to be an
emergency. The person may proceed to take whatever actions
are necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two
business days after the occurrence of the emergency, the
person shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees
associated therewith and otherwise fully comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
(b) If the Village becomes aware of any emergency regarding a
person's facilities, the Department may attempt to contact the
local representative of each person affected, or potentially
affected, by the emergency. The Village may take whatever
action it deems necessary to protect the public safety as a
result of the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the
person whose facilities occasioned the emergency.
(2) Nonemergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person
who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, excavates
a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, and shall, in
addition to any penalties prescribed by ordinance, pay double the
normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by
this chapter or other chapters of the Code of the Village of
Waterford, deposit with the Department the fees necessary to
correct any damage to the right-of-way and comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter.
K. Location of facilities. [Amended 5-8-2017 by Ord. No. 652]
(1) Placement.
(a) Unless in conflict with state or federal law, except when
existing aboveground facilities are used, the installation of new
facilities and replacement of old facilities shall be done
underground or contained within buildings or other structures
in conformity with applicable codes.
(b) All aboveground structures, poles, cabinets or boxes shall be
precisely indicated on the plans submitted pursuant to
Subsection D(2)(b), including the size and appearance thereof.
[1] The Department may require alternative placement of said
structures, poles, cabinets or boxes as part of the
§ 191-3 WATERFORD CODE § 191-3
159:336
permitting process if it determines that the planned
placement interferes with public safety, health or welfare.
In addition:
[a] No aboveground structure, pole, cabinet or box may
be placed in a vision clearance triangle or other area
where a driver's line of sight may be obstructed.
[b] No structure, pole, cabinet or box may be placed in a
location that would interfere with the provision of
municipal police or fire services.
[c] Rigid nonbreakaway utility structures shall be located
a minimum of 10 feet from roadway curbs or
shoulders and behind existing or future sidewalks.
[d] Additional restrictions for poles and structures over
60 feet in height. No pole or structure over 60 feet in
height may be placed in the right-of-way within a
zoning district that allows residential uses or within
500 feet of such a district. A pole or structure over 60
feet in height may only be placed in a location where
there is a clear fall zone of any building that would
reasonably be expected to have people inside or
underneath. An application for a permit for a pole or
structure over 60 feet in height shall include:
[i] An analysis of alternate existing sites in the rightof-
way or elsewhere in or near the Village that
shows no suitable alternate site is available and
that no ground-based distribution system, or
newer technology, is possible.
[ii] A roadside hazard analysis that shows that the
placement of the structure does not exceed the
risk of placing a structure 60 feet or less in height
in the same location.
[iii] An ice shedding and ice throw risk assessment
inclusive of mitigation measures that will be used.
[iv] A plan for the replacement of any nonnuisance
tree or other vegetation that must be removed to
accommodate the pole or structure and its
associated equipment.
[v] An erosion control plan for use when an
excavation site or ground disturbance is not
restored within 24 hours.
[vi] Proof of compliance with the Wisconsin Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
§ 191-3 MINORS § 191-3
159:337
[vii] Proof that the weight of any equipment placed on
a structure will not compromise its structural
integrity, and proof that said equipment will not
interfere with existing equipment located in the
vicinity.
[viii] An environmental analysis at each pole or
structure location.
[2] Cabinets and boxes should not be placed in the right-ofway.
If allowed in the right-of-way, cabinets and boxes,
along with all other aboveground facilities, shall be located
as close to the right-of-way line as practical.
[3] The Department may also reasonably require screening of
structures, cabinets or boxes if it determines that the
public welfare is harmed by the potential diminution of
property values in the area because of the appearance of
said structures, cabinets or boxes.
[4] No aboveground facility, pole, structure, cabinet or box
may interfere with the use of the adjacent property
without the written authorization of the property owner.
(c) All underground facilities shall be precisely indicated on the
plans submitted pursuant to Subsection D(2)(b). The
Department may require alternative placement of said
facilities as part of the permitting process if it determines that
said facilities interfere with the public safety, health or welfare.
No underground facility may interfere with the use of the
adjacent property.
(2) Limitation of space. The Department may prohibit or limit the
placement of new or additional facilities within the right-of-way if
there is insufficient space to accommodate all of the requests of
persons to occupy and use the right-of-way. In making such
decisions, the Department shall strive, to the extent possible, to
accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-of-way
but may prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional
facilities when required to protect the public health, safety or
welfare. Basic required municipal uses, such as sewer, water and
storm sewer mains and laterals, shall be given priority in
furtherance of such protection of the public health, safety and
welfare.
(3) Attachment to bridges. Whenever an applicant or permittee under
this section requests permission to attach pipes, conduits, cables or
wires to any Village bridge structure, upon the granting of such
permission, the applicant shall pay the actual cost to the Village of
the administrative and engineering expense in the analysis and
inspection of such installation. The owner of such pipes, conduits,
cables or wires shall be entitled to no compensation for removal or
§ 191-3 WATERFORD CODE § 191-3
159:338
relocation of the same in the case of repair, removal, or
replacement of said bridge structure by the Village.
L. Relocation of facilities.
(1) Permanent relocation.
(a) A person must, promptly and at its own expense, permanently
remove and relocate its facilities in the right-of-way whenever
the Village, acting in its governmental capacity for the health,
safety or public welfare, requests such removal and relocation.
If requested, the person shall restore the right-of-way.
(b) Notwithstanding Subsection L(1)(a), a person shall not be
required to remove or relocate its facilities from any right-ofway
which has been vacated in favor of a nongovernmental
entity unless and until the person gives written consent to the
vacation, or the person fails to use the easements and rights
for a period of four years from the date of the vacation, or the
reasonable costs of the relocation are first paid to the person
therefor, pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.1005.
(c) A person must, promptly and at its own expense, permanently
relocate its facilities in the public right-of-way if the placement
or location of the facilities interferes with an adjacent
property's connection to a required utility. A required utility is
municipal water service (see § 223-15), municipal sewer
service (see § 223-19), and municipal stormwater service (see
Chapter 250). The Village mandates connection to said
required utilities for the health, safety and welfare of the
public, and such connection shall not be considered to be
substantially for the benefit of any person other than the
Village.
(d) A person must, promptly and at its own expense, permanently
relocate its facilities in the public right-of-way if the right-ofway
is being widened or altered for the public health, safety or
welfare and the location of the facilities interferes with such
widening or alteration.
(2) Temporary relocation.
(a) A person must, promptly and at its own expense, temporarily
protect, change or relocate its facilities in the right-of-way
whenever the Village, acting in its governmental capacity for
the health, safety or public welfare, requests such protection,
change or relocation. If requested, the person shall restore the
right-of-way.
(b) A person must, promptly and at its own expense, temporarily
protect, change or relocate its facilities in the public right-ofway
if the placement or location of the facilities interferes with
§ 191-3 MINORS § 191-3
159:339
an adjacent property's connection to a required utility. A
required utility is municipal water service (see § 223-15),
municipal sewer service (see § 223-19), and municipal
stormwater service (see Chapter 250). The Village mandates
connection to said required utilities for the health, safety and
welfare of the public, and such connection shall not be
considered to be substantially for the benefit of any person
other than the Village.
M. Interference with other facilities during municipal construction.
(1) When the Village performs work in the right-of-way and finds it
necessary to maintain, support, shore, or move a person's facilities,
the Village shall notify the local representative. The person or its
representative shall meet with the Village's representative within
24 hours and coordinate the protection, maintenance, supporting
and/or shoring of the person's facilities. The person shall
accomplish the needed work within 72 hours, unless the Village
agrees to a longer period.
(2) In the event that the person does not proceed to maintain, support,
shore or move its facilities, the Village may arrange to do the work
and bill the person, said bill to be paid within 30 days.
N. Discontinued operations; abandoned facilities.
(1) Discontinued operations.
(a) A person who has determined to discontinue its operations in
the Village must either:
[1] Provide information satisfactory to the Department that
the person's obligations for its facilities under this chapter
have been lawfully assumed by another person; or
[2] Submit to the Department a proposal and instruments for
dedication of its facilities to the Village. If a person
proceeds under this clause, the Village may, but shall not
be required to:
[a] Accept the dedication for all or a portion of the
facilities; or
[b] Require the person, at its own expense, to remove the
facilities in the right-of-way at ground level or above
ground level; or
[c] Require the person to post a bond or provide payment
sufficient to reimburse the Village for reasonably
anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the
facilities.
§ 191-3 WATERFORD CODE § 191-3
159:340
§ 191-4. Obstructions and encroachments.
(b) However, any person who has unusable and abandoned
facilities in any right-of-way shall remove them from that rightof-
way within two years, unless the Department waives this
requirement.
(2) Abandoned facilities. Facilities of a person who fails to comply with
Subsection N(1), and which, for two years, remain unused, shall be
deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a
nuisance. In addition to any remedies or rights it has at law or in
equity, the Village may, but shall not be required to:
(a) Abate the nuisance; or
(b) Take possession of the facilities; or
(c) Require removal of the facilities by the person, or the person's
successor in interest.
(3) Public utilities. This Subsection N shall not apply to a public utility,
as defined by Wis. Stats. § 196.01(5), that is required to follow the
provisions of Wis. Stats. § 196.81.
O. Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The Village, by the
granting of a permit to excavate, obstruct and/or occupy the right-ofway
under this chapter, does not surrender or in any extent lose, waive,
impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights which it has now or may
be hereafter granted to the Village under the Constitution and statutes
of the State of Wisconsin to regulate the use of the right-of-way by the
permittee; and the permittee, by its acceptance of a permit to excavate,
obstruct and/or occupy the right-of-way under this chapter, agrees that
all lawful powers and rights, regulatory powers, or police power, or
otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or
reserved to the Village, shall be in full force and effect and subject to
the regulatory and police powers of the Village to adopt and enforce
general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public
and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general law and
ordinances enacted by the Village pursuant to such powers.
P. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or
portion of this section is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional
by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such
portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision
and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
thereof.
Q. Penalty. Any person who violates this section or fails to comply with the
provisions of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than
$120 nor more than $600. Each day such violation or failure to comply
continues shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 191-3 MINORS § 191-4
159:341
A. Prohibited. No person shall encroach upon or in any way obstruct or
encumber any street, alley, sidewalk, public grounds or land dedicated
to public use or any part thereof or permit such encroachment or
encumbrance to be placed or remain on any public way adjoining the
premises of which he is the owner or occupant, except as provided in
Subsection B.
B. Exceptions. Subsection A shall not apply to the following:
(1) Signs and clocks with valid sign permits attached to buildings
which project not more than six feet from the face of such building
and which do not extend at any point lower than 10 feet above the
sidewalk, street or alley. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
(2) Awnings which do not extend at any point lower than seven feet
above the sidewalk, street or alley.
(3) Public utility encroachments authorized by the Village.
(4) Goods, wares, merchandise or fixtures being loaded or unloaded
which do not extend more than three feet on a sidewalk, provided
such articles do not remain thereon for more than three hours.
(5) Building materials, when placed upon the street, alley or sidewalk
upon conditions prescribed by the Department of Public Works,
which may require such materials to be protected by barricades or
appropriate lights. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
(6) Mailboxes. Mailboxes may be located in the Village of Waterford's
right-of-way if they are installed per the USPS Residential Mailbox
Standards and conform to the following standards. No permit is
required. All mailboxes placed in the right-of-way are placed there
at the owner's risk. [Added 12-13-2010 by Ord. No. 563]
(a) Standards.
[1] The front of the box must be set back a minimum of eight
inches from the back of curb, or, in locations where there
is no curb, a minimum of eight inches from the existing
graveled shoulder of the road. The mailbox door when
opened shall not extend past the back of the curb or
graveled shoulder of the road.
[2] The support shall be a wood post, steel pipe, or steel
channel installed no more than 24 inches in the ground
and extending to a vertical height such that the bottom of
the mailbox is a minimum of 42 inches but not to exceed a
maximum of 48 inches above the road surface. The support
shall be one of the following dimensions:
[a] Square wood post: four inches by four inches.
[b] Round wood post: four inches in diameter.
§ 191-4 WATERFORD CODE § 191-4
159:342
[c] Steel pipe: one-and-one-half inch inside diameter.
[d] Steel channel: two pounds per foot.
[3] The support shall not be set in concrete, nor is a base plate
acceptable. Anti-twist flanges may be installed on the pipe
or channel supports but shall not be imbedded more than
10 inches into the ground.
[4] Attachment. The box-to-post attachment shall be sufficient
to prevent the separation of the box from the support post
when struck.
[5] Multiple mailboxes. No more than two mailboxes may be
mounted on one post. For a multiple installation, support
posts must be spaced a minimum longitudinal distance
apart which is equal to three-quarters of the height of the
posts in the installation. For example, in an installation
where posts are four feet above ground, they should be
spaced three feet apart. The Director of Public Works may
approve the design and installation of clusters or groups of
mailboxes that vary from this requirement at his or her
discretion.
[6] No mailbox shall be placed within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
[7] The Department of Public Works will maintain a supply of
standard drawings of approved mailbox installations.
(b) Damage. Any claim of damage from snow removal operations
will be investigated by Department of Public Works Staff. In the
event that a mailbox that is installed in accordance with this
section is actually hit and damaged by Village-owned snowremoval
equipment and cannot be repaired, the owner may
make a claim to the Director of Public Works, who shall
proceed according to Village policy. The Village is not liable for
any damage to mailboxes caused by snow and ice being pushed
off the roadway by Village equipment.
(c) Owner's responsibility to remove snow. Since plows cannot
plow directly up to the edge of a mailbox, it is the property
owner's responsibility to keep snow and ice cleared up to the
curb in front of their mailbox to enable the Postal Service to
have unobstructed access to the mailbox so that carriers can
safely and efficiently deliver the mail. Failure to keep this area
clear of snow and ice may result in an interruption of mail
service.
(d) Limits. Newspaper tubes may be attached to the mailbox post.
No other object of any kind shall be attached to the mailbox,
newspaper tube or their supports. No other objects, including
§ 191-4 MINORS § 191-4
159:343
but not limited to landscaping boulders or fences, may be
placed on the right-of-way.
(e) This section is not intended to and shall not be construed to
create any affirmative duty on the part of the Village of
Waterford to locate and remove obstructing mailboxes.
(7) Sidewalk seating and decorative displays. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this Municipal Code, the Village wishes to allow
the operation of sidewalk seating, dining, and outdoor displays to
provide for increased activity, revitalization, and business
opportunities. Sidewalk seating, dining, and outdoor displays are
subject to the standards set forth in this section, which are
developed to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the public
with the least imposition on pedestrians, vehicular movement, and
business patrons and proprietors. No person shall allow sidewalk
seating and/or installation of a decorative display on sidewalks
unless said seating or decorative display is in conformance with a
permit issued pursuant to this section. [Added 11-26-2012 by
Ord. No. 595]
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used
in this section shall have the meanings given in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
DECORATIVE DISPLAY — A display designed for the
entertainment or cultural enrichment of the public and has no
direct or indirect sales or advertising content.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a highway between the
curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent
property lines, constructed for use by pedestrians. It does not
include any portion of a multiuse pathway.
SIDEWALK SEATING AREA and/or DECORATIVE DISPLAY
AREA — The area designated in the permit and includes any
tables, chairs, benches, barriers or partitions, trash containers,
and decorative displays maintained upon any part of the
sidewalk in the permit area.
(b) Permit required. [Amended 12-27-2016 by Ord. No. 647]
[1] Except as set forth in Subsection B(7)(b)[2], no person or
business shall maintain a sidewalk seating or decorative
display area unless a permit for the area has been issued
under this section. A seasonal permit is required for
sidewalk seating and/or decorative displays and shall be
issued by the Director of Public Works or the Director’s
designee. In making the determination whether to issue a
permit, the Director of Public Works or the Director’s
designee shall, on a case-by-case basis, take into
consideration public safety, size of the sidewalk seating or
§ 191-4 WATERFORD CODE § 191-4
159:344
decorative display area, location with respect to
residential uses and neighborhood conditions, noise, and
security.
[2] No permit, application fee, or proof of insurance is
required for displays of vegetation placed next to a
building’s facade, providing that there is compliance with
all pertinent restrictions in Subsections B(7)(e), Location;
B(7)(h)[1][a], Sidewalk Clearance; B(7)(h)[1][b], Proximity
to Street; B(7)(h)[1][d], Ingress and Egress; and the
following regulations:
[a] The rear edges of flowerpots or planters must be
placed no further than six inches away from the
building wall and may not extend more than a total of
18 inches from the wall.
[b] Flowerpots and planters must be kept level, tended
regularly, and have dead materials removed regularly.
[c] Plantings must be of such a nature as to not pose harm
to passersby, such as thorns, prickly plants, or vines
that trail into the right-of-way.
[d] Notwithstanding that a permit is not required under
this subsection, the provisions of Subsections B(7)(j),
Suspension and revocation of permits, and B(7)(o),
Violations, apply as though a permit has been issued
for the display.
(c) No person or business shall maintain a sidewalk seating or
decorative display area unless the sidewalk seating/decorative
display is in conformance with the standards and requirements
of this section.
(d) Application and fee. An applicant for a permit under this
section shall file an application on a form provided by the
Village Clerk, and must include a site plan drawn to scale and
shall accurately describe the area and furniture, and indicate
the nature of fencing or other measures intended to provide
control over the operation of the area if those measures are
required in this section. The application shall be signed by the
applicant, and if the business operator is a tenant, then also by
the property owner. The initial application shall be
accompanied by a drawing of the site requested to be used,
showing the approximate location of the furniture and
decorative displays. The application shall also be accompanied
by a nonrefundable fee in an amount set by the Village Board
and set forth on the Fee Schedule.76
76.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 191-4 MINORS § 191-4
159:345
(e) Location. A sidewalk seating and/or decorative display area
may be permitted on the public sidewalk immediately in front
of the applicant's business or property. It shall not encroach on
neighboring property. The sidewalk seating or decorative
display area shall be limited to the area identified in the
permit. If more than one business is located on a property and
wish to use the sidewalk, the business applying first shall be
given priority. No permit shall be issued if the sidewalk and use
does not meet the standards and restrictions set forth in this
section.
(f) Indemnification/insurance. The permit holder shall defend,
indemnify and hold harmless the Village and its officers and
employees from and against all claims, losses, damage, injury
and liability for damages arising from the permit holder's use
of the public right-of-way. The permit holder shall provide to
the Village, in a form acceptable to the Village, a certificate of
insurance substantiating the existence of a general liability
policy, in an amount not less than $1,000,000, covering the
area subject to the permit. The Village shall be named as an
additional insured. The insurance certificate shall be provided
to and approved by the Village prior to issuance of the permit.
(g) Hours and months of operation. A permitted sidewalk seating
area may be open daily from 6:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m., from
April 1 through October 31. A new permit and permit fee is
required annually.
(h) Standards and restrictions.
[1] Physical requirements.
[a] Sidewalk clearance. An unobstructed sidewalk
clearance of four feet shall be maintained for
pedestrians at all times from the edge of any table,
chair, bench, planter, or other appurtenance used as
part of a sidewalk seating or decorative display area.
The entire seating area must be paved with concrete,
asphalt, brick or pavers.
[b] Proximity to street. Where the sidewalk seating or
decorative display area is located adjacent to the
street, in addition to the requirements stated in
Subsection B(7)[1][a] above, an eighteen-inch
clearance shall be maintained from the face of the
curb to the sidewalk seating or decorative display area
unless there is parking parallel to the street, in which
case a thirty-inch clearance is required.
[c] Table size. Tables located within the sidewalk seating
area shall be sized so as to maintain the required fourfoot,
unobstructed sidewalk clearance zone.
§ 191-4 WATERFORD CODE § 191-4
159:346
[d] Ingress and egress. No sidewalk seating or decorative
display shall obstruct any points of building ingress
and/or egress.
[e] Vision corners. On a corner lot, no sidewalk seating or
decorative display area shall be located within the
area bound by the extensions of the corner building
walls between the building and the curb.
[f] Attachments. No portion of a fixture or feature of the
sidewalk seating or decorative display area may be
permanently attached to the sidewalk or building.
[g] Parking increase. Sidewalk seating shall be exempt
from additional parking requirements of Chapter 245,
Zoning.
[h] Lighting and sound. No additional exterior lighting is
permitted in a sidewalk seating or decorative display
area. No entertainment or use, operation or playing of
any musical instrument, loudspeaker, sound amplifier,
or other machine for the reproduction of sound is
permitted unless a special events permit is issued
pursuant to Chapter 188 of this Municipal Code.
[i] All items in the sidewalk seating or outdoor display
area must be removed at the end of each business day,
or 9:15 p.m., whichever is later, or must be adequately
secured to prevent theft, or will be subject to removal
by the Village. The Village is not responsible for any
item in the sidewalk seating or outdoor display area.
[j] The placement of any item on the public sidewalk that
is not in compliance with these regulations is subject
to removal by the Village without warning. Items
removed by the Village will be disposed of without
compensation provided to the owner of the items. The
cost of removal will be billed to the permit holder.
Failure to pay the bill for costs within 30 days of billing
will result in the costs being placed on the tax roll as a
special charge against the property at which the
permit holder was located.
[2] Design. The design of all improvements and furniture shall
be of a quality to sustain weather and wear, and shall be of
natural finishes or dark colors.
[3] Maintenance.
[a] The permit holder shall maintain the sidewalk seating
or decorative display area and the adjoining street,
curb, gutter and sidewalk in a neat, clean, sanitary
§ 191-4 MINORS § 191-4
159:347
and orderly condition at all times, regardless of the
source of the refuse and litter. Trash disposal shall
be inside the establishment operating the sidewalk
seating area. The permit holder shall remove litter
from the adjoining properties which may have come
from the sidewalk seating or decorative display area.
[b] Activities in the sidewalk seating or decorative display
area shall be conducted in a manner that does not
interfere with pedestrians, parking or traffic.
[c] The permit holder shall be responsible for preventing
excessive noise to ensure minimal or no intrusion on
the merchants and inhabitants of the surrounding
properties.
[d] The permit holder shall clean the surface of the
sidewalk by washing or buffing to remove any stains,
marks, or discoloration. In so cleaning, the permit
holder shall not allow any chemical or debris
substance to enter the storm sewer.
(i) Service of intoxicating liquor and/or fermented malt
beverages.
[1] The permit holder may sell and serve intoxicating liquor
and/or fermented malt beverages only if the permit holder
holds the appropriate license and has obtained approval of
the inclusion of the sidewalk seating area in its described
licensed premises by the Village Board. The license shall
be automatically conditioned at the time of approval of the
sidewalk seating area in the license with a limitation that
the enlargement of the premises to allow for the activity of
service or consumption of intoxicating liquor or fermented
malt beverages within the sidewalk seating area under
such liquor license has no vested rights and may be
suspended or revoked or nonrenewed by the Village Board
without cause being shown.
[2] Sidewalk seating areas where intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverages are to be served must be
defined by an enclosure of no more than three feet in
height measured from the sidewalk. Enclosures shall be
designed in compliance with ADA accessibility guidelines.
An enclosure shall be compatible with the appearance and
design of the associated building and sidewalk seating
area. Enclosures shall be portable and may consist of
planters, removable bollards/barriers or similar features
that involve no alteration to or damage to the sidewalk.
[3] Intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages must be
sold and served by the licensee or licensee's employees
§ 191-4 WATERFORD CODE § 191-4
159:348
and sold or served only to patrons seated at tables in the
sidewalk seating area, and must be served in plastic cups.
[4] Each license holder shall be responsible for policing the
area of the sidewalk seating to ensure that the beverages
are not removed from the sidewalk seating area. Tables
must be cleared as soon as patrons leave.
[5] Small cards must be placed on each table giving notice
that removal of intoxicating liquor or fermented malt
beverages from the sidewalk seating area is not allowed.
[6] Storage and/or preparation of intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverages shall not be permitted in the
sidewalk seating area. The bar from which such beverages
are dispensed shall be located indoors and shall not be
located in the sidewalk seating area.
(j) Suspension and revocation of permits.
[1] Temporary suspension by Director of Public Works for
conflicts. The Director of Public Works or the Director's
designee shall have the right to suspend or prohibit the
operation of a sidewalk seating or decorative display area
at any time because of problems or conflicts in the use of
the area. Such problems or conflicts may arise from, but
are not limited to, scheduled festivals, parades, marches,
and similar special events, repairs to the street, sidewalk
or the public facility, or from demonstrations or
emergencies occurring in the area. To the extent possible,
the Village will give prior notice of any time period during
which the operation of the sidewalk seating or decorative
display area must be suspended.
[2] Suspension and revocation of permit for noncompliance. In
the event of noncompliance with this section by the permit
holder, its agents, employees, or patrons, the Director of
Public Works or the Director's designee may suspend or
revoke the permit upon notice to the permit holder.
[3] Revocation or nonrenewal of permits at the option of the
Village Board. The Village Board may determine that use
of the public sidewalk shall cease, even without a showing
of cause, in the entirety or a portion of the Village. In that
event, no sidewalk seating and/or outdoor displays of any
kind at that location may continue on the public sidewalk,
and no tables or chairs or other encumbrances of the
sidewalk may remain.
[4] In the event that permits are suspended or revoked for any
reason, items on the public sidewalk shall be removed
immediately upon notice to the permit holder. If not
§ 191-4 MINORS § 191-4
159:349
removed by the end of the day that notice is delivered,
the Director of Public Works or the Director's designee
shall cause the encumbrance to be removed and the cost
thereof billed to the permit holder. Failure to pay the bill
for costs within 30 days of billing will result in the costs
being placed on the tax roll as a special charge against the
property at which the permit holder was located.
(k) This section does not limit the Director of Public Works' or the
Director's designee's authority to refuse to issue permits for
the use of the public sidewalk for sidewalk seating and/or
outdoor displays in individual cases, even if the applicant or
permit holder meets all conditions of this section.
(l) A permit under this section is a privilege, not a right. The
issuance of any permit under this section may not be construed
to create a vested right for the benefit of any person or any
liquor or fermented malt beverage licensee. Whether a permit
is issued or suspended or nonrenewed or revoked is within the
Director of Public Works' or the Director's designee's and the
Village Board's discretion, and no cause must be shown for any
adverse action with regard to any sidewalk seating and/or
decorative display permit.
(m) The no cause standard on nonissuance, nonrenewal,
suspension or revocation is deemed reasonable by the Village
Board due to the Village Board's recognition that the sidewalk
is primarily for the benefit of the public as a whole for
pedestrian travel within its entire width at all times, and that
the encumbrance permitted through the issuance of a sidewalk
seating and/or decorative display permit is a special privilege
that may be extended or withdrawn at any time and for any
reason. The notice and hearing provisions of this section may
not be construed as a recognition of any right on the part of the
permit holder to such special use of the public sidewalk.
(n) Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Director of
Public Works or the Director's designee shall have the right to
appeal such decision to the Village Board provided such appeal
is taken within 30 days of the determination or decision. The
permit holder may request a public hearing before the Board.
Upon appeal, the Village Board may restore, suspend or revoke
the privilege of providing sidewalk seating and/or outdoor
displays on public sidewalks.
(o) Violations.
[1] In addition to the provisions set forth in this section, any
sidewalk seating or decorative display that is initiated,
operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of this
section, including, but not limited to, unlawfully
§ 191-4 WATERFORD CODE § 191-4
159:350
§ 191-5. Snow and ice removal. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No.
467; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
obstructing the public right-of-way, or failure to
adequately maintain and clean the sidewalk seating and/
or decorative display area, shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code.
[2] Persons who are legally in possession of or consuming
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in a
location for which a valid permit has been issued under
this section are not in violation of § 174-6 of this Municipal
Code, Drinking in public.
A. Sidewalks to be kept clear. The owner or occupant of any lot or parcel
within the Village shall, within 24 hours after the end of any storm,
remove all snow and ice which may have fallen or accumulated upon
the sidewalk in front of such lot or parcel; provided when ice has so
formed that it cannot be removed, the owner or occupant shall keep the
same sprinkled with a material which will prevent the sidewalk from
being dangerous to pedestrians. If the owner or occupant fails to
comply with this subsection, the Department of Public Works shall
cause the snow or ice to be removed or sprinkled as required in this
subsection and the cost thereof assessed against the property as a
special tax as provided in Subsection B. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 489]
B. Assessment. After clearing or sprinkling any such sidewalk as provided
in Subsection A, the Village Department of Public Works shall file with
the Village Clerk a written report containing a description of the lot or
tract charged and the expenses chargeable to the same; and the Clerk
shall mail to the owner of each such lot or tract, at his last known
address, a statement of such expenses. When paid, the amount so paid
shall be credited to the Village General Fund. If any such bill remains
unpaid on October 1 next following the clearing or sprinkling of the
sidewalk, the Village Clerk shall insert such charge in the general tax
roll of the Village; and the same shall be collected in the same manner
as other special taxes.
C. Snow not to be deposited in streets. No person shall cause to be
deposited snow from his premises or the sidewalk abutting thereon
onto any street in the Village.77 [Amended 2-10-2014 by Ord. No.
614]
D. Fines and penalties. In addition to the assessment or reimbursement
provisions set forth above, the Village may issue citations and impose
penalties for violation of this section.
77.Editor's Note: Former § 8.06, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
12-9-1997 by Ord. No. 346. Former § 8.07, Official map established, was deleted 1-23-2006
by Ord. No. 489. See now Ch. 54, Official Map.
§ 191-4 MINORS § 191-6
159:351
§ 191-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any order, rule
or regulation made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code.
Chapter 195
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Permits required — See Ch. 98, § 98-27.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 142.
Nuisances — See Ch. 165.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 223.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
§ 195-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
POOL OWNER — Every person or entity that owns, directly or indirectly,
or operates, uses or has custody or control of or has the right to use any
swimming pool.
SWIMMING POOL — Any man-made depression in the ground, either
temporary or permanent, or a container of water, either temporary or
permanent and either above or below the ground, in which water of 42 or
more inches in depth at any point is contained, or which has a diameter of
10 feet or more. Spas, hot tubs, in-ground, aboveground and public pools
are included in this definition.[Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
§ 195-2. Applicability; effective date.
All pool owners as defined herein shall abide by the regulations contained
in this chapter. These regulations are applicable to all swimming pools,
including those constructed before the effective date of this chapter.
§ 195-3. Barriers to entry.
A. Every swimming pool shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall
not less than four feet in height, but not to exceed six feet in height,
which shall be constructed so as to not have openings, holes or gaps
which would allow access by unauthorized persons, except for doors or
gates. A dwelling or accessory structure may be used as part of the
enclosure. A spa or hot tub may be made inaccessible by a locking
safety cover or other approved safety barrier when not in use, in lieu of
the requirement for a fence or wall. Any type of barrier shall be
designed and shall be of such size, strength, construction and proximity
§ 191-6 WATERFORD CODE § 195-3
159:352
§ 195-4. Gates and door openings.
All gates or doors opening through enclosures shall be equipped with an
inside, self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door
securely closed at all times when not in actual use. The door for any
dwelling which forms part of the enclosure need not be so equipped, but
shall be secured in a similar manner.
§ 195-5. Safety devices.
Safety devices shall be supplied for every swimming pool. At least one
life preserver or rope or other safety device shall be supplied for every
swimming pool with a capacity for water of at least four feet or which is at
least 10 feet in diameter.
§ 195-6. Drainage.
No water drained from a swimming pool may be discharged into an adjacent
property without the written consent of the owner of that property, or into
the municipal sanitary sewerage system, or directly into a navigable body
of water.
§ 195-7. Electrical requirements. [Amended 11-11-2013 by Ord. No.
610]
Separation from overhead and underground electrical wiring shall be in
accordance with the State Electrical Code as adopted in Chapter 98 of this
Municipal Code, which requires that no swimming pool shall be located
directly under or over electrical transmission lines, or within 10 feet of
said lines; but if the electrical transmission lines are underground, this
separation distance may be reduced to five feet. All electrical connections
to a swimming pool, as defined herein, whether considered a permanent,
storable, portable or temporary pool, shall conform to the requirements of
Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 316 and may require an electrical permit as set
forth in Chapter 98.
to the swimming pool so as to safeguard a child's unregulated access
to the swimming pool. Said barrier shall be in place prior to filling the
swimming pool.
B. A fence or wall is not required around an aboveground swimming pool
where the pool wall is at least 48 inches above the highest point of
grade for the full pool perimeter. The finished grade shall be maintained
for a minimum of four feet beyond the outside of the full perimeter of
the pool. In such cases, all means of access to the pool shall be secured
when not in use. If an access ladder is provided, it shall be designed and
used so that it is locked, tipped, or removed and placed to prohibit
access to the pool by children.
§ 195-3 MINORS § 195-8
159:353
§ 195-8. Maintenance.
All swimming pools designed to keep water throughout the summer shall
be maintained in such a way as to not create a nuisance, hazard, eyesore,
or otherwise result in a substantial adverse effect upon neighboring
properties, or to be in any way detrimental to public health, safety or
welfare; said water shall be properly treated to prevent the growth of algae.
§ 195-9. Exceptions.
Those pool owners owning pools classified as public swimming pools and
requiring state permits pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code ch. Comm 90, Design
and Construction of Public Swimming Pools, and ch. HFS 172, Safety,
Maintenance and Operation of Public Swimming Pools, shall be required
to construct, maintain and operate their pools as set forth in the state
code, and are excepted from the requirements herein only insofar as these
requirements are in conflict with the state requirements.
§ 195-10. Violations and penalties.
Violators of this chapter shall be subject to penalties as provided in Chapter
1, Article II, of this Code.
Chapter 202
TOBACCO PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 154. Minors — See Ch. 159.
§ 195-8 WATERFORD CODE § 195-10
159:354
ARTICLE I
Use and Sale Restrictions
[Adopted as §§ 9.15 through 9.165 and 9.20 of the 1998 Code]
§ 202-1. Statewide smoking ban; use of tobacco on school grounds
and within public buildings. [Amended 7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 558]
§ 202-2. Purchase or possession of cigarettes or tobacco products
by persons under 18. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489;
1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 566]
The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 254.92 are hereby adopted in strict
conformance with said statute, as authorized in Wis. Stats. § 254.92(4), as
follows:
A. Statewide smoking ban. Wisconsin Statutes § 101.123, Smoking
prohibited, is hereby adopted as though fully set forth herein in order to
protect the health and comfort of the public, pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 101.123(4m). The prohibition against smoking in enclosed places set
forth in Wis. Stats. § 101.123, effective on July 5, 2010, includes, but is
not limited to, smoking in enclosed public places, places of
employment, day-care centers, educational facilities, theaters,
restaurants, taverns, private clubs, retail establishments, common
areas of certain multiple-unit residential properties, lodging
establishments, and public buildings. The statute also imposes
responsibilities on persons in charge of the listed sites, including but
not limited to: requiring that persons in charge may not allow smoking,
and persons in charge must make reasonable efforts to prohibit persons
from smoking in those sites by posting signs, refusing to serve persons
who are smoking in restaurants, taverns and private clubs, asking
persons to refrain from smoking or leave the premises, and notifying
law enforcement of violations if persons refuse to leave the premises.
B. Use of any form of tobacco prohibited on school grounds. No person
shall chew, ingest or in any other way use tobacco products of any
nature in the buildings or on the grounds of real property owned by the
Waterford Union High School District or the Waterford Grade School
District Joint Number 1 located within the corporate limits of the
Village.
C. Use of any form of tobacco prohibited within public buildings. No
person shall chew, ingest or in any other way use tobacco products of
any nature in any public building owned or occupied by the Village and
located within the corporate limits of the Village.
A. No person under 18 years of age may falsely represent his or her age
for the purpose of receiving any cigarette or tobacco product.
B. No person under 18 years of age may purchase, attempt to purchase, or
possess cigarettes or tobacco products, except a person under the age
of 18 years may purchase or possess cigarettes or tobacco products for
§ 202-1 MINORS § 202-2
159:355
§ 202-3. Restrictions on sale or gift of cigarettes or tobacco
products. [Added 2-23-1998 by Ord. No. 361]
The Village of Waterford shall adopt Wis. Stats. § 134.66, all as though fully
set forth herein, and providing that this article adopting this state statute
by incorporation shall strictly conform to the state model.
§ 202-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, or any regulation,
rule or order made hereunder, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code, except for any specific section
penalty provisions contained within the body of any such section.
the sole purpose of resale in the course of employment during his or
her working hours if employed by a retailer, and a person under 18
years of age, but not under 15 years of age, may purchase or attempt
to purchase cigarettes and tobacco products in the court of his or her
participation in an investigation under Wis. Stats. § 254.916 that is
conducted in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 254.916(3).
C. No person may purchase cigarettes on behalf of, or to provide to, any
person under the age of 18.
D. A law enforcement officer shall seize any cigarette or tobacco product
that has been sold to and is in the possession of a person under 18 years
of age.
E. Any person violating the provisions of this section will be subject to
forfeitures as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, of this Code.
§ 202-2 WATERFORD CODE § 202-4
159:356
ARTICLE II
Retailers
[Adopted 1-10-2002 by Ord. No. 386]
§ 202-5. State statutes adopted.
The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 134.65, relating to the sale of cigarettes and
tobacco products, are adopted in their entirety.
§ 202-6. License required; fee.
§ 202-7. Issuance of license. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
The application for such license shall be obtained from the Clerk. Such
completed application shall be approved by the Village Board prior to
issuance of the license.
§ 202-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be
subject to a penalty as provided under Wis. Stats. § 134.65 and Chapter 1,
Article II, of this Municipal Code. See also § 202-3 of this Municipal Code
(adopting Wis. Stats. § 134.66).
A. No person shall directly or indirectly sell, expose for sale, possess with
intent to sell, exchange, barter, dispose of or give away any cigarettes
or tobacco products without first obtaining a license from the Clerk.
[Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
B. The fee for such license shall be in an amount set by the Village Board.
The license period shall be from July 1 through and including the
following June 30 unless sooner revoked.
§ 202-5 MINORS § 202-8
159:357
Chapter 207
TRAFFIC AND PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 59.
Carriage services — See Ch. 109.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 174.
Special events — See Ch. 188.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 191.
Vehicles — See Ch. 218.
§ 202-8 WATERFORD CODE § 202-8
159:358
ARTICLE I
Traffic Regulations
§ 207-1. State traffic laws adopted. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No.
489]
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the statutory
provisions in Wis. Stats. Chs. 340 to 348 and Wis. Stats. §§ 167.31 and
941.01, describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and
traffic, and Wis. Admin. Code Trans, describing and defining regulations
with respect to standards for motor vehicle equipment, inclusive of any
provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed and exclusive of
any regulations for which the statutory penalty is a fine or term of
imprisonment, are adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter
as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited
by any part of such chapters incorporated herein by reference is required
or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or
modifications of the chapters incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of traffic
on the highways, streets and alleys of the state and to secure uniform
regulation of motor vehicle equipment which is used on the highways,
streets and alleys of the state and the Village. The statutes and regulations
adopted herein shall be cited by this chapter number, followed by the
applicable statute or regulation number.
§ 207-2. Speed limits.
A. State statutes adopted. The provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 346.57, 346.58
and 346.59, relating to speed restrictions of vehicles are hereby
adopted as if fully set forth herein, except as specified in Subsection B,
pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.11.
B. Modified speed limits. Speed limit signs shall be posted on all highways
entering at the Village limits, designating the speed limit to be either
15, 25, 30 or 35 miles per hour, which shall be determined by the
Village Board in accordance with the requirements of the particular
area. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
C. Speed limits shall be established on Village streets as follows:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
East Main Street 25 From First Street to State
Highway 36
Fox Isle Park 15
Foxwood Drive 15
§ 207-1 MINORS § 207-2
159:359
§ 207-3. Through streets. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489;
10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 611]
In the interest of public safety and pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.07, the
Village Board may designate streets or portions thereof to be through
streets, at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting
highways is required by traffic control signals or stop signs to stop, by
resolution and inclusion in the Street and Parking Regulation Schedule. All
other intersections in the Village will be controlled as determined by the
Department of Public Works at the time of construction or as determined by
the Village Board.
§ 207-4. One-way streets. [Amended 2-14-1994 by Ord. No. 298;
9-27-1999 by Ord. No. 385; 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 611]
In the interest of public safety and pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.10, the
Village Board may designate streets or portions of streets as one-way
streets by resolution and inclusion in the Street and Parking Regulation
Schedule.
§ 207-5. Heavy traffic; Class "B" highways. [Amended 7-8-1996 by
Ord. No. 336; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 11-12-2012 by Ord. No.
594]
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
North Milwaukee Street
[Added 5-13-1996 by
Ord. No. 338]
25 From Main Street north to
the Village limits
A. Authority and intent. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.17, which grants the
authority to regulate heavy traffic, Wis. Stats. § 349.16, which grants
the authority to impose weight restrictions, and Wis. Stats. § 349.15,
which grants the authority to designate Class "B" highways, this section
is enacted for the purpose of requiring through heavy traffic to use the
heavy traffic routes adopted herein, for preventing Village streets and
highways from being used for heavy traffic, and for the purpose of
protecting Village streets and highways from damage. It is not the
intent of this section to prevent the use of Village streets for purposes
specifically excepted by statute or by this section.
B. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
HEAVY TRAFFIC — [Amnded 1-28-2013 by Ord. No. 603]
(1) All vehicles not operating completely on pneumatic tires; and
§ 207-2 WATERFORD CODE § 207-5
159:360
RESIDENCE DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to a highway not
comprising a business district, where the frontage on such highway for
a distance of 300 or more feet is mainly occupied by dwellings or by
dwellings and buildings in use for business, as set forth in Wis. Stats.
§ 340.01(50).
All vehicles designed or used for transporting persons or property
of any nature, and having a gross vehicle weight rating of more
than 16,000 pounds.
(2)
"Heavy traffic" does not include school buses, motor buses,
recreational motor homes, recreational vehicles, or human service
vehicles.
(3)
C. Prohibited routes.
(1) Pursuant to the authority found in Wis. Stats. § 349.17, heavy
traffic is prohibited from using any Village of Waterford street or
highway not designated as a heavy traffic route. When use of a
Village street or highway that is not a heavy traffic route is
permitted under Subsection C(2), heavy traffic is prohibited from
traveling through residence districts unless doing so is necessary
to reach the destination.
(2) Exemptions. Heavy traffic exempted hereunder may use Village
streets or highways not designated as heavy traffic routes as
follows:
(a) This section shall not act to prohibit heavy traffic from using a
Village street or highway for the purpose of obtaining orders
for supplies or moving or delivering supplies or commodities to
or from any place of business or residence which has an
entrance on such street or highway. This exception shall be
permitted for the period of time necessary to complete the
above-described activities. No stopping or parking such
vehicles upon streets not designated as heavy traffic routes
shall be permitted at any other time. No overnight parking of
any vehicle defined as heavy traffic is allowed on any Village
street.
(b) When being driven to the site of any construction, repair or
maintenance of buildings or utilities in the Village,
construction vehicles and vehicles owned and operated by a
public utility are exempt from the provisions of this section.
(c) Emergency vehicles are exempt.
(d) Village-owned or operated vehicles and equipment, and
vehicles operated for purposes of performing maintenance to
Village streets or installations, snow removal, street cleaning,
refuse removal or curb pickup are exempt.
§ 207-5 MINORS § 207-5
159:361
§ 207-6. Buses.
(e) This section will not act to prohibit heavy traffic from using any
Village streets over which are routed state trunk highways,
connecting highways and county trunk highways.
D. Heavy traffic routes. There shall be recognized in the Village a heavy
traffic route for the operation of all heavy traffic in the Village of
Waterford. The heavy traffic route shall consist of the following
highways within the Village:
Name of Highway
County Trunk Highway W (unless determined otherwise by the Racine
County Board)
State Trunk Highway 20/83
State Trunk Highway 36
State Trunk Highway 164
E. Streets designated Class "B" highways. Pursuant to the authority found
in Wis. Stat. § 349.15, all streets and alleys within the Village, except
state trunk highways, connecting highways, and county trunk highways
are hereby designated Class "B" highways, subject to the weight
limitations imposed on Class "B" highways by Wis. Stat. § 348.16 and
the exemptions therein.
F. Special or seasonal weight limitations. Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 349.16,
the Director of Public Works is authorized to impose special or seasonal
weight limitations when necessary to avoid serious damage or
destruction of the street or highway, and shall post notice as required.
G. Administration. The Department of Public Works, in cooperation with
the Police Department, shall administer this section. Administration
shall include posting of signs in accordance with state law.
H. Penalties and liability.
(1) In every instance where a violations of Subsection C occurs, the
penalty to be imposed shall be the amount approved by the Village
Board and set forth in the Deposit Schedule.
(2) In every instance where a violation of Subsection E or F occurs, the
penalty to be imposed shall be consistent with the current State of
Wisconsin penalty for violating weight restrictions set forth in Wis.
Stat. § 348.21(3), including the "per pound" overload violation
schedule therein.
(3) Liability. Any operator, corporation, owner or agent whose heavy
traffic vehicle damages any Village streets or highways in violating
this section shall be liable and required to pay the Village the cost
of repair or replacement of the damaged street or highway.
§ 207-5 WATERFORD CODE § 207-6
159:362
§ 207-6.1. Neighborhood electric vehicles. [Added 9-22-2008 by
Ord. No. 532]
A. Travel restricted. No bus shall be operated on any street in the Village
except on arterial highways and on the following streets or portions
thereof:
Name of Street Location
Barnes Drive [Added
1-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 489]
Between Field Drive and Buena Park Road
Center Street Between Main and Washington Streets
Elizabeth Street To the parking area
Field Drive Between Main and Washington Streets
Louis Street Between Main and Elizabeth Streets
Second Street Between Thomas and Main Streets
Thomas Street Between First and Second Streets
Washington Street Between Jefferson Street and Field Drive
Water Street Between Main and Washington Streets
B. Exception. Bus route travel shall be permitted on Village streets other
than those streets designated in Subsection A in emergencies and for
cause, as determined by a police officer, affecting public safety,
convenience and necessity. Further, regularly established school bus
routes for the transport of school children to and from schools, along
with routes established for senior shuttle buses, shall be excepted from
the traffic routes hereinabove established. [Amended 7-8-1996 by
Ord. No. 336; 5-24-2010 by Ord. No. 555]
C. Loading and unloading school children. No person operating a bus or
passenger vehicle shall load or unload any school children in school
areas, except in areas designated by proper signs authorized and
placed by the Village Board.
A. Definition. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLE (NEV) — A self-propelled
electrically powered motor vehicle that has successfully completed the
Neighborhood Electric Vehicle America Test Program conducted by
the Federal Department of Energy and that conforms to the definition
and requirements for low-speed vehicles as adopted in the Federal
Motor Vehicle Safety Standards for Low-Speed Vehicles under 49 CFR
571.3(b) and 571.500. Electric golf carts are not included within the
foregoing definition.
B. Requirements. A neighborhood electric vehicle shall be four-wheeled
and have a speed range of at least 20 miles per hour and not more than
§ 207-6 MINORS § 207-6.1
159:363
25 miles per hour on a paved surface and have a gross vehicle weight
of less than 2,500 pounds. Neighborhood electric vehicles shall have all
of the following specifications:
(1) Headlamps and tail lamps. [Amended 4-25-2011 by Ord. No.
573]
(2) Front and rear turn signals.
(3) Stop lamps.
(4) Reflex reflectors: one red on each side as far to the rear as
practicable and one red on the rear.
(5) An exterior mirror mounted on the driver’s side and either an
exterior mirror on the passenger side or an interior rear-view
mirror.
(6) Parking brake.
(7) A windshield that conforms to the requirements of the Federal
Motor Vehicle Safety Standard on Glazing Materials (49 CFR
571.205).
(8) A vehicle identification number (VIN) that complies with federal
law as provided in 49 CFR 565. [Amended 4-25-2011 by Ord.
No. 573]
(9) A Type 1 or Type 2 seatbelt assembly conforming to 49 CFR
571.209 and Federal Motor Vehicle Standard No. 209 for each
designated seating position.
(10) Meets the general test conditions under 49 CFR 571.500.
[Amended 4-25-2011 by Ord. No. 573]
C. Use on Village streets. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.26(2), the use of a
neighborhood electric vehicle on Village streets or highways is allowed
only as expressly authorized under this section. [Amended 4-25-2011
by Ord. No. 573]
(1) Use. The use of a NEV is hereby authorized on roadways within the
territorial boundaries of the Village upon which the speed limit is
35 miles per hour or less.
(2) A NEV may not be used on any Village roadway upon which the
speed limit is more than 35 miles per hour.
(3) An NEV may not be operated on any sidewalk or walking path in
the Village.
(4) Headlamps must be on during operation.
(5) License and registration required. Neighborhood electric vehicles
shall be registered, titled and licensed by the State of Wisconsin.
§ 207-6.1 WATERFORD CODE § 207-6.1
159:364
(6) Permitted users. Any person who operates a neighborhood electric
vehicle on any Village street must hold a valid operator’s license.
(7) The operation of a neighborhood electric vehicle must in all
respects comply with the provisions of the Code of the Village of
Waterford, inclusive of this chapter.
D. Penalty. Any person convicted of violating any of the NEV provisions of
this section shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1,
Article II, of this Municipal Code. Any person convicted of violating a
traffic ordinance along with an NEV violation shall be subject to a
penalty as provided in that ordinance
§ 207-6.1 MINORS § 207-6.1
159:365

ARTICLE II
Parking Regulations
§ 207-7. Parking restrictions, parking signs and pavement
markings. [Amended 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 611; 7-27-2015 by Ord.
No. 629]
As set forth in § 207-20, the Village Board may designate parking
restrictions on streets, portions of streets, and in municipal parking lots
by resolution and inclusion in the Street and Parking Schedule. Once the
appropriate signage and/or pavement markings are installed in any block
giving notice of the restrictions, the operator of a vehicle shall not park in
violation of the signs and/or pavement markings. The following restrictions
are authorized:
§ 207-8. through § 207-13. (Reserved)78
A. Fifteen-minute parking.
B. Thirty-minute parking.
C. One-hour parking.
D. Two-hour parking.
E. No parking at any time.
F. No trailer parking.
G. No heavy traffic parking.
H. Parking prohibited certain hours.
I. Loading zones. Loading zones may be designated by the Village Board
by resolution but are not required to be included in the Street and
Parking Regulation Schedule.
J. Angle parking. Angle parking may be designated by the Village Board
by resolution and may be enforced by appropriate pavement marking;
provided, however, that if no sign is present, enforcement of angle
parking is prohibited if the pavement marking is not visible due to snow
accumulation.
K. Temporary parking restrictions. Temporary parking restrictions may be
authorized by resolution or motion of the Village Board and shall not be
included in the Street and Parking Regulation Schedule.
L. Municipal parking lots. Parking may be restricted in municipal parking
lots by any combination of hours, days, and/or identification of persons
or vehicles that may or may not park in any area.
78.Editor’s Note: Former § 207-8, Fifteen-minute parking; § 207-9, Thirty-minute parking;
§ 207-10, One-hour parking; § 207-11, Two-hour parking; § 207-12, No parking at any
§ 207-7 MINORS § 207-14
159:367
§ 207-14. All-night parking prohibited; alternate-side parking.
[Amended 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 457; 9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 484,
effective 1-1-2006]
§ 207-15. Emergencies. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489;
12-13-2010 by Ord. No. 564]
A. No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle on a state or
county trunk highway within the Village between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
B. No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle on any street or
alley in the Village which is not a state or county trunk highway
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except as herein
provided:
(1) On even-numbered calendar dates, vehicles may be parked on the
side of the street adjacent to lots and houses which have been
assigned even numbers. On odd-numbered calendar dates, vehicles
may be parked on the side of the street adjacent to lots and houses
which have been assigned odd numbers. Alternate-side parking
rules are determined on the calendar date after 12:00 midnight;
e.g.: It is December 3, at 10:00 p.m., and a person does not plan to
move his or her vehicle until the next morning; that person would
park on the even side of the street because it will be December 4
after midnight, and alternate-side parking is in effect from 2:00
a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
(2) Alternate side-parking. [Amended 5-9-2016 by Ord. No. 634]
(a) Where alternate-side parking is not available, including but not
limited to a cul-de-sac or a block where no parking is allowed
on one side of the street at any time, parking during the
specified hours shall be allowed on the only available side of
the street.
(b) Where a street is circular and there are no odd-numbered
addresses, the person shall park on the outside (even side) of
the circle on even days and the inside of the circle on odd days.
(3) Parking of 60 minutes shall be allowed in designated areas in front
of all overnight business establishments from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m., except during snow emergencies.
C. This section shall not apply to physicians on emergency calls or other
emergency vehicles.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, whenever the Director of
Public Works or his or her designee, together with either the Village
time; and § 207-13, Parking prohibited certain hours, as amended, were repealed
10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 611. For current regulations, see § 207-20.
§ 207-14 WATERFORD CODE § 207-15
159:368
§ 207-16. (Reserved)79
§ 207-17. Disabled parking. [Added 11-12-2001 by Ord. No. 418;
amended 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 574]
The Village Board, upon the recommendation of the Public Works and
Utilities Committee, may reserve parking, standing or stopping spaces
upon any portion of a street, roadway or alley for any vehicle bearing
special registration plates or a special identification card officially issued to
designate that the vehicle is entitled to the parking privileges of disabled
persons as specified in § 346.50(2a), Wis. Stats. In making its
recommendations to the Village Board, the Public Works and Utilities
Committee shall consider the availability of such parking in nearby parking
lots. Any person who is not entitled to such parking privileges shall not park
in such a reserved space.
Administrator or his or her designee, or the supervisory law
enforcement officer on duty, upon consultation, determine that an
emergency exists because of fire, flood, heavy snowstorm (six inches
or more in a twenty-four-hour period), blizzard or blowing and drifting
snow, or other catastrophe, they may, in the interest of public safety,
convenience and necessity, declare an emergency and prohibit parking
on any street or alley in the Village. The declaring officials shall notify
the appropriate media of the emergency pursuant to the Village
protocol for such notification, and shall be responsible for notifying
the same media at the termination of the emergency. The emergency
may not be terminated without the consent of the Director of Public
Works, who shall determine that street clearing operations have been
substantially completed.
B. Whenever such an emergency has been declared and announced
through the media, no person shall park, or allow to be parked, any
vehicle of any kind or description between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. upon any street or alley in the Village.
(1) Removal. A vehicle of any kind or description parked in violation of
these regulations may be immediately removed, without notice, by
an authorized towing service to a storage facility, as directed by a
law enforcement officer, and shall be ticketed for illegal parking.
The Village shall not be responsible for any damage to the vehicle
while illegally parked, resulting from being towed, or while in the
storage facility.
(2) Charges. Whenever any vehicle has been removed hereunder, the
towing and storage charges shall be paid for by the owner of such
vehicle, as provided for in § 207-18C.
79.Editor’s Note: Former § 207-16, Loading zones, was repealed 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 611.
§ 207-15 MINORS § 207-18
159:369
§ 207-18. Removal and towing of illegally parked, stopped or
standing vehicles. [Added 2-10-2003 by Ord. No. 431; amended
1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 2-25-2008 by Ord. No. 527]
A. No person shall fail to move an illegally parked, stopped or standing
vehicle after being cited for such illegal parking, stopping or standing.
No person shall fail to obey a police officer's order to move an illegally
parked, stopped or standing vehicle.
B. Vehicles deemed abandoned.
(1) Any vehicle that has been parked on public or private property
(including any private street) not posted as a tow-away zone,
without being moved for at least 72 hours, and which has been the
subject of a citation for a violation of parking restrictions at least
twice during that time period shall be deemed abandoned.
(2) A law enforcement officer shall affix a brightly colored warning to
any vehicle which is deemed abandoned under Subsection B(1),
giving notice that the vehicle must be moved within 15 hours of the
time of such notice or be subject to removal and impoundment.
Upon the expiration of said time period, a law enforcement officer
shall make arrangements for such removal and impoundment, and
shall notify the Village Police Department and the Racine County
Sheriff's Department that such action has been taken.
(3) Upon removal and impoundment, the provisions of Chapter 218,
Vehicles, §§ 218-4, 218-5 and 218-6 apply.
C. Vehicles parked, stopped or standing illegally.
(1) Pursuant to § 349.13, Wis. Stats., whenever any law enforcement
officer finds a vehicle parked, stopped or standing on a highway in
violation of any of the officially posted provisions of this chapter, or
parked, stopped or standing in violation of Ch. 346, Wis. Stats., or
obstructing the roadway, the officer is authorized to require the
owner or operator in charge thereof to move the vehicle to a
position to which parking is not prohibited, or to have the vehicle
towed to a storage facility by an authorized towing service. The
officer shall notify the Village Police Department and the Racine
County Sheriff's Department when a vehicle is towed. The officer
shall also notify the towing service of the name and last-known
address of the registered owner and all lienholders of record of the
vehicle within 24 hours of the removal of the vehicle.
(2) In addition to other penalties provided by this chapter, the owner or
operator of a vehicle towed to a storage facility shall pay the actual
reasonable charges of the towing service, along with the actual
reasonable charges for storage of the vehicle. Upon payment, a
receipt shall be issued for the towing and storage charges, and the
vehicle may be released to the owner thereof.
§ 207-18 WATERFORD CODE § 207-18
159:370
(3) In the event that the owner or operator is determined by a court to
be not guilty of the citation upon which removal and storage was
based, or the Village Attorney declines to prosecute said citation,
the Village shall refund the towing charges upon showing proof of
payment for said charges.
(4) If a vehicle has been removed and/or impounded pursuant to this
section, the provisions of § 779.415, Wis. Stats. shall apply.
§ 207-18 MINORS § 207-18
159:371

ARTICLE III
Miscellaneous Regulations
§ 207-19. Accident reports.
The operator of any vehicle involved in any accident shall immediately after
such accident file with the Police Department a copy of the report required
by Wis. Stats. § 346.70, if any. If the operator is unable to make such report,
any occupant of the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making
such report shall comply with this section. Such reports shall be subject to
the provisions and limitations in Wis. Stats. §§ 346.70(4)(f) and 346.73.
§ 207-20. Street and parking regulation schedule; erection of traffic
signs and signals. [Amended 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 611]
A. Parking Regulation Schedule. There is hereby created a Street and
Parking Regulation Schedule for the Village of Waterford, which shall
include restrictions enacted by the Village Board, including but not
limited to the designation of through streets, one-way streets and
parking restrictions on streets and other Village property.
B. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 349.07, 349.10 and 349.13, the Village Board
may designate through and one-way streets and may designate parking
restrictions on streets or portions of streets by resolution. Upon
adoption of such resolution, the restrictions shall be included in the
Street and Parking Regulation Schedule. Once the appropriate signage
is installed, an operator of a vehicle may not operate the vehicle or park
in violation of such signs.
C. The Department of Public Works shall procure, erect and maintain
appropriate standard traffic signs, signals and markings conforming to
the rules of the Department of Transportation giving notice of the
provisions of §§ 207-2, 207-3, 207-4, 207-5, 207-6C, 207-7, 207-14, and
207-15 of this chapter, Chapter 218, Article II, stop signs and signals,
and the Street and Parking Resolution Schedule. Signs shall be erected
in such locations and manner as the Department of Public Works shall
determine will best effect the purposes of this chapter and give
adequate warning to users of the street or highway.
D. Removal of unofficial signs and signals. The Department of Public
Works may order the removal of a sign, signal, marking or device
placed, maintained or displayed in violation of this chapter or Wis.
Stats. § 346.41. The Department may impose a charge on a premises for
removal of such an illegal sign, signal or device, which shall be reported
to the Village Board at its next regular meeting for review and
certification.
E. When traffic or parking restrictions are requested by a third party and
approved by the Village Board, the Village may require the third party
to pay the cost of materials and installation of the appropriate signs
and/or pavement markings.
§ 207-19 MINORS § 207-21
159:373
§ 207-21. School bus traffic signals. [Amended 10-12-1998 by Ord.
No. 367; 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 374]
School bus drivers, when collecting and discharging children at the
intersections of East Main Street and Seventh Street, Fifth Street and
Milwaukee Street, Third Street and Division Street, and Division Street
and Milwaukee Street, and on East Main Street at a point approximately
125 feet east of the east line of its intersection with Fifth Street, shall use
the flashing red warning lights and stop sign arm devices, as provided in
Wis. Stats. § 349.21. The operation of these devices shall be in accordance
with Wis. Stats. § 346.48, and operators approaching any such bus shall be
subject to the penalties imposed under such statutes for any violation of
such statutes, the same being incorporated herein fully by reference.
§ 207-22. Nonmoving violation and registration program. [Amended
6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 618]
Pursuant to the provision of § 345.28(4), Wis. Stats., the Village may
participate in the nonmoving traffic violation and registration program of
the Wisconsin Department of Transportation and, if the Municipal Judge
directs such participation, the Village shall pay the costs established by
such Department under § 385.13, Wis. Stats. Such costs shall, in turn, be
assessed against persons charged with nonmoving traffic violations. The
Court Clerk shall be responsible for complying with the requirements set
forth in § 345.28(4), Wis. Stats.
§ 207-21 WATERFORD CODE § 207-22
159:374
ARTICLE IV
Penalties and Enforcement
[Amended 4-8-2002 by Ord. No. 420]
§ 207-23. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a forfeiture
and all applicable assessments and court costs and fees as required by the
Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 207-24. State forfeiture statutes. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No.
489]
Any forfeiture for violation of the state statutes adopted by reference in
this chapter shall conform to the forfeiture permitted to be imposed for
violation of such statutes as set forth in the revision of the Revised Uniform
State Traffic Deposit Schedule and Alcohol Beverages, Harassment, Safety,
Tobacco, U.W. Rule, and Drug Paraphernalia and Rental Unit Energy
Efficiency Violations Deposit Schedule and Uniform Misdemeanor Bail
Schedule and Trespass to Land Deposit Schedule, adopted by the Wisconsin
Judicial Conference, as may be amended from time to time, in effect on the
date of the violation, including any variations or increases for subsequent
offenses, which schedule and all revisions thereof is adopted by reference,
unless otherwise specified in this section or in this chapter.
§ 207-25. Special local regulations. [Amended 6-23-2014 by Ord.
No. 618]
The forfeiture for violation of a local regulation set forth in this chapter for
which a specific forfeiture amount is not established in this section, this
chapter or the Village of Waterford Municipal Deposit Schedule shall be not
less than $5 nor more than $200 for a first offense and not less than $10
nor more than $500 for the second offense within two years, subject to the
imposition of assessments, costs and fees as set forth above.
§ 207-26. Parking penalties. [Amended 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 611;
6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 618; 7-27-2015 by Ord. No. 629; 8-10-2015 by
Ord. No. 630]
A. Notwithstanding § 207-24 of this article, the forfeiture for a violation of
Article II or a parking restriction adopted pursuant to § 207-7, unless
another amount is set forth, shall be $35 if such forfeiture is paid before
the court date assigned on the citation, and if not paid by said date,
court costs will be added thereto, except as provided in Subsection B
below.
B. Specific penalties.
(1) The forfeiture for a violation of § 207-7F, No trailer parking, shall
be $50 if such forfeiture is paid before the court date assigned on
§ 207-23 MINORS § 207-26
159:375
§ 207-27. Payment. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467;
6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 618]
Forfeitures shall be made payable to the Village of Waterford and may be
paid in person or by mail at the Village Hall.
§ 207-28. Enforcement. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489;
6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 618]
This chapter shall be enforced according to §§ 66.0114, 345.11 to 345.61,
Wis. Stats., and Ch. 800, Wis. Stats.
the citation, and if not paid by said date, court costs will be added
thereto.
(2) The forfeiture for a violation of § 207-14, All-night parking
prohibited, shall be $20 if such forfeiture is paid before the court
date assigned on the citation, and if not paid by said date, court
costs will be added thereto.
(3) The forfeiture for a violation § 207-17, Disabled parking, shall be
the same as is provided for Wis. Stats., § 346.505(2) if such
forfeiture is paid before the court date assigned on the citation, and
if not paid by said date, court costs will be added thereto.
(4) The forfeiture for a parking violation not specifically listed in
Article II which is a violation of a statute adopted by this chapter
shall be $35 if such forfeiture is paid before the court date assigned
on the citation, and if not paid by said date, court costs will be
added thereto.
(5) The forfeiture for a violation of § 207-7L, municipal parking lot
regulations, shall be $35 if such forfeiture is paid before the court
date assigned on the citation, and if not paid by said date, court
costs will be added thereto; provided, however, that violation of a
posted sign for trailer parking shall be $50 if such forfeiture is paid
before the court date assigned on the citation, and if not paid by
said date, court costs will be added thereto.
§ 207-26 WATERFORD CODE § 207-28
159:376
Chapter 211
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 165.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 178.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 191.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 235.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
§ 211-1. Intent and purpose.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village of Waterford to regulate
the planting, maintenance and removal of trees, plants and shrubs in the
Village in order to promote, protect and enhance the public health, safety
and general welfare of its people. The purpose of this chapter is to preserve,
protect and plant trees, plants and shrubs, as valuable resources which
enhance the aesthetics of property, prevent soil erosion, filter airborne
pollutants, reduce atmospheric carbon dioxide, produce oxygen, provide
protection against severe weather, aid in the control and drainage and
restoration of soil subsequent to construction or grading, and reduce
stormwater runoff.
§ 211-2. Arbor Day.
The Village of Waterford hereby proclaims that an annual Arbor Day shall
be set aside and celebrated on the last Friday of the month of April.
The observance and celebration of Arbor Day shall include educational
activities and the planting of trees, and in conjunction with those purposes a
school principal may request one free tree from the Department of Natural
Resources for each fourth grade pupil in the school, pursuant to Wis. Stat.
§ 118.025.
§ 211-3. Village Forester.
A. Designation. The Director of the Village Public Works Department is
appointed to perform the duties of the Village Forester. The Village
Public Works Department is appointed to carry out the duties assigned
by the Village Forester.
B. Duties and responsibilities. The Village Forester shall administer and
enforce this chapter, and shall exercise the powers granted by Wis.
Stat. § 27.09. It shall be the responsibility of the Village Forester to
study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually, and
administer, a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting,
replanting, removal or disposition of trees in parks, along streets and in
other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the Village
Board and upon its acceptance and approval shall constitute the official
§ 207-28 TREES § 211-3
211:377
§ 211-4. Applicability.80
This chapter provides full power and authority over all trees, plants and
shrubs located within street rights-of-way, parks and public places of the
Village of Waterford; and to trees, plants and shrubs located on private
property that constitute a hazard or threat as described within. The Village
shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants
and shrubs located in any public place, as may be necessary to ensure
public safety or to preserve or enhance the beauty and symmetry of such
public place. This section does not prohibit the planting of trees within tree
lawns by adjacent property owners, provided that permit requirements are
complied with.
§ 211-5. Definitions.
As used within this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set
forth in this section:
FORESTER — The Village Forester, who is the actual individual or his or her
agent assigned to enforce this chapter.
PERSON — Any public or private individual, group, company, firm,
corporation, partnership, association, society or any other combination of
human beings, whether legal or natural.
PUBLIC PLACE — All grounds owned by the Village of Waterford, County of
Racine, State of Wisconsin.
PUBLIC TREE — Any tree, shrub, bush, or other woody vegetation located
in a public place.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width of every public way or right-ofway
when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of
right, for purposes of vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic.
comprehensive Tree Plan for the Village of Waterford. The Forester,
when requested by the Village Board, shall consider, investigate, make
findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or question
coming within the scope of the Forester's work.
C. Authority. The Village Forester shall have the authority and jurisdiction
to regulate the planting, maintenance and removal of trees on streets
and other publicly owned property to ensure safety or preserve the
aesthetics of such public sites. The Village Forester shall have the
authority and it shall be his duty to supervise or inspect all work done
under a permit issued in accordance with the terms of this chapter. The
Village Forester shall have the authority to affix reasonable conditions
to the granting of a permit in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 211-3 WATERFORD CODE § 211-5
211:378
TREE LAWN — That part of a street or highway, not covered by sidewalk or
other paving, lying between the property line and the curb or that portion
of a street or highway usually used for vehicular traffic.
VILLAGE — The Village of Waterford.
§ 211-6. Forestry permit.
§ 211-7. Care and protection of trees: pruning and corner
clearance.
A. Permit requirement. No person shall plant, replace, prune, alter,
remove or perform surgery on a public tree or disturb the land within
the dripline of a public tree, or cause such work to be performed by
others, without first obtaining a written permit for such work from the
Village Forester, unless acting under contract with the Village. A person
shall not be required to obtain a permit to fertilize or water trees in a
tree lawn abutting his or her property.81
B. Time. Any person who applies for a permit shall make the application in
writing, on a form provided by the Village, no less than 24 hours prior to
the time the work is to be performed.
C. Standards. The Village Forester shall issue the permit required if, in the
Forester's judgment, the proposed work is desirable and the proposed
method and workmanship are satisfactory. Any permit granted shall
contain an expiration date, and the work shall be completed in the time
and manner provided for in the permit. A permit shall be void if its
terms are violated.
D. Annual public utility and contractor permits. Public utilities and
contractors may apply for and obtain, in accordance with this chapter,
an annual forestry permit subject to the following additional conditions,
unless waived for just cause by the Village Forester:
(1) File evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum
amount of $300,000 for bodily injury or death and $100,000
property damage indemnifying the Village or any person injured or
damaged resulting from work done pursuant to the permit; and
maintain that liability insurance for the permit period.
(2) Provide the Village Forester with seven days' advance notice of the
work to be performed.
(3) Perform the work in conformance with this chapter and written
guidelines and directives of the Village Forester.
A. Every property owner or occupant shall be responsible for the normal
care, including watering, of trees located on such property.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 211-5 TREES § 211-7
211:379
§ 211-8. Public nuisances.
B. Willful injury or disfigurement of any tree growing within the Village
shall be a violation of this chapter.
C. A protective barrier shall be placed outside the root zone of any public
tree prior to construction activities, and shall remain in place until all
construction activity is terminated.
D. Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or highway within the
Village shall prune the branches so that the branches will not severely
obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any
street intersection or street sign and so that there shall be a clear space
of 13 feet above the street surface and 10 feet above the sidewalk
surface.
E. Tree pruning which is necessary for the maintenance of the
transmission lines of a utility or cable TV franchise shall conform to the
requirements of Wis. Stat. §§ 86.16, 182.017 and Municipal Code
Chapter 104, § 104-10I (if applicable), and shall only be performed after
48 hours' notice to the Village, even when no public trees are affected.82
F. Every owner of any tree shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous
trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the
safety of the public.
G. It shall be unlawful, as a normal practice, for any person or Village
department to top any public tree. Topping is defined as the severe
cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter
within the tree's crown to such a degree as to remove the tree's normal
canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or
other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions
where pruning is impractical, may be exempted from this chapter at the
determination of the Village Forester.
A. The following are declared public nuisances under this chapter:
(1) Any dead or dying tree.
(2) Any otherwise healthy tree which is affected with any injurious
fungus, insect or other pest.
(3) Any tree which, by reason of location or condition, constitutes an
imminent danger to the health, safety or welfare of the general
public, including any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe
condition or which by nature is injurious to sewers, electric powers
lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements.
(4) Any tree which obstructs the free passage of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, or which obstructs the view of any street
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 211-7 WATERFORD CODE § 211-8
211:380
§ 211-9. Funding.
The Village Board shall include in its annual budget the sum necessary
to meet the expenses required by the enactment of this chapter and the
implementation of the Tree Plan, which shall not be less than $2 per capita
of the population of the Village of Waterford. The Village Board may, in its
discretion, levy a separately denominated tax for the purpose of setting out
shade and ornamental trees as provided in Wis. Stat. § 61.47.
§ 211-10. Violations and penalties.
intersection or street sign, or severely obstructs the light from any
street lamp.
B. Right to inspect. The Village Forester and the Public Works Department
have the authority to enter onto private property, after prior notification
of the property owner, whereon there is located a tree that is suspected
to be a public nuisance.
C. Abatement. The means of abating public nuisances under this chapter
are as follows:
(1) Any public nuisance under this chapter which is located on public
property shall be pruned, removed or otherwise treated by the
Village Forester in whatever fashion is required to cause the
abatement of the nuisance within a reasonable time of its discovery.
(2) Upon finding any public nuisance under this chapter which is
located on private property, the Village Forester shall follow the
procedures for notice and abatement set forth in Chapter 165,
§ 165-7, of this Municipal Code. Notice to abate a nuisance issued
under § 165-7C shall specify whether the property owner shall
prune, remove, or otherwise treat the tree.
(3) When a property owner fails to comply with an order to abate a
public nuisance issued under this chapter, and the Village Forester
causes the nuisance to be abated, the costs of the service, including
labor, equipment and materials, shall be charged to the property
owner, and shall be assessed to the property in conformance with
Wis. Stat. § 66.0627.
D. Immediate abatement. Notwithstanding the above, the Village Forester
is empowered to cause the immediate abatement of any public nuisance
which the Village Forester determines to be an immediate threat to any
person or property.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or fails to comply
with any order issued pursuant to this chapter, upon being found guilty
of the violation, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $200 for each
separate offense. Each day during which any violation of the provisions
of this chapter shall occur or continue shall be a separate offense.
§ 211-8 TREES § 211-10
211:381
§ 211-11. Appeals.
Any person who is aggrieved by any action or decision by the Village
Forester or Public Works Department may appeal to the Village Board.
The Board, after a hearing, may reverse, affirm or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Village Forester upon notice
to the appellant, and to that end shall have all of the powers of the Village
Forester.
Chapter 218
VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Carriage services — See Ch. 109.
Minors — See Ch. 159.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 170.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 191.
Traffic and parking — See Ch. 207.
B. If a public tree is injured, mutilated or dies as the result of the violation
of any provision of this chapter, the cost of repair or replacement of
such tree shall be borne by the person in violation.
§ 211-10 WATERFORD CODE § 211-11
211:382
ARTICLE I
Abandoned Vehicles
[Adopted as § 7.09 of the 1998 Code]
§ 218-1. Inoperable vehicles. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
No person, except the holder of a motor vehicle dealer's license issued
pursuant to the statutes of the state, shall accumulate, store or allow to
remain outside of any building on real estate located within the Village for a
period of more than 72 hours, or dump, deposit or otherwise abandon upon
any property or highway, street, road, alley or way within the Village, any
used motor vehicle, as "motor vehicle" is defined by the state statutes, or
any detached part or parts thereof, for which no current registration fee
has been paid therefor pursuant to such statutes, or which, if paid, does
not have properly attached thereto, pursuant to such statutes, a current
license plate or plates if so required and which is in a condition which would
mechanically prevent its immediate operation upon any public highway or
its operation thereon would be in violation of the law. Each day that any
used motor vehicle, as herein defined, or any detached part or parts thereof
shall be accumulated, stored or allowed to remain contrary to the provisions
hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.83
§ 218-2. Permits issued.
A person doing business in the Village commercial or business district may,
upon a showing of hardship, apply to the Village Board for a permit to allow
the storing of used motor vehicles outside of any building, which storage
would otherwise violate § 218-1 above, for a period of up to seven days.
The Village Board may grant such a permit when satisfied that a hardship
exists, that such permit would affect property located in the commercial or
business districts of the Village, and that the spirit and intent of this article
would remain intact.
§ 218-3. Removal and impoundment.
Any vehicle in violation of this article shall be impounded until lawfully
claimed or disposed of under § 218-4, except if the Chief of Police or his
authorized representative determines that the cost of towing and storage
charges for the impoundment would exceed the value of the vehicle, the
vehicle may be junked by the Village prior to expiration of the impoundment
period upon determination by the Chief of Police or his authorized
representative that the vehicle is not wanted for evidence or other reasons.
§ 218-4. Disposal.
A. If the Chief of Police or his authorized representative determines that
the value of the abandoned vehicle exceeds $100, he shall notify the
83.Editor's Note: The subsection regarding illegally parked vehicles, which immediately
followed this section, was moved to Chapter 207, Traffic and Parking, 1-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 489. See now § 207-18.
§ 218-1 TREES § 218-4
211:383
§ 218-5. Owner responsible for impoundment and sale costs.
The owner of any abandoned vehicle, except a stolen vehicle, is responsible
for the abandonment and all costs of impounding and disposing of the
vehicle. Costs not recovered by the sale of the vehicle may be recovered in
a civil action by the Village against the owner.
§ 218-6. Notice of sale or disposition.
Within five days after the sale or disposal of a vehicle as provided in
§ 218-4B and D, the Chief of Police or his authorized representative shall
advise the State Department of Transportation, Division of Motor Vehicles,
of such sale or disposition on a form supplied by the Division. A copy of
such form shall be given to the purchaser of the vehicle, and a copy shall be
retained on file in the Village.
§ 218-7. Violations and penalties. [Added 1-23-2006 by Ord. No.
489]
In addition to the provisions herein, any person who violates this article
shall be subject to the penalties as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of this
Municipal Code.
owner and lienholders of record by certified mail that the vehicle has
been deemed abandoned and impounded by the Village and may be
reclaimed within 15 days upon payment of accrued towing, storage and
notice charges and, if not so reclaimed, shall be sold.
B. If an abandoned vehicle determined to exceed $100 in value is not
reclaimed within the period and under the conditions as provided
above, it may be sold at private sale. The description of the vehicle and
the terms of sale shall be published as a Class 1 notice three days
before the sale.
C. After deducting the expense of impoundment and sale, the balance of
the proceeds, if any, shall be paid into the Village treasury.
D. Any abandoned vehicle which is determined by the Chief of Police or his
authorized representative to have a value of less than $100 may be
disposed of by direct sale to a licensed salvage dealer upon
determination that the vehicle is not reported stolen.
§ 218-4 WATERFORD CODE § 218-7
211:384
ARTICLE II
Snowmobiles
[Adopted 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 59784]
§ 218-8. Intent.
§ 218-9. Statutory authority.
§ 218-10. Routes designated.
All routes must be signed in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § NR 50.10.
The following road(s) are designated as snowmobile road route(s).
State Trunk Highway 83 beginning at the northerly limits of the Village
and ending at the parking lot of the Cotton Exchange restaurant, located at
the intersection of State Trunk Highway 83 and State Trunk Highway 20,
requested by the Tichigan Sno-N-Go Snowmobile Club.
§ 218-11. Conditions.
As a condition for the use of this route, the following conditions shall apply
in addition to the applicable provisions of Wis. Stat. Ch. 350:
A. The Village of Waterford, Racine County, designates the following
snowmobile route(s) for the operation of snowmobiles as listed in
§ 218-10.
B. Following due consideration of the recreational value to connect trail
opportunities and weighted against possible dangers, public health and
concern, liability aspects, terrain involved, history of automobile traffic
and overall traffic density, the listed snowmobile route(s) have been
created.
A. The snowmobile route(s) are created in this Article pursuant to Village
authority as authorized by Wis. Stat. § 350.18.
B. The applicable provisions of Wis. Stat. Ch. 350 regulating snowmobile
operations in general, and snowmobile operations pursuant to
snowmobile routes, are adopted.
A. Responsible snowmobile club. The snowmobile club that requests that a
route be approved by the Village shall be responsible for the
maintenance of the route, for erecting and removing the required signs
under the direction of the Village, and for repairing damage that occurs
to property along the route.
B. No residential access. Pursuant to the authority granted in Wis. Stat.
§§ 350.02(6) and 350.18(3), residential access by snowmobiles, and
access from lodging by snowmobiles, is prohibited in the Village.
84.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Snowmobiles, adopted as § 7.10
of the 1998 Code, as amended.
§ 218-8 TREES § 218-11
211:385
§ 218-12. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 218-13. Severability.
The provision of this article shall be deemed severable and it is expressly
declared that the Village would have passed the other provisions of this
article irrespective of whether or not one or more provisions may be
declared invalid. If any provision of this article or the application to any
person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the article and the
application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not
be deemed affected.
C. No operation in Village parks or other land. Pursuant to the authority
granted in Wis. Stat. § 350.10, no person shall operate a snowmobile in
any Village park or on any other land owned by the Village.
D. All applicable provisions of Chapter 350 of the Wisconsin Statutes
apply. No person may operate a snowmobile in the Village except in
strict conformance with the statutory provisions of Wis. Stat. Ch. 350.
Said provisions, as set forth in Wis. Stat. § 350.02, do not allow
operation of a snowmobile any closer than 10 feet to the roadway of any
U.S. numbered highway, state or county highway, or upon the roadway
of any town highway, except by law enforcement officers or for
emergency purposes in certain circumstances, or for certain access
purposes, or to directly cross a highway. Subject to the provisions and
exceptions set forth in Wis. Stat. § 350.02, no person may operate a
snowmobile on or adjacent to any Village street that is not a
snowmobile route, or one of the types of highways listed by statute, or
on any sidewalk, pedestrian way or mall. Snowmobiles may only be
operated adjacent to or on highways lying in the Village if the operation
is in strict conformance with Wis. Stat. Ch. 350.
A. This article may be enforced by any law enforcement officer authorized
to enforce the laws of the State of Wisconsin.
B. Wisconsin snowmobile penalties as found in Wis. Stat. § 350.11 are
adopted by reference.
§ 218-11 WATERFORD CODE § 218-13
211:386
ARTICLE III
Bicycles
[Adopted as § 7.12 of the 1998 Code]
§ 218-14. Definitions.
§ 218-15. Registration and license required.
No person shall operate a bicycle upon any street, sidewalk or other public
place in the Village without having first registered such bicycle and secured
a license therefor.
§ 218-16. Application; examination of bicycle; license plate.
Application for registration and license for a bicycle shall be made by the
owner in writing in duplicate upon blank forms furnished by the Police
Department. Such application shall then be presented to the Village Police
Department. The bicycle to be registered and licensed shall be brought to
the Police Station at the time of presenting the application for examination.
The Village Police Department shall, upon receiving such application and
license fee, issue to the owner of the bicycle a registration card and metal
license plate. This license plate shall be attached to the bicycle.
§ 218-17. Term of license.
The license so issued shall be effective for two years. The license year shall
be from January 1 to December 31 of the ensuing year.
§ 218-18. Violations and penalties.
The forfeiture for a violation of this article shall be $20 if such forfeiture is
paid within five days of the citation date and $25 if such forfeiture is paid
more than five days after the date of the citation.
A. As used herein, the following shall have the meanings indicated:
BICYCLE — A vehicle with two tandem wheels, neither of which are
less than 20 inches in diameter, with solid or pneumatic tires, having a
steering bar or wheel, a saddle seat and propelled by human power.
LICENSE PLATE — A metal plate or tag issued by the Police
Department bearing the license number.
LICENSEE — Any person who procures from the Police Department
a license plate for a bicycle, together with a registration card
accompanying same.
OPERATE — The use, putting into action or causing to function of a
bicycle by a person mounted thereon.
B. In addition to the above definitions, any applicable definitions of
Chapter 207, Traffic and Parking, and the Wisconsin Statutes shall be
deemed to be included herein.
§ 218-14 TREES § 218-18
211:387

ARTICLE IV
All-Terrain Vehicles
[Adopted as § 7.13 of the 1998 Code; amended in its entirety
8-13-2007 by Ord. No. 515]
§ 218-19. Purpose.
The purpose of this article shall be to regulate and control the use and
operation of all-terrain vehicles within the Village, and this article adopts
the provisions of Wis. Stat. § 23.33 and the rules promulgated by the
Department of Natural Resources thereunder in strict conformity therewith
as though fully set forth herein, pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 23.33(11).
§ 218-20. Use and operation.
No person shall use or operate an all-terrain vehicle in violation of the
provisions of Wis. Stat. § 23.33 and Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 64. Said
provisions, as set forth in Wis. Stat. § 23.33(4), do not allow operation of an
all-terrain vehicle adjacent to the roadway except on established all-terrain
vehicle trails, or on the roadway except in certain circumstances. Subject to
the exceptions set forth in Wis. Stat. § 23.33, no person may operate an allterrain
vehicle on or adjacent to any Village street, nor or on any sidewalk,
pedestrian way or mall. All-terrain vehicles may only be operated adjacent
to or on highways lying in the Village if the operation is in conformance
with Wis. Stat. § 23.33. There are no all-terrain vehicle trails or trails in the
Village.
§ 218-21. Village parks and other land.
Pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code s. NR 64.07 and Wis. Stat. § 23.33(3)(c), no
person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle in any Village park or on any
other land owned by the Village.
§ 218-22. Exception for special events.
Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in §§ 219-20 and 219-21, all-terrain
vehicles may be operated in the Village pursuant to a special event permit
issued under § 188-1.
§ 218-23. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Enforcement. Any law enforcement officer specified under Wis. Stat.
§ 23.33(12) has authority and jurisdiction to enforce this article.
B. Penalties. Any person who violates this article shall be subject to the
penalties provided in Wis. Stat. § 23.33(13).
§ 218-19 TREES § 218-23
211:389
Chapter 223
WATER AND SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building, plumbing, electrical and
mechanical codes — See Ch. 98.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 137.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 178.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 195.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 235.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
Erosion control and stormwater
management — See Ch. 250.
Shoreland-wetland zoning — See Ch. 255.
Floodplain zoning — See Ch. 256.
Piers — See Ch. 260.
§ 218-23 WATERFORD CODE § 218-23
211:390
ARTICLE I
Water Utility
§ 223-1. Operating rules.
A. Compliance with rules. All persons now receiving a water supply from
the Utility, or who may hereafter make application therefor, shall be
considered as having agreed to be bound by all rules and regulations as
filed with the State Public Service Commission.
B. Public Service Commission rules adopted. The following provisions of
Wis. Admin. Code ch. PSC 185 are adopted by reference and made a
part of this chapter as if set forth in full. A violation of any such rules
shall constitute a violation of this section and shall be punishable as
provided in § 223-31. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
§ 185.11 Authorization for and application of rules
§ 185.12 Definitions
§ 185.13 General requirements
§ 185.15 Free or discriminatory service prohibited
§ 185.16 Protection of water utility facilities
§ 185.17 Interference with public service structures
§ 185.18 Location of records
§ 185.19 Retention of records
§ 185.21 Schedules to be filed with the commission
§ 185.22 Information available to customers
§ 185.31 Metered service
§ 185.32 Meter readings and billing periods
§ 185.33 Billing
§ 185.34 Adjustment of bills (ROM)
§ 185.35 Adjustment of bills
§ 185.36 Deposits for residential services
§ 185.361 Deposits for nonresidential service
§ 185.37 Disconnection and refusal of service
§ 185.38 Deferred payment agreement
§ 185.39 Dispute procedures
§ 185.41 Employees authorized to enter a customers' premises
§ 185.42 Customer complaints
§ 185.43 Construction records
§ 185.44 Records and reports of service interruptions
§ 185.45 Pumpage records
§ 223-1 TREES § 223-1
211:391
§ 185.46 Metering equipment records
§ 185.47 Other records
§ 185.51 Requirement for good engineering practice
§ 185.52 General construction standards
§ 185.53 Metering configuration
§ 185.61 Meters
§ 185.65 Accuracy requirements for meters
§ 185.71 Meter testing facilities and equipment
§ 185.72 Calibration of meter testing equipment
§ 185.73 Testing of customer meters
§ 185.74 Test flows
§ 185.75 Required tests of customer meters
§ 185.751 Alternate sample-testing plan for "before use" test for 5/
8, 3/4 and one inch meters
§ 185.76 Periodic tests
§ 185.761 Alternative sample-testing plan for in-use meters
§ 185.77 Complaint tests
§ 185.78 Referee tests
§ 185.79 Remote outside meter (ROM) and automatic meter
reading (AMR) system tests
§ 185.795 Electrical safety
§ 185.81 Quality of water
§ 185.815 Adequacy of water supply
§ 185.82 Pressure standards
§ 185.83 Station meters
§ 185.84 Emergency operation
§ 185.85 System losses
§ 185.86 Flushing mains
§ 185.87 Interruptions of service
§ 185.88 Frozen laterals
C. Water Utility operating rules adopted.85
(1) The Water Utility shall operate pursuant to the Village of Waterford
Water and Sewer Utility Water Rates and Rules approved by the
Wisconsin Public Service Commission, including the Water Utility
Operating Rules, Schedule X-1, as may be amended from time to
time, which are adopted as though fully set forth herein, and which
85.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 223-1 WATERFORD CODE § 223-1
211:392
§ 223-2. Adopted operating rules.86
No person may violate the operating rules adopted in this chapter, Schedule
X-1, which include the following provisions:
shall be kept on file in the offices of the Village Clerk and the Water
Utility, and at the Village of Waterford Public Library. A violation of
these rules shall constitute a violation of this section and shall be
punishable as provided in § 223-31.
(2) The following schedules, approved by the PSC, are included herein:
Public Fire Protection F-1
Private Fire Protection Service
- Unmetered
Upf-I
General Service- Metered Mg-1
Non-Sufficient Funds Charge NSF-1
General Service - Suburban Mg-2
Public Service Mpa-1
General Water Service -
Unmetered
Ug-1
Seasonal, Emergency or
Temporary Service
Mgt-1
Building and Construction
Water Service
Mz-1
Bulk Water BW-I
Additional Meter Rental Charge Am-1
Reconnection Charges R-I
Water Lateral Installation
Charge
Cz-1
Operating Rules X-1
Water Main Extension Rule X-2
Water Main Installations in
Platted Subdivision
X-3
86.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
The following sections, which were included in Ch. 13 of the 1998 Code, were replaced
with the current version of the Operating Rules, as may be amended from time to time,
including §§ 13.02 through 13.10, sections on establishing water service, replacement of
service pipe, meters, turning on water, repairs to service, thawing frozen services, repairs
to meters, stop boxes, and valves; 13.12, Deposit and guarantee rules; 13.13,
Reconnection charge; 13.14, Failure to read meters; 13.15, Charges for water wasted due
to leaks; 13.16, Complaint meter tests; 13.17, Surreptitious use of water; 13.18,
Temporary metered supply; 13.19, Emergency and occasional use; 13.20, Hydrants; 13.21,
Refunds of deposit; 13.22, Inspection of premises; 13.23, Vacation of premises; 13.25,
Repairs to mains; 13.26, Public safety; 13.27, Protection of water mains and service pipes;
13.28, Protective devices; and 13.29, Air chamber.
§ 223-1 TREES § 223-2
211:393
Compliance with Rules
Establishment of Service
Reconnection of Service
Temporary Metered Service, Meter, and Deposits
Water for Construction
Use of Hydrants
Operation of Valves and Hydrants and Unauthorized Use of Water -
Penalty
Refunds of Monetary Deposits
Service Laterals
Replacement and Repair of Service Laterals
Abandonment of Service
Charges for Water Wasted Due to Leaks
Thawing Frozen Service Laterals
Curb Stop Boxes
Installation of Meters
Repairs to Meters
Service Piping for Meter Settings
Turning on Water
Failure to Read Meters
Complaint Meter Tests
Inspection of Premises
Vacation of Premises
Deposits for Residential Service
Deposits for Nonresidential Service
Deferred Payment Agreement
Dispute Procedures
Disconnection and Refusal of Service
Collection of Overdue Bills
Surreptitious Use of Water
Repairs to Mains
Duty of Water Utility with Respect to Safety of the Public
Handling Water Mains and Service Laterals in Excavation Trenches
Protective Devices
Cross-Connections
§ 223-2 WATERFORD CODE § 223-3
211:394
§ 223-3. Additional specifications: service connections, meters,
valves, extensions and hydrants. [Added 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489;
amended 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 574; 7-22-2013 by Ord. No. 609]
The following specifications apply in addition to the PSC operating rules
adopted in this chapter:
A. Service connections and laterals.
(1) Duplexes may be served by one lateral, provided individual
metered service and disconnection is provided.
(2) All service pipe shall be laid not less than six feet below the surface
of an established or proposed grade line. When laid in a combined
sewer and water trench, the service pipe shall be laid on a shelf of
solid ground not nearer than 12 inches to the side wall of the sewer
trench.
(3) No water supply pipe to the furthermost riser or fixture branch
shall be of a smaller diameter than one inch.
B. Developers' connection charges. A connection charge for premises not
previously connected to the water main shall be paid, in an amount set
by the Village Board, and imposed upon developers pursuant to
developer's agreements entered into under Chapter 235, Subdivision of
Land, of this Code.
C. Meters.
(1) Service for meter settings. Where a meter of one inch or less is to
be installed, a meter horn of a size appropriate to the meter used
shall be installed by the owner. For meters greater than one inch,
the meter setting shall be inspected and approved by the Utility.
(2) No permission shall be given to change from metered to flat rate
service.
(3) In multiple-use buildings where the uses are divided into distinct
units, separate meters shall be installed for business and
residential uses.
D. Valves. All valves, be they altitude, gate, globe, check, pressure relief or
otherwise, within the public or private street right-of-way lines and two
inches in size or over shall be installed inside a standard manhole,
which shall be 48 inches in inside diameter, of concrete construction,
providing sufficient clearance on all sides and bottom of the valve for
maintenance and operation and equipped with a cast-iron frame and
cover, or within a valve box, according to the current edition of
Standard Specifications for Sewer and Water Construction in
Wisconsin, at the discretion of the Director of Public Works.
E. Extensions.
§ 223-3 TREES § 223-3
211:395
§ 223-4. Billing procedure. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
See Schedule Mg-1 and all schedule references to the same.
(1) All extensions of the water system shall be constructed according
to the current edition of Standard Specifications for Sewer and
Water Construction in Wisconsin, as may be amended from time to
time, the size thereof to be determined by the Utility; however, no
extension shall be of less than eight-inch pipe.
(2) Dedication to the public. Any water system which is to be dedicated
to the public shall be constructed to public water utility standards
as set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes and Administrative Code. No
system which is constructed to private system standards shall be
dedicated to the public.
F. Right to open hydrants. Only persons authorized by the Director of
Public Works or the Fire Department shall be permitted to open any fire
hydrant for any purpose, and no one except such persons may take the
hydrant wrenches or wheels or allow the same to be taken from any fire
house, except for Fire Department purposes.
A. Billing.
(1) Bills for water service are rendered quarterly and become due and
payable on the first of the month following the period for which
service is rendered. A late payment charge as set per § 223-7 will
be added to bills not paid within 20 days of issuance. This one-time
late payment charge will be applied only to any unpaid balance for
the current billing period's usage. This late payment charge is
applicable to all customers. The utility customer may be given a
written notice that the bill is overdue no sooner than 20 days after
the bill is issued. Unless payment or satisfactory arrangement for
payment is made within the next 10 days, service may be
disconnected pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code ch. PSC 185.
(2) Failure to receive a bill shall not exempt consumers from the
provisions of Subsection A(1).
B. Unit of service defined.
(1) A unit of service shall consist of any aggregation of space or area
occupied for a distinct purpose, such as a residence, apartment,
flat, store, office or factory, which is equipped with one or more
fixtures for rendering water service, separate and distinct from
other users. Each unit of service shall be regarded as one
consumer, and the surcharge for additional consumers on a meter
shall be assessed accordingly.
(2) Suites in houses, or apartments where complete housekeeping
functions (such as cooking) are not exercised, shall be classed as
rooming houses. Thus, houses and apartments having suites of one,
§ 223-3 WATERFORD CODE § 223-4
211:396
§ 223-5. Claims for damages. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
No person shall enter a claim against the Village as a water utility, or any
officer thereof, for damage to any pipe, fixture or appurtenance by reason of
interrupted water supply or variation of pressure or for damage caused by
the turning off or turning on, either wholly or partially, of the water supply
for the extension, alteration or repair of any water main or premises supply
or for the discontinuance of the premises water supply for the violation of
any rules or regulations of the Water Utility. No claims shall be allowed
against the Village on account of the interruption of the water supply caused
by the breaking of pipes or machinery or by stoppage for repairs or on
account of fire or other emergency; and no claims shall be allowed for any
damage caused by the breakage of any pipe or machinery.
§ 223-6. Cross-connection control. [Amended 9-8-1997 by Ord. No.
356; 8-22-2005 by Ord. No. 482; 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 626]
See Chapter 112.
§ 223-7. Water Utility rates and fees. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord.
No. 467; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 574]
The rates and fees for water, service and equipment provided by the Village
of Waterford Water Department shall be as established by the Village Board
and amended from time to time in conformance with the requirements of
the Wisconsin Public Service Commission. The fee schedule as established
shall be on file as provided in § 223-1. The Village Board shall also
determine the connection charges to be charged to developers under
§ 223-3B.
§ 223-8. Administration. [Amended 7-24-2000 by Ord. No. 403;
1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 574; 7-22-2013 by
Ord. No. 609]
two or more rooms with toilet facilities but without a kitchen for
cooking are classed as rooming houses.
A. As provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0805(6), the Village Board is in charge of
the operations and management of the Village of Waterford Water
Utility. The Water Utility shall function in accordance with the
provisions of Wis. Stats. Chs. 196 and 197 and any and all applicable
state or local laws or regulations pertaining to the operation of water
utilities.
(1) Accounting. The Village Board shall establish a financial
management system that accounts for all revenues and all
expenditures relating to the water system. It shall keep separate
detailed accounting of Water Utility funds and provide periodic
accounting reports in order to meet the requirements of the
Wisconsin Public Service Commission.
§ 223-4 TREES § 223-8
211:397
(2) Control of water mains, etc. The water mains, supply pipes, curb
stops, stop boxes, meters, service pipes and other equipment of the
Utility shall be under the exclusive control of the Village Board and
its authorized agents and employees, and no other person shall
disturb, tamper with, injure, tap, change, obstruct access to or
interfere with such water mains, supply pipes, curb stops, stop
boxes, meters, service pipes or other equipment.
B. Director of Public Works.
(1) Appointment. The Village Board shall appoint the Director of Public
Works at such times as it deems necessary.
(2) Duties. The Director of Public Works shall:
(a) Perform all duties concerning the Village waterworks imposed
upon him by the Village Board and shall see that all rules and
regulations of the Board concerning the waterworks are
carried out in addition to performing the duties of Director of
Public Works.
(b) Watch over all machinery and everything connected therewith
and see that no deprecations or misdemeanors are committed
about the place or buildings connected with the waterworks
system.
(c) Keep himself prepared for duty at all times.
(d) Have charge of the motor, pump and machine shop and the
care and supervision of the running of the motor and all
machinery connected therewith.87
(e) Monitor the quantity of water in the reservoirs and make
necessary adjustments thereto.
(f) See that all valves and every part of the waterworks system is
in running order and, in the case of breakage or defects in the
same, shall give immediate notice to the Village Board or the
Chairman of the Public Works and Utilities Committee.
(3) Compensation. The Director of Public Works shall receive such
compensation as the Village Board shall from time to time
determine.
(4) Bond. The Village Board may require a bond of the Director of
Public Works before entering upon his duties for such sum as it may
determine, conditioned for the faithful discharge of his duties.
C. Records. All records pertaining to the management of the Village
waterworks, except those required to be kept by the Director of Public
87.Editor's Note: Original Subsection 5, requiring the Superintendent to visit and examine all
hydrants at least once a month, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489
§ 223-8 WATERFORD CODE § 223-8
211:398
§ 223-9. Rate rules. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
The rate rules and applicable charges shall be as set forth in the schedules
approved by the PSC and adopted under § 223-1, as may be amended from
time to time.
§ 223-10. Wellhead protection. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No.
462]
Land use and activities in the recharge area of Wells No. 3, 4 and No. 5 in
the Village of Waterford shall be regulated for the purpose of protecting the
groundwater pursuant to Village of Waterford Municipal Code Chapter 245,
Zoning, § 245-25 and Article IX.
§ 223-11. Well abandonment and well operation permits. [Amended
8-12-1996 by Ord. No. 341; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 5-11-2015 by
Ord. No. 627]
Works, shall be kept by the Utility Clerk in books provided for that
purpose. Such records shall show the names of all patrons, descriptions
of premises supplied, uses to which the supply of water is put, rate of
tariff, collections made and such other matters as the Board may from
time to time require to be recorded.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect public health, safety
and welfare and to prevent contamination of groundwater by assuring
that unused, unsafe or noncomplying wells or wells which may act as
conduits for contamination of groundwater or wells which may be
illegally cross-connected to the municipal water system are properly
maintained or abandoned.
B. Applicability. This section applies to all wells located on premises
served by the Village of Waterford municipal water system. Utility
customers outside the jurisdiction of the municipal system may be
required under contract agreement or utility rule to adopt and enforce
equivalent ordinances within their jurisdictions for purpose stated in
Subsection A above.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM — The community water system owned
by the Village of Waterford.
NONCOMPLYING — A well or pump installation that does not comply
with Wis. Admin. Code Subch. IV, Standards for Existing Installations,
and which has not been granted a variance pursuant to Wis. Admin.
Code § NR 812.43.
PUMP INSTALLATION — The pump and related equipment used for
withdrawing water from a well, including the discharge piping, the
§ 223-8 TREES § 223-11
211:399
underground connections, pitless adapters, pressure tanks, pits,
sampling faucets and well seals or caps.
"UNSAFE" WELL OR PUMP INSTALLATION — One which produces
water which is bacteriologically contaminated or contaminated with
substances which exceed the drinking water standards of Wis. Admin.
Code Chs. NR 140 or 809, or for which a Health Advisory has been
issued by the Department of Natural Resources.
"UNUSED" WELL OR PUMP INSTALLATION — One which is not used
or does not have a functional pumping system.
WELL — A drillhole or other excavation or opening deeper than it
is wide that extends more than 10 feet below the ground surface
constructed for the purpose of obtaining groundwater.
WELL ABANDONMENT — The proper filling and sealing of a well
according to the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code § NR 812.26.
D. Abandonment required. All wells on premises served by the municipal
water system shall be properly abandoned in accordance with
Subsection F no later than 180 days from the date of connection to the
municipal water system, or the date of discovery or construction of the
well, or the date of notice from the Village, unless a valid well operation
permit has been issued to the well owner by the Village of Waterford
under the terms of Subsection E.
E. Well operation permit.
(1) Owners of wells on premises served by the municipal water system
wishing to retain their wells for any use shall make application for a
well operation permit for each well no later than 180 days after
connection to the municipal water system or the date of discovery
or construction of the well, or the date of notice from the Village.
The Village shall grant a permit to a well owner to operate a well
for a period not to exceed five years providing all conditions of this
section are met. A well operation permit may be renewed by
submitting an application verifying that the conditions of this
section are met. The applicant shall arrange for inspections and
water quality tests to be conducted at the applicant's expense to
obtain or verify information necessary for consideration of a permit
application or renewal. Permit applications and renewals shall be
made on forms provided by the Utility Clerk. All initial and renewal
applications must be accompanied by a fee as adopted by the
Village Board and set forth in the Fee Schedule.88 No new wells or
replacement wells are allowed.
(2) The following conditions must be met for issuance or renewal of a
well operation permit:
88.Editor's Note: The Fee Schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 223-11 WATERFORD CODE § 223-11
211:400
(a) The well and pump installation shall meet the Standards for
Existing Installations described in Wis. Admin. Code Subch. IV,
§ NR 812.42, Criteria for Evaluation. The well and pump
system shall be evaluated by a licensed well driller or pump
installer and certified on the Wisconsin Well and Pressure
System Inspection Form 3300-221 to comply with Wis. Admin.
Code Ch. NR 812, Subch. IV, prior to the issuance of the initial
permit and every 10 years thereafter.
(b) The well and pump shall have a history of producing safe water
evidenced by at least one coliform bacteria sample taken prior
to the initial permit issuance and each permit renewal. In areas
where the Department of Natural Resources has determined
that groundwater aquifers are contaminated with substances
other than bacteria, additional chemical tests may be required
to document the safety of the water.
(c) There shall be no cross-connections between the well's pump
installation or distribution piping and the municipal water
system.
(d) The water from the private well shall not discharge into a drain
leading directly to a public sewer utility unless properly
metered and authorized by the sewer utility.
(e) The private well shall have a functional pumping system.
(f) The owner shall demonstrate a need for the use of the private
well.
(g) Any well that does not meet the requirements for a permit shall
be abandoned pursuant to Subsection F.
F. Abandonment procedures.
(1) All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of this section shall be
done according to the procedures and methods of Wis. Admin.
Code § NR 812.26. All debris, pumps, piping, unsealed liners and
any other obstructions which may interfere with sealing operations
shall be removed prior to abandonment.
(2) The owner of the well, or the owner's agent, shall notify the Utility
Clerk that the well will be abandoned.
(3) An abandonment report form, supplied by the Department of
Natural Resources, shall be submitted to the Utility Clerk and the
Department of Natural Resources within 30 days of the completion
of the well abandonment. The form must be completed by the
licensed well driller, pump installer, or certified operator
performing the abandonment.
G. Violations and penalties.
§ 223-11 TREES § 223-11
211:401
§ 223-12. Swimming pools.
§ 223-12.1. Water conservation measures. [Added 7-22-2013 by Ord.
No. 609]
(1) Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of this
Municipal Code.
(2) Each day in which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(3) If any person fails to comply with this section for more than 30 days
after receiving written notice of the violation, the Village may cause
the well abandonment to be performed and the expense to be
assessed as a special charge against the property as set forth in
§ 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
A. Filling. Upon the request of any real property owner, and provided a
minimum of three days' notice therefor is given, the Village shall supply
water for the filling of swimming pools in the corporate limits of the
Village. The Utility shall supply such water during regular business
hours only and only at such times as do not interfere with the other
orderly operation of the Utility's business. [Amended 5-9-2011 by
Ord. No. 574]
B. Meter. Prior to the supplying of such water, a meter shall be installed
for the purpose of metering the water's delivery and a fee as set per
§ 223-7 shall be charged and collected for the meter installation prior to
delivery.
C. Charges. The charge for this service shall be as set forth in § 223-7.
[Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
A. Authority to issue water conservation measures. The Village President
is hereby authorized to issue an order establishing water usage
restrictions for the purpose of conserving water, and in his or her
absence the Director of Public Works or the Village Administrator may
issue the order. The order shall establish the type (as described in
Subsection C) and the duration of the water usage restrictions. The
duration may be a specified period of time or may simply be "until
further public notice."
B. Public notice of the restrictions. When a water usage restriction order
is issued under Subsection A, public notice of said restriction shall be
published in the local paper and on the Village web page, sent to local
news stations, and posted in three public places in the Village of
Waterford. The Village may use additional forms of notice it considers
necessary under the circumstances.
C. Water use restrictions.
§ 223-11 WATERFORD CODE § 223-12.1
211:402
(1) Level 1 water use restrictions shall be as follows:
(a) Watering allowed using sprinklers or irrigation systems for
even addresses on even dates and for odd addresses on odd
dates between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Irrigation
systems that encompass both an even and odd address shall
operate every other day. The odd-even dates will begin at 7:00
p.m. and carry through to 7:00 a.m. the following morning.
(b) Watering allowed of trees, shrubs and other outside plants
when using a handheld device such as a sprinkling can or hose
with sprayer (when handheld) on any day at any time.
(c) Watering allowed on newly seeded lawns or lawns with newly
installed sod any day between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
(d) The use of children's water toys will be allowed only when
attended by at least one person.
(e) Washing of vehicles and trailers is allowed for even addresses
on even dates and for odd addresses on odd dates only.
(f) No watering of hard surfaces (i.e., streets, sidewalks, and
driveways) that is a result of poorly placed and/or maintained
sprinklers or an unattended hose.
(g) No watering during precipitation.
(2) Level II water use restrictions shall be as follows:
(a) No watering allowed using sprinklers or irrigation systems.
(b) Watering allowed of trees, shrubs and other outside plants only
when using a handheld device such as a sprinkling can or hose
with sprayer (when handheld) on any day at any time.
(c) Watering allowed on newly seeded lawns or lawns with newly
installed sod only by issuance of a fifteen-day permit issued by
the Village's Director of Public Works or his or her designee.
(d) Watering allowed for businesses that sell plants for a living by
issuance of a fifteen-day permit issued by the Village's Director
of Public Works or his or her designee.
(e) No use of children's water toys will be allowed.
(f) No washing of vehicles or trailers.
(g) No watering of hard surfaces (i.e., streets, sidewalks, and
driveways) that is a result of an unattended hose.
(h) No watering during precipitation.
§ 223-12.1 TREES § 223-12.1
211:403
(i) Request voluntary reduction of water usage by higher-volume
commercial business users.
(3) Level III water use restrictions:
(a) No outside water use allowed.
(b) Limit indoor water use where possible.
(c) Require reduction of water usage by higher-volume
commercial business users, including but not limited to
carwashes, laundromats and factories. These businesses would
be evaluated on an individual basis and operate under the
issuance of a fifteen-day permit issued by the Village's Director
of Public Works or his or her designee.
D. Emergencies. Whenever, in the opinion of the Village Board, a necessity
to limit water exists due to weather conditions, water usage, electrical
power outage or any other cause, the Village Board may, for such time
as the necessity for water limitations exist, issue orders and
regulations, suspend permits, alter days and hours, impose additional
terms and conditions, and prevent usage of water.
E. Enforcement. This section may be enforced by the issuance of citations
or by any other method authorized by law.
F. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this
section shall be subject to penalty as set forth in § 223-31.
§ 223-12.1 WATERFORD CODE § 223-12.1
211:404
ARTICLE II
Extension of Utility Services
§ 223-13. Lands to be annexed. [Amended 1-8-2001 by Ord. No.
409]
No sewer or water mains or service of any type will be extended beyond
the corporate limits of the Village, with the following exception: a portion
of a sewer or water main may be routed outside the corporate limits of
the Village when cost-effective or when necessary to meet requirements
of state agencies with approval power over the location of such main, but
such placement may only be made for the purpose of service to customers
located within the Village.
§ 223-14. Water main extensions. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No.
489]
The Village Water Utility, in the discretion of the Village Board, will extend
water mains for new customers and will decide whether the extension is to
be eight-inch pipe or larger, where fire protection service is needed, and the
entire cost will be computed and the total charged on the following basis:
A. Where the cost of the extension will be immediately assessed against
the abutting property, the procedure set forth under Wis. Stats.
§ 66.0703, as provided in the Water Main Extension Rules adopted in
§ 223-1 shall apply.
B. Where the Village is unwilling to make a special assessment because of
low density of prospective consumers or for some other reason,
extensions may be made on a customer-financed basis as follows:
(1) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
CONTRIBUTOR — The owner of property at time of a contribution
or refund, unless otherwise specified by written agreement.
CUSTOMER — The owner of premises to which water is or will
be furnished, unless specific written agreements specify otherwise.
"Customer" at all times means the property owner at the time a
contribution is to be made or a refund becomes available.
(2) Basis for determining contributions from original customers. The
applicant (or applicants, pro rata) shall advance the amount that
would have been assessed under Subsection A above, such
contribution to be paid in advance of construction.
(3) Additional customers and refunds.
(a) When additional customers are connected to a water main
originally financed in part by customers, the utility shall
require a contribution from each new customer equal to the
existing average contribution. When the amount of customer
§ 223-13 TREES § 223-14
211:405
§ 223-15. Compulsory connection to water. [Amended 11-22-2004
by Ord. No. 467; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 5-9-2011 by Ord. No.
574; 7-22-2013 by Ord. No. 609
contribution computed under Subsection B(3)(b) is less than
would have been assessed under Subsection A above, the
applicant for service shall pay an amount equivalent to the
assessment. This amount shall then be refunded pro rata to all
contributors along the extension whose remaining contribution
still exceeds that which would have been assessed under
Subsection A above.
(b) When refunds have reduced the contribution of any contributor
to the applicable assessment per front foot, no further refund
shall be made to that individual. After all refunds have been
made, the remaining premises that may connect shall be
charged at the rate per front foot established for the extension.
(4) Limit of extension. When an extension beyond an existing extension
is required to serve a new customer, and the cost for a customer
exceeds the average remaining contribution in the original
extension, the new extension shall be considered a new project,
without refunds or other connection with the original extension.
(5) Refunds limited. The development period during which refunds
shall be made shall be limited to 10 years.
C. When customers connect to a transmission main or connecting loops
laid at utility expense, such customers shall contribute an amount
equivalent to the applicable assessment as determined in Subsection A
above.
A. The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within
the Village and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which
there is now located or may in the future be located a public water
main, are hereby required, at the owners' expense, to install suitable
water facilities therein and connect such facilities to the proper public
water main in accordance with the provisions of this article within six
months after the date of official notice from the Director of Public
Works do so.
B. If any person fails to comply after the expiration of the time provided by
the notice, the Village may impose a penalty equal to 150% of the
minimum quarterly charge found in the user charge system for each
quarter until such time as the connection is made by the owner. After a
period of 12 months from the date of official notice, the Village may
cause connection to be made. In the latter case, the expense thereof
shall be assessed as a special tax against the property pursuant to Wis.
Stats. § 281.45. The owner may, within 30 days after the completion of
the work, file a written option with the Village stating that he cannot
§ 223-14 WATERFORD CODE § 223-15
211:406
§ 223-16. Water service extended beyond Village limits.
§ 223-17. Sewer service extended beyond Village limits.
pay the amount in one sum and asking that it be levied in not to exceed
five equal annual installments, and the amount shall be so collected
with interest at the rate of 10% per year from the completion of the
work, the unpaid balance to be a special tax lien.
C. The water service charges contained in the user charge system shall
take effect as of the day a connection to the water is made.
A. Lands described. The Village water service shall be extended by the
Water Utility to the following described property:
All that part of the Southwest Quarter (SW 1/4) of the Northeast
Quarter (NE 1/4) and the Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4) of the Southeast
Quarter (SE 1/4) of Section 36, Township Four North, Range 19 East,
Racine County, Wisconsin described as follows:
Commencing at the center of said Section 36 and run thence North
88°59'44" East, 285.78 feet; thence North 19° 50 feet 20 inches East
along the Reference Line of State Trunk Highway #36, 38.24 feet;
thence South 70° 40 inches East, 120.00 feet to the Southeasterly
right-of-way line of State Trunk Highway #36 and the point of
beginning of the parcel of land hereinafter described;
Thence run South 3° one foot West, 130.53 feet; thence North 77° 16
feet 50 inches East, 50 feet North of (as measured at right angles) and
parallel to the center line of County Trunk Highway "K", 480.00 feet;
thence North 12° 43 feet 10 inches West, 377.55 feet; thence South
77° six feet 50 inches West, 283.00 feet; thence South 19° 59 feet 20
inches West along the Southeasterly right-of-way line of State Trunk
Highway #36, 299.46 feet to the point of beginning, containing 3.437
acres of land.
Said lands lying and being in the Town of Waterford, County of Racine
and State of Wisconsin.
B. Water service charges. The owners of such lands shall pay for such
water service the normal charge as levied on properties inside the
Village limits, plus a surcharge of 25% of such charge, both of which
shall be due on the regular water billing dates. Such surcharge shall
continue until such area is annexed to the Village.
C. Cost of extension. The owners shall pay to the Village the total cost of
the water main extension to the lands described in Subsection A not
more than 90 days from the date the same is billed to the owners.
A. Lands described. The Village shall extend sewer service beyond Village
limits to the following described property:
§ 223-15 TREES § 223-17
211:407
(1) Parcel No. 1: All that part of the Southwest Quarter (SW 1/4) of the
Northeast Quarter (NE 1/4) and the Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4) of
the Southeast Quarter (SE 1/4) of Section 36, Township Four North,
Range 19 East, Racine County, Wisconsin described as follows:
Commencing at the center of said Section 36 and run thence
North 88° 59 feet 44 inches East, 285.78 feet; thence North 19°
50 feet 20 inches East along the Reference Line of State Trunk
Highway #36, 38.24 feet; thence South 70° 40 inches East, 120.00
feet to the Southeasterly right-of-way line of State Trunk Highway
#36 and the point of beginning of the parcel of land hereinafter
described;
Thence run South 3° one foot West, 130.53 feet; thence North 77°
16 feet 50 inches East, 50 feet North of (as measured at right
angles) and parallel to the center line of County Trunk Highway
"K", 480.00 feet; thence North 12° 43 feet 10 inches West, 377.55
feet; thence South 77° six feet 50 inches West, 283.00 feet; thence
South 19° 59 feet 20 inches West along the Southeasterly right-ofway
line of State Trunk Highway #36, 299.46 feet to the point of
beginning, containing 3.437 acres of land.
Said lands lying and being in the Town of Waterford, County of
Racine and State of Wisconsin.
(2) Parcel No. 2: All that part of the Southwest Quarter (SW 1/4) of the
Northeast Quarter (NE 1/4) and the Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4) of
the Southeast Quarter (SE 1/4) of Section 36, Township 4 North,
Range 19 East, Town of Waterford, Racine County, Wisconsin,
described as follows:
§ 223-17 WATERFORD CODE § 223-17
211:408
Commencing at the center of said Section 36 and run thence
North 88°59'44" East, 285.78 feet; thence North 19° 50 feet 20
inches East along the Reference Line of State Trunk Highway #36,
38.24 feet; thence South 70° 40 inches East, 120.00 feet to the
Southeasterly right-of-way line of State Trunk Highway #36, said
point of beginning of the parcel of land hereinafter described,
thence running North 77° 16 feet 50 inches East 283.00 feet to
an iron stake, thence South 12° 43 feet 10 inches East 377.55
feet to a point on the North line of County Trunk K, thence North
77° 16 feet 50 inches East (50 feet North of, as measured at right
angles, and parallel to the center line of County Trunk K) 456.30
feet, thence North 1° 36 feet 20 inches East along the North and
South 1/16 line of said Northeast 1/4, 1270.33 feet, thence South
88° seven feet 20 inches West along the East-West 1/16 line of
said Northeast 1/4, 455.75 feet to a point on the Southeasterly
line of State Trunk Highway Number 36, thence South 19° 59 feet
20 inches West 1125.64 feet along the Southeasterly right-of-way
line of State Trunk Highway Number 36 to place of beginning.
Consisting of 18.116 acres.
Said land being in the Town of Waterford, County of Racine and
State of Wisconsin.
B. Service charges and other conditions. All sewer service charges and
costs of present and future installations of mains, laterals and
appurtenances shall be as determined by a separate agreement
between the owners of the described lands and the Village.
C. Enactment. This section is enacted pursuant to the authority granted to
the Village under Wis. Stat. § 66.0813(3).89
89.Editor's Note: Original § 13.41, Connection charges for Milwaukee Street extension
projects, added 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 295, which followed this subsection, was repealed
1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489.
§ 223-17 TREES § 223-17
211:409

ARTICLE III
Sewer Utility
§ 223-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMMONIA NITROGEN (NH3-N) — One of the oxidation states of nitrogen
in which nitrogen is combined with hydrogen in molecular form as NH3 or
in ionized form as NH4+. Quantitative determination of ammonia nitrogen
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Western Racine County Sewerage District
No. 1 or its authorized deputy, agent or representative.[Amended
1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five days at 20° C.,
expressed as milligrams per liter. Quantitative determination of BOD shall
be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
BUILDING DRAIN — The horizontal piping within or under a building,
installed below the lowest fixture or the lowest floor level from which
fixtures can drain to the building sewer/service lateral.[Amended
12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 583
BUILDING SEWER — That part of the drain system not within or under
a building which conveys its discharge to the public sewer. The building
sewer may also be referred to as a "lateral" or "service lateral."[Amended
1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 583]
CHLORINE REQUIREMENT — The amount of chlorine in milligrams per
liter which must be added to wastewater to produce a specified residual
chlorine content in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard
Methods.
COMBINED SEWER — Any sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and
a storm sewer.
COMMERCIAL USER — Any user whose premises are used primarily for
the conducting of a profit-oriented enterprise in the fields of construction,
wholesale or retail trade, finance, insurance, real estate or services and
who discharges primarily normal domestic sewage. This definition shall also
include multifamily residences having three or more units served by a single
meter.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids, pH or fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in
the WPDES permit for the publicly owned treatment works receiving the
pollutants if such works were designed to treat such additional pollutants
and in part does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE (24 HOURS) — The combination of individual
samples taken at intervals of not more than one hour.
§ 223-18 TREES § 223-18
211:411
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil
if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
FLOW PROPORTIONAL SAMPLE — A sample taken that is proportional to
the volume of flow during the sampling period.
GARBAGE — The residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food and from the handling, storage and sale of food products and produce.
GROUND GARBAGE — The residue from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles
will be carried freely in suspension under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch in
any dimension.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Any pollutant which is not a compatible
pollutant.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any user whose premises are used primarily for
the conduct of a profit-oriented enterprise in the fields of manufacturing,
transportation, communications or utilities, mining, agriculture, forestry or
fishing.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any trade or process waste as distinct from
segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary convenience.
INSTITUTIONAL USER — Any user whose premises are used primarily for
the conduct of activities of a social, charitable or educational character.
INTERCEPTING SEWER — A sewer whose primary purpose is to convey
wastewater from a collection system or systems to a wastewater treatment
plant. Size of the sewer is not a factor.
LATERAL, SERVICE LATERAL — A pivately owned sewer service line that
connects a residence, commercial establishment, institutional facility,
industrial user or other user to the sewage system. This lateral may also be
referred to as a "building sewer."[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 583]
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
surface water or groundwaters.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — Sanitary wastewater resulting from
normal domestic activities in which BOD 5, SS and P concentrations do not
exceed normal concentrations of:
A. A five-day, 20° C. BOD of not more than 290 mg/l.
B. A suspended solids content of not more than 345 mg/l.
§ 223-18 WATERFORD CODE § 223-18
211:412
PERSON — Any and all persons, including any individual, firm, company,
municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution,
enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven and
a hydrogen ion concentration of 10-7.
PHOSPHORUS (P) — Total phosphorus in wastewater which may be present
in any of three principal forms: orthophosphates, polyphosphates and
organic phosphates. Quantitative determination of total phosphorus shall be
made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
PRETREATMENT — An arrangement of devices and structures for the
preliminary treatment or processing of wastewater required to render such
wastes acceptable for admission to the public sewers.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Any user whose premises are used for the conduct
of the legislative, judicial, administrative or regulatory activities of federal,
state, local or international units of government; government-owned
educational facilities; government-owned health facilities; or governmentowned
recreational facilities. This does not include government-owned or
-operated business establishments.
PUBLIC SEWER — Any sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of
Western Racine County Sewerage District No. 1. It shall also include sewers
within or outside the district boundaries that serve one or more persons and
ultimately discharge into the district sanitary sewer system even though
those sewers may not have been constructed with district funds. The public
sewer does not include private building sewers/private laterals. References
in this chapter to the "sewer system" or "sewer facilities" are to the public
sewer.[Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 12-12-2011 by Ord. No.
583]
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries sanitary and industrial watercarried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, together with minor quantities of ground-, storm- and surface
water that are not admitted intentionally.
SANITARY WASTEWATER — A combination of water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial plants, other than
industrial wastes from such plants, together with such ground-, surface and
stormwaters as may be present.
SEGREGATED DOMESTIC WASTES — Wastes from nonresidential sources
resulting from normal domestic activities. These activities are distinguished
from industrial, trade and/or process discharge wastes.
SEWAGE — The spent water of a community. The preferred term is
"wastewater."
A phosphorus concentration of not more than 10 mg/l. [Amended
1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
C.
§ 223-18 TREES § 223-18
211:413
SEWAGE SYSTEM — The composite network of public underground
conduits carrying wastewater and appurtenances incidental thereto (i.e.,
manholes, lift stations, etc.).[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 583]
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SHALL — Is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any period
of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration of flows during normal operation and shall
adversely affect the system and/or performance of the wastewater
treatment works.
STANDARD METHODS — The examination and analytical procedures set
forth in the standardized guideline adopted by the Village from time to time,
which is maintained by the Director of Public Works.[Amended 1-23-2006
by Ord. No. 489; 7-22-2013 by Ord. No. 609]
STORM DRAIN (sometimes referred to as "STORM SEWER") — A drain
or sewer for conveying stormwater, groundwater, subsurface water or
unpolluted water from any source.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — That portion of the rainfall that is drained into
the sewers.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) — Solids that either float on the surface of or are
in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquid and that are removable
by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods and are referred
to as nonfilterable residue.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving
water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the
sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
USER CLASSES — Categories of users having similar flows and water
characteristics; that is, levels of biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids, phosphorus, ammonia nitrogen, etc. For the purposes of this article,
there shall be four user classes: residential, commercial, industrial and
public authority.
WASTEWATER — The spent water of a community. From the standpoint
of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be
present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — The treatment works defined herein,
exclusive of interceptor sewers, and wastewater collection systems.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — An arrangement of devices and
structures for the storage, treatment recycling and reclamation of
wastewater, liquid industrial wastes and sludge. These systems include
interceptor sewers, outfall sewers, wastewater collection systems,
§ 223-18 WATERFORD CODE § 223-18
211:414
individual systems, pumping, power and other equipment and their
appurtenances; any works that are an integral part of the treatment process
or are used for ultimate disposal of residues from such treatment; or any
other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating,
separating or disposing of municipal or industrial wastes.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water,
either continuously or intermittently.
WPDES PERMIT — A permit issued under the Wisconsin Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System under Wis. Stat. ch. 283. See also Wis.
Admin. Code ch. NR 200 et seq.
§ 223-19. Use of public sewers.
A. Sanitary sewers. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
any unpolluted waters as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage or cooling water to any sanitary sewer, except
stormwater runoff from limited areas which stormwater may be
polluted at times, may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by
permission of the approving authority.
B. User connections.
(1) The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated
within the Village and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way
in which there is now located or may in the future be located a
public sanitary sewer, are hereby required, at the owners' expense,
to install suitable toilet facilities therein and connect such facilities
directly to the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this article within six months after the date of official
notice from the Village or the approving authority to do so.
[Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 5-9-2011 by Ord. No.
574]
(2) If any person fails to comply after the expiration of the time
provided by the notice, the Village may impose a penalty equal to
150% of the minimum quarterly charge found in the user charge
system for each quarter until such time as the connection is made
by the owner. After a period of 12 months from the date of official
notice, the Village may cause connection to be made. In the latter
case, the expense thereof shall be assessed as a special tax against
the property. The owner may, within 30 days after the completion of
the work, file a written option with the Village stating that he
cannot pay the amount in one sum and asking that it be levied in
not to exceed five equal annual installments, and the amount shall
be so collected with interest at the rate of 10% per year from the
completion of the work, the unpaid balance to be a special tax lien.
[Amended 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 574]
§ 223-18 TREES § 223-19
211:415
(3) The sewer service charges contained in the user charge system
shall take effect as of the day a connection to the sewer is made.
(4) No portable or temporary sanitary facilities shall be allowed within
the Village without approval of the approving authority.
C. Storm sewers. Stormwater, other than that exempted under § 223-19,
and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as
are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a
natural outlet approved by the approving authority and other
regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process
waters may be discharged on approval of the approving authority to a
storm sewer or natural outlet.
D. Prohibitions and limitations.
(1) Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause
to be discharged any of the following described waters, wastes or
substances to any public sewer:
(a) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(b) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any
waste treatment process or which constitutes a hazard to
humans or animals, creates a public nuisance or creates any
hazard in or has an adverse effect on the waters receiving any
discharge from the treatment works.
(c) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher
than 9.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of
causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and
personnel of the wastewater works.
(d) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size as to be
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the wastewater
facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud,
straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics,
wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair
and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers,
etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(e) The following described substances, materials, waters or waste
shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to
concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the
sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment; will not
have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or will not
otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property or constitute a
nuisance. The approving authority may set limitations lower
§ 223-19 WATERFORD CODE § 223-19
211:416
than the limitations established in the regulations below if,
in its opinion, such more severe limitations are necessary to
meet the above objectives. In forming an opinion as to the
acceptability, the approving authority will give consideration to
such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows
and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the
sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity
of the wastewater treatment plant and other pertinent factors.
The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics
of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer
which shall not be violated without approval of the approving
authority are as follows:
[1] Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150° F.
(65° C.).
[2] Wastewater containing more than 25 mg/l of petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oils or product of mineral oil
origin.
[3] Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 mg/l
of fat, oil or grease.
[4] Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers
from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals,
catering establishments or similar places where garbage
originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the
purpose of consumption on the premises or when served
by caterers.
[5] Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper,
zinc, mercury and similar objectionable or toxic
substances to such degree that any such material received
in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment
works exceeds the limits established by the approving
authority for such materials.
[6] Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing
substances exceeding limits which may be established by
the approving authority.
[7] Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the
approving authority in compliance with applicable state or
federal regulations.
[8] Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both, which
constitute a "slug" as defined herein.
[9] Water or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater
§ 223-19 TREES § 223-19
211:417
treatment processes employed or are amenable to
treatment only to such degree that the wastewater
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of
other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving waters.
[10] Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other
water or wastes in the public sewer system, release
obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere
with the collection system or create a condition
deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
[11] Materials which exert or cause:
[a] Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a
significant load on the wastewater treatment plant;
[b] Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting "slugs" as defined herein;
[c] Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids such
as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and
lime residues, or of dissolved solids such as, but not
limited to, sodium sulfate; or
[d] Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
(2) No wastewater, regardless of character, shall be discharged to the
sewage system in such a manner as to interfere with the designed
operation of the collection system or treatment facilities or to cause
the treatment works to exceed the limits presented by the WPDES
permit.
E. Special arrangements. No statement contained in this section shall be
construed as prohibiting any special agreement between the Village
and any person whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be admitted to the sewage disposal works, either before
or after pretreatment, provided that there is no impairment of the
function of the sewage disposal works by reason of the admission of
such wastes and no extra costs are incurred by the Village without
recompense by the person, provided that all rates and provisions set
forth in this article are recognized and adhered to. [Amended
5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 574]
F. New connections. New connections to the sewage system shall not be
permitted if there is insufficient capacity in the treatment works to
adequately transport the additional wastewater anticipated to be
received from such connections.
§ 223-19 WATERFORD CODE § 223-20
211:418
§ 223-20. Discharge of industrial wastes. [Amended 1-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 489; 7-22-2013 by Ord. No. 609]
A. Submission of basic data.
(1) Establishments discharging industrial wastes to a public sewer
shall file with the approving authority a report that shall include
pertinent data relating to the quantity and characteristics of the
wastes discharged to the wastewater works. Such information shall
be provided as per Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 101.
(2) Each establishment desiring to make a new connection to public
sewer for the purpose of discharging industrial wastes shall
prepare and file with the approving authority a report that shall
include actual or predicted data relating to the quantity and
characteristics of the waste to be discharged.
B. High-strength toxic discharges.
(1) If any waters or wastes are discharged or proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters or wastes contain
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 223-19
and which, in the judgment of the approving authority, may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or
receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life, health
or constitute a public nuisance, the approving authority may:
(a) Reject the wastes.
(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable limit for discharge to
the public sewers.
(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
(d) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer
charges under the provisions of §§ 223-27 and 223-29.
(2) The toxic pollutants subject to prohibition or regulation under this
section shall include, but need not be limited to, the list of toxic
pollutants or combination of pollutants established by
Section 307(a) of the Clean Water Act of 1977 and subsequent
amendments. Effluent standards or prohibitions for discharge to
the sanitary sewer shall also conform to the requirements of
Section 307(a) and associated regulations.
(3) Pretreatment standards for those pollutants which are determined
not to be susceptible to treatment by the treatment works or which
would interfere with the operation of such works shall conform to
the requirements and associated regulations of Section 307(b) of
the Clean Water Act of 1977 and subsequent amendments. The
primary source for such regulations shall be 40 CFR 403, General
§ 223-20 TREES § 223-20
211:419
Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of
Pollution.
C. Industrial waste control.
(1) Manhole required. All building sewers serving manufacturing or
industrial processing plants, gas stations, service stations (gas and
oil), laundromats or car washes which are connected to a public
sewer system shall have installed therein a manhole for periodic
sewerage sampling purposes. Existing structures shall, upon the
application for or issuance of a building permit for the purpose of
remodeling, expansion or construction of any nature or a
conditional use permit, be brought within the purview of this
article. The manhole shall be of approved design and shall be
located on public right-of-way, where possible. When manholes are
installed on private property, they shall be readily accessible at all
times.
(2) Location of manhole. Sampling manholes shall be located on public
property, whenever possible. When located on private property,
they shall be within five feet of the lot line fronting on the public
right-of-way, and authorized representatives shall be guaranteed
the right of access.
(3) Construction. Sampling manholes shall be a minimum of 48 inches
in diameter and constructed in a watertight and substantial
manner and may be of concrete or precast concrete. Construction
details shall follow the general criteria as contained in Wis. Admin.
Code ch. Comm 81 through 87 and ch. NR 110 and in the current
edition of Standard Specifications for Sewer and Water
Construction in Wisconsin.
(4) Access. Authorized representatives of the Village shall have
unlimited access to such sampling manholes, and denial of such
access shall be a violation of this article.
D. Metering of waste. Devices for measuring the volume of waste
discharged may be required by the approving authority if this volume
cannot otherwise be estimated. Metering devices for determining the
volume of waste shall be installed, owned and maintained by the
discharger. A maintenance schedule must be accepted by the approving
authority. Following approval and installation, such meters may not be
removed without the consent of the approving authority.
E. Waste sampling.
(1) Industrial wastes discharged into the public sewers shall be subject
to periodic inspection and a determination of character and
concentration of such wastes. The determination shall be made by
the industry as often as may be deemed necessary by the approving
authority.
§ 223-20 WATERFORD CODE § 223-20
211:420
(2) Sampling shall be conducted in such a manner as to be
representative of the composition of the wastes. The sampling may
be accomplished either manually or by the use of mechanical
equipment acceptable to the approving authority.
(3) Installation, operation and maintenance of the sampling facilities
shall be the responsibility of the establishment discharging the
waste and shall be subject to the approval of the approving
authority. Access to sampling locations shall be granted to the
approving authority or its authorized representative at all times.
Every care shall be exercised in the collection of samples to ensure
their preservation in a state comparable to that at the time the
sample was taken.
F. Analyses.
(1) All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall
be determined in accordance with the standardized guideline
adopted by the Village Board and the approving authority from
time to time and maintained by the Director of Public Works.
Sampling methods, location, times, durations and frequencies are
to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the
approving authority.
(2) Determination of the character and concentration of the industrial
wastes shall be made by the establishment discharging them or its
agent as designated and required by the approving authority. The
approving authority may also make its own analyses on the wastes,
and these determinations shall be binding as a basis for charges.
G. Pretreatment. Where required, in the opinion of the approving
authority, to modify or eliminate wastes that are harmful to the
structures, processes or operation of the wastewater treatment works,
the person shall provide at his expense such preliminary treatment or
processing facilities as may be determined required to render his
wastes acceptable for admission to the public sewers.
H. Submission of information. Plans, specifications, any other pertinent
information relating to proposed flow equalizations, pretreatment or
processing facilities shall be submitted for review of the approving
authority prior to the start of their construction if the effluent from such
facilities is to be discharged into the public sewers.
I. Grease and/or sand interceptors. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall
be provided when, in the opinion of the approving authority, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable
grease in excessive amounts as specified in § 223-19D(1)(e)[3] or any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
approving authority and shall be located as to be readily and easily
§ 223-20 TREES § 223-20
211:421
§ 223-20.1. Mercury minimization requirements. [Added 3-9-2009
by Ord. No. 538]
accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal
and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall
maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject
to review by the approving authority. Any removal and hauling of the
collected materials not performed by the owner's personnel must be
performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms.
A. Dental offices.
(1) This section applies to any dental office that places or removes
amalgam. If work in a dental office is limited to work that does not
involve placing or removing amalgam, such as orthodontics,
periodontics, oral and maxillo-facial surgery, endodontics or
prosthodontics, then this section does not apply.
(2) Dental offices in existence on the date of enactment of this section
are subject to the deadlines for compliance with this section set
forth in Subsection A(4) through (8) below, as established by the
Village and the Western Racine County Sewerage District No. 1
(WRCSD).
(3) All dental offices shall implement best management practices for
amalgam as established by the Wisconsin Dental Association.
(4) Within the shortest reasonable time, but not later than December
31, 2009, every vacuum system where amalgam is placed or
removed shall include an amalgam separator that meets the
criteria of the International Standards Organization (ISO 11143).
Dental offices shall install, operate and maintain the amalgam
separator according to instructions provided by the manufacturer.
The amalgam separator shall have a design and capacity
appropriate for the size and type of vacuum system.
(5) On or before March 31, 2009, each dental office shall submit a
schedule for the installation of the amalgam separator required by
Subsection A(4) above.
(6) On or before July 31, 2009, each dental office shall submit a report
to the Village that certifies the implementation of the management
practices required by Subsection A(3) above and identifies the
contractors used to remove amalgam waste within the last 12
months. A copy of this report will be forwarded to WRCSD.
(7) On or before December 31, 2009, each dental office shall submit a
report providing the following information:
§ 223-20 WATERFORD CODE § 223-20.1
211:422
(a) If installation of the amalgam separator is complete, then the
report shall identify the installation date, the manufacturer and
the model name.
(b) If installation of the amalgam separator is incomplete, then the
report shall briefly explain the delay, provide an installation
schedule and identify the manufacturer and the model name of
the amalgam separator that will be installed.
(8) If a dental office has provided a report according to Subsection
A(7)(b) above, then the dental office shall notify the Village of the
completion of the installation within five (5) days after completion.
A copy of this report will be forwarded to WRCSD.
(9) The Village shall provide forms for reporting the information
required by Subsection A(5), (6), (7) and (8) above.
(10) From the contractor(s) used to remove amalgam waste, dental
offices shall obtain records for each shipment showing the volume
or mass of amalgam waste shipped; the name and address of the
destination and the name and address of the contractor. Dental
offices shall make these records available to the Village and
WRCSD personnel for inspection and copying upon request.
(11) Annually on or before January 31, each dental office shall submit a
report to the Village that lists the volume or mass of amalgam
waste shipped, the name and address of the destination and the
name and address of the contractor(s) used to remove amalgam
waste within the previous calendar year. The report shall also set
forth all maintenance performed on the amalgam separator within
the previous calendar year, including inspections, cleaning, repairs
and other maintenance. The Village shall provide forms for
reporting the information required by this Subsection A(11). A copy
of this report will be forwarded to WRCSD.
(12) Dental offices shall permit the Village and WRCSD to inspect
vacuum system, amalgam separator and amalgam waste storage
areas if requested. Inspections shall occur during the normal
operating schedule of the dental office according to appointments
made in advance, as long as this advance notice does not impede
enforcement of this section.
(13) If a dental office is implementing the management practices
required by Subsection A(3) above and is operating and
maintaining the amalgam separator required by Subsection A(4)
above, then with regard to mercury it will not be subject to the
regulatory procedures and requirements as set forth elsewhere in
this Article III; however, if the dental office fails to meet such
standards, the provisions of Articles III and IV, including §§ 223-20,
223-26 and 223-31, shall apply.
B. Other facilities.
§ 223-20.1 TREES § 223-20.1
211:423
(1) This section applies to all other facilities having the potential to
discharge mercury or mercury-containing material to the Village's
and WRCSD's sanitary sewer system. Facilities to which this
section applies include:
(a) Medical facilities, including all hospitals, clinics and veterinary
facilities that have laboratories.
(b) School facilities, including all public and private schools with
science laboratories, including middle schools, high schools,
technical schools, colleges and universities, but not elementary
schools.
(c) Industrial facilities, including all industrial plants that
historically or consistently discharge mercury into the
wastewater treatment plant and industrial plants with the
potential for mercury in their wastewater.
(2) The Village shall identify and notify the facilities to be regulated
under this Subsection B within 30 days after the effective date of
this section. All facilities identified after the effective date of this
section shall be notified individually by the Village that they are
subject to regulation under this Subsection B.
(3) All facilities regulated under this Subsection B shall implement
best management practices as established by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and the WRCSD. On or
before July 31, 2009, each facility regulated under this section shall
submit a report to the Village that identifies the management
practices already implemented and lists the anticipated dates for
implementing the other management practices listed on the report.
New facilities identified under Subsection B(2) above shall submit
this report within three months of notification. A copy of this report
will be forwarded to WRCSD.
(4) By December 31, 2009, all facilities regulated under this
Subsection B shall submit a report to the Village that certifies the
implementation of the management practices described in
Subsection B(3) above. New facilities identified under Subsection
B(2) above shall implement best management practices and submit
a certification report within six months of submittal of the report
required under Subsection B(3) above. A copy of this report will be
forwarded to WRCSD.
(5) The Village shall provide forms for reporting the information
required by Subsection B(3) and (4) above.
(6) If a facility is implementing the management practices required by
Subsection B(3) and (4) above, then with regard to mercury it will
not be subject to the regulatory procedures and requirements as
set forth elsewhere in this Article III; however, if the facility fails to
§ 223-20.1 WATERFORD CODE § 223-20.1
211:424
§ 223-21. Right of entry; safety and identification. [Amended
5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 574]
§ 223-22. Sewer construction (building sewers).
meet such standards, the provisions of Articles III and IV, including
§§ 223-20, 223-26 and 223-31, shall apply.
A. Right of entry. The collection system operator or other authorized
employee of the Village or approving authority bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties
for the purpose of inspection, observation and testing in accordance
with the provisions of this article and state laws. The operator or other
authorized employee of the Village or approving authority shall have no
authority to inquire into any process beyond that point having a direct
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers, waterways
or facilities for wastewater treatment.
B. Safety. While performing the necessary work on private premises
referred to in Subsection A, the authorized Village or approving
authority employees shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the owner or occupant, and the Village or
approving authority shall indemnify the owner against loss or damage
to its property by Village or approving authority employees and against
the liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the owner and growing out of gauging and sampling
operation of the Village or approving authority employees, except as
such may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner to maintain
safe conditions as required in § 223-20D.
C. Identification; right to enter easements. The operator and other
authorized employees of the Village or approving authority bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the Village holds a negotiated
easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the
sewage works lying within such easement, all subject to the terms, if
any, of the agreement.
A. Work authorized. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer,
building sewer, lateral or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining
written permits from the Village. [Amended 12-12-2011 by Ord. No.
583]
B. Cost of sewer construction.
(1) All costs and expenses incidental to the installation, connection,
modification and maintenance of the building sewer/private service
lateral and any appurtenances thereto shall be borne by the owner,
who may request that the work be performed by the approving
§ 223-20.1 TREES § 223-22
211:425
authority or who may employ an independent contractor to do the
work. The owner shall indemnify the sewerage district and the
Village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly
be occasioned by the installation, modification, maintenance or
connection of the building sewer. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 489; 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 583]
(2) Except as herein provided, all charges accruing to the owner under
this subsection may be treated as special assessments in
accordance with the provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes.
C. Use of old building sewers. Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found on
examination and test by the approving authority to meet all
requirements for this article.
D. Materials and methods of construction. The size, slope, alignment and
the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements
of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, State Department of Natural
Resources, Chapter 98, Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical
Codes, of this Municipal Code and other applicable rules and
regulations of the sewerage district. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 489]
E. Building sewer grade. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be
brought to the building at an elevation below the basement flow. In all
buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to
the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall
be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
F. Storm- and groundwater drains.
(1) No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface
runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which
is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(2) All existing downspouts or groundwater drains, etc., connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer must be
disconnected no later than 60 days from the date of an official
written notice by the approving authority or Village. Exceptions to
the above shall be made only to the approving authority or Village
in writing.
G. Conformance to Plumbing Code.
(1) The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of Chapter 98 of this Municipal Code
and other applicable rules and regulations of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code. All such connections shall be made gastight
and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
§ 223-22 WATERFORD CODE § 223-22
211:426
materials must be approved by the approving authority or Village
before installation.
(2) All connections to existing sewer mains shall be made with a saddle
"T" or "Y" fitting set upon a carefully cut opening centered in the
upper quadrant of the main sewer pipe with solvent welded joints.
H. Inspection of connection. The applicant for the building sewer permit
shall notify the approving authority or Village when the building sewer
is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The
connection shall be made under the supervision of the approving
authority or Village. The permit fee shall include the cost of one
inspection by either the approving authority or Village. The owner shall
pay the costs of any additional inspections that may be required for
quality assurance. [Amended 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 574]
I. Barricades; restoration. All excavations for the building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so
as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and
other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be
restored in a manner satisfactory to the Village.
J. Sewer main extensions. In addition to all other pertinent sections of this
article, any person requesting an extension of the public sanitary sewer
main shall be responsible for all of the following duties:
(1) All costs and expenses incidental to the installation of a sewer main
extension, including engineering and any fees associated with the
connection or hookup to the sewer, shall be borne by the person
requesting the extension. This person shall secure and furnish
proof of an escrow account for the estimated amount of the total
sewer costs, the amount to be determined by the sewerage district
and the Village. The account shall be so arranged and a special
agreement executed between the person, bank and the Village to
allow the latter to withdraw monthly amounts from the account
sufficient to cover monthly payments to subcontractors under
contract with the Village for the sewer installation. The amounts of
monthly withdrawals as determined by the Village shall be billed to
the person requesting the extension and shall be due within 10
days of the date of billing. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No.
489; 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 574]
(2) Design of any proposed sewer extension shall be performed by an
engineering consultant selected by the approving authority. The
resulting construction plans and specification shall be reviewed
and approved by the approving authority and the Village prior to
submission to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. All
plans shall conform to the standards of the DNR, and such
additional requirements and standards that the approving
authority may establish, and shall be prepared by a professional
engineer registered to practice in the state. Construction
§ 223-22 TREES § 223-22
211:427
§ 223-23. Septic tank and holding tank disposal. [Amended
1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
No septic tank or holding tank wastes shall be discharged to the collection
system operated by Western Racine County Sewerage District No. 1.
§ 223-24. Damage or tampering with sewage facilities.
inspection and contract administration shall be performed by the
district's engineer. [Amended 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 574]
(3) The person requesting the sewer extension shall assist in securing
all required utility easements, the location and width of which shall
be determined by the Village. The Village will furnish blank
easement forms to the person who will be responsible for the
proper legal description of the easement parcel and for the proper
execution of the easement by the grantor. All completed easements
shall be submitted to the Village, designated as the grantee, for its
review and shall be recorded at the Racine County Register of
Deeds office by the Village. [Amended 5-9-2011 by Ord. No.
574]
(4) The person requesting the sewer extension shall also execute any
other special agreements deemed necessary by the approving
authority and the Village. [Amended 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 574]
(5) Construction and dedication. [Added 1-23-2006 by Ord. No.
489]
(a) All extensions of the sanitary sewer system shall be
constructed according to the current edition of Standard
Specifications for Sewer and Water Construction in Wisconsin,
as may be amended from time to time.
(b) Dedication to the public. Any sanitary sewer system which is to
be dedicated to the public shall be constructed to public
sanitary sewer standards as set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes
and Administrative Code. No system which is constructed to
private system standards shall be dedicated to the public.
(6) Any person who constructs a sanitary sewer system extension shall
televise said extension upon completion and provide a recording
thereof to the Village. [Added 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
A. Willful, negligent or malicious damage. No unauthorized person shall
maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the sewage facilities. Any persons violating this provision
shall be subject to immediate arrest under a charge of disorderly
conduct.
§ 223-22 WATERFORD CODE § 223-24
211:428
§ 223-25. Appeals. [Amended 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 574]
§ 223-26. Violations and penalties.
B. Liability to discharger for losses. Any person who intentionally,
negligently or accidentally violates any provisions of this article shall
become liable to the Village or any downstream user for any expense,
loss or damage occasioned by reason of such violation which the Village
or any downstream user may suffer as a result thereof. This subsection
shall be applicable whether or not a written notice of the violation was
given as provided in § 223-26A.
A. Any user, permit applicant or permit holder affected by any decision,
action or determination, including cease and desist orders, made by the
approving authority, the Village, or the approving authority through the
Village, interpreting or implementing the provisions of this article or in
any permit issued herein, may file with the Public Works and Utilities
Committee a written request for reconsideration, within 10 days,
setting forth in detail the facts supporting the user's request for
reconsideration. The approving authority shall be given notice of such
written request and shall appear at the time of reconsideration.
B. The Public Works and Utilities Committee shall render a decision on the
request for reconsideration to the user, permit applicant or permit
holder, in writing, within 15 days of receipt of request.
A. Written notice of violation. Any person found to be violating any
provision of this article shall be served by the Village with a written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable
time for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within
the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations. [Amended 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 574]
B. Accidental discharge. Any person found to be responsible for
accidentally allowing a deleterious discharge into the sewer system
which causes damage to the treatment facility and/or receiving body of
water shall, in addition to a forfeiture, pay the amount to cover damage,
both values to be established by the approving authority.
C. Continued violations. Any person who shall continue any violation
beyond the aforesaid notice time limit provided shall, upon conviction
thereof, forfeit not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, together with
the costs of prosecution. In default of payment of such forfeiture and
costs, such violator shall be imprisoned in the Racine County Jail for a
period not to exceed 30 days. Each day in which any violation is
continued beyond the aforesaid notice time limit shall be deemed a
separate offense.
D. Liability to the district for losses. Any person violating any provision of
this article shall become liable to the Western Racine County Sewerage
District No. 1 for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by reason of
§ 223-24 TREES § 223-26
211:429
§ 223-27. Additional provisions for municipal utilities. [Amended
7-24-2000 by Ord. No. 403; 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 574]
§ 223-28. Administration. [Added 7-24-2000 by Ord. No. 403;
amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 574;
12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 583; 7-22-2013 by Ord. No. 609]
such violation which the WRCSD Commission or district may suffer as
a result thereof. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
A. Standards and definitions. The Village, for the following elements, shall
employ the same standards and definitions as employed by the Public
Service Commission:
(1) Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD).
(2) Suspended solids.
(3) Phosphorus.
B. Replacement fund. The Village shall establish and maintain a
segregated account to be designated the replacement fund and shall
fund this account so as to adequately provide for the replacement of
mechanical equipment within the Village, based upon the replacement
schedule and useful life determinations from time to time made by the
Village.
A. As provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0805(6), the Village Board is in charge of
the operations and management of the Village of Waterford Sewer
Utility. The Sewer Utility shall function in accordance with Wis. Stats.
§ 66.0821 and any and all applicable state or local laws or regulations
pertaining to the operation of sanitary sewer utilities.
(1) Accounting. The Village Board shall establish a financial
management system that accounts for all revenues and all
expenditures relating to the sanitary sewer system. It shall keep
separate detailed accounting of Sewer Utility funds and provide
periodic accounting reports.
(2) Control of sewer mains, etc. The public sewer mains, lift stations,
and all equipment of the Utility shall be under the exclusive control
of the Village Board and its authorized agents and employees, and
no other person shall disturb, tamper with, injure, tap, change,
obstruct access to or interfere with such public sewer mains, lift
stations or equipment. [Amended ]
B. Director of Public Works. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
(1) Appointment. The Village Board shall appoint the Director of Public
Works at such times as it deems necessary.
(2) Duties. The Director of Public Works shall:
§ 223-26 WATERFORD CODE § 223-28
211:430
§ 223-29. Sewer Utility rates and fees. [Added 7-24-2000 by Ord.
No. 403; amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 5-9-2011 by Ord. No.
574]
The rates and fees for sewer, service and equipment provided by the Village
of Waterford Sewer Utility shall be as established by the Village Board.
(a) Perform all duties concerning the Village sewage system
imposed upon him by the Village Board and shall see that all
rules and regulations of the Board concerning the sewage
system are carried out in addition to performing the duties of
Director of Public Works.
(b) Watch over all machinery and everything connected therewith
and see that no deprecations or misdemeanors are committed
about the place or buildings connected with the sewage
system.
(c) Keep himself prepared for duty at all times.
(d) Have charge of the physical plant and the care and supervision
of the running of all machinery connected therewith.
(e) See that every part of the sewage system is in running order
and, in the case of breakage or defects in the same, shall give
immediate notice to the Village Board or the Chairman of the
Public Works and Utilities Committee.
(3) Compensation. The Director of Public Works shall receive such
compensation as the Village Board shall from time to time
determine.
(4) Bond. The Village Board may require a bond of the Director of
Public Works before entering upon his duties for such sum as it may
determine, conditioned for the faithful discharge of his duties.
C. Records. All records pertaining to the management of the Village
sewage system, except those required to be kept by the Director of
Public Works, shall be kept by the Utility Clerk in books provided for
that purpose. Such records shall show the names of all patrons,
descriptions of premises supplied, rate of tariff, collections made and
such other matters as the Board may from time to time require to be
recorded.
A. The Village shall charge sewage system users on a quarterly basis, to
include a service charge and a usage charge which is based upon the
metered volume of water. The rates shall be based upon the costs of the
Sewer Utility's operations, maintenance and replacement costs, the
amount paid to the Western Racine County Sewerage District No. 1 for
wastewater treatment, and the amount of debt service incurred by the
Utility.
§ 223-28 TREES § 223-29
211:431
B. The Village shall maintain proportionate distribution of its operation,
maintenance and replacement costs among its various user classes, but
may charge users who discharge a higher percentage of pollutants,
above the standard within each user class, a higher amount per
metered gallon of water.
C. The Village shall generate sufficient revenues to pay the operation,
maintenance and replacement costs, the wastewater treatment costs,
and the debt service.
§ 223-29 WATERFORD CODE § 223-29
211:432
ARTICLE IV
Penalties
§ 223-30. Operation of valves and hydrants. [Amended 5-9-2011 by
Ord. No. 574; 7-22-2013 by Ord. No. 609]
Any person who shall, without authority of the Director of Public Works,
operate any valve connected with the street or supply mains; open any fire
hydrant connected with the distribution system, except for the purpose of
extinguishing a fire; or who shall wantonly injure or impair the same shall
be subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal
Code. Owners or operators of motor vehicles will be held for the cost of
repair of any hydrant damaged by a motor vehicle, and the Water Utility is
not responsible for damage to a motor vehicle by reason of such accident.
§ 223-31. General penalty.
Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any provision
of this chapter or any regulation, rule or order made hereunder shall be
subject to a penalty as provided by Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal
Code.
§ 223-30 TREES § 223-31
211:433
Part III: Land Use Legislation
Chapter 235
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plan Commission — See Ch. 5, § 5-3.
Building, plumbing, electrical and
mechanical codes — See Ch. 98.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 191.
Trees — See Ch. 211.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 223.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
Erosion control and stormwater
management — See Ch. 250.
Shoreland-wetland zoning — See Ch. 255.
Floodplain zoning — See Ch. 256.
§ 223-31 WATERFORD CODE § 223-31
211:434
ARTICLE I
Purpose and Interpretation; Definitions
§ 235-1. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare; lessen congestion in the streets and highways; further the orderly
layout and use of land; secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers;
provide adequate light and air; prevent the overcrowding of land; avoid
undue concentration of population; facilitate adequate and economical
provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds
and other public requirements; ensure proper legal description and proper
monumenting of land subdivided; and facilitate the further resubdivision of
larger tracts into smaller parcels of land; and because today's subdivision of
land forms the basic physical pattern of the community to which the future
community will of necessity adhere.
§ 235-2. Statutory authorization. [Amended 1-10-2011 by Ord. No.
561]
This chapter is adopted pursuant to Wis. Stats. Ch. 236, relating to platting
lands and recording and vacating plats, and specifically to Wis. Stats. §
236.45, relating to local subdivision control, which allows the Village to
enact ordinances governing the subdivision or other division of land that are
more restrictive than the provisions of Wis. Stats. Ch. 236. Pursuant to Wis.
Stats. § 236.45(2)(ac), no provision of this chapter shall be interpreted to
modify in a more restrictive way time limits, deadlines, notice requirements,
or other provisions of Wis. Stats. Ch. 236 that provide protections for a
subdivider.
§ 235-3. Applicability. [Amended 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 445;
1-10-2011 by Ord. No. 561; 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 650]
A. The provisions of this chapter are supplemental to Wis. Stats. Ch. 236,
which is adopted by reference and incorporated herein as though set
forth in full, and shall apply to land divisions hereafter made, except
insofar as it relates to the following divisions of less than five parcels:
(1) Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order;
(2) Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages or easements;
(3) The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of
adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and the
lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by
Wis. Stats. Ch. 236 or this chapter or Chapter 245, Zoning.
B. Every owner of land, or agent of an owner of land, shall obtain the
approval of the Village Board, upon recommendation of the Plan
Commission, for any land division not specifically excepted herein,
within the Village limits of the Village of Waterford.
§ 235-1 TREES § 235-3
211:435
§ 235-4. Minimum requirements. [Amended 3-22-2004 by Ord. No.
445]
The requirements provided in this chapter for the development and design
of land being divided shall be considered minimum requirements.
§ 235-5. Definitions.
In the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply:
ALLEY — A public way which affords a secondary means of access to
abutting property.
CERTIFIED SURVEY MAP (CSM) — A survey and map of not more than
four parcels of land consisting of lots or outlots, meeting the requirements
of Wis. Stats. § 236.34, prepared by a professional land surveyor.[Added
3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 445; amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 650]
CERTIFIED SURVEY MAP, EXPANDED (expanded CSM) — A survey and
map meeting the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.34(1)(ar). An expanded
CSM, or a series of expanded CSMs, may be used for certain land divisions
that would otherwise require subdivision plats as set forth in § 235-16.1.
[Added 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 650]
EASEMENT — The land set aside over which a liberty, privilege or
advantage in such land, without profit and distinct from the ownership of
the land, is granted to the public or to some particular person or part of the
public.
C. Every owner of land, or agent of an owner of land, shall obtain the
approval of the Village Board, upon recommendation of the Plan
Commission, for any land division by certified survey map, as provided
by Wis. Stats. § 236.34(1), or plat, as provided by Wis. Stats.
§ 236.10(1), within the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the
Village of Waterford. The Village may not deny approval of a plat or
certified survey map on the basis of the proposed use of land within the
extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction, unless the denial is based on
the provisions of §§ 245-100 through 245-107 of this Code, the
Extraterritorial Zoning District.
D. Where no plat is required by Wis. Stats. Ch. 236, land shall be divided
by certified survey map, meeting the requirements of Wis. Stats.
§ 236.34, as set forth in § 235-16 or 235-17. Under certain
circumstances, land may be divided by expanded CSM as set forth in
§ 235-16.1. Unless excepted herein, land shall not be divided by metes
and bounds description.
E. Where the requirements of Wis. Stats. Ch. 236 and this chapter conflict,
the provisions of Wis. Stats. Ch. 236 shall prevail unless the authority to
vary from the statute is granted therein.
§ 235-3 WATERFORD CODE § 235-5
211:436
LAND DIVISION — A division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts or parcels of land, or the recombination of two or more
existing lots into a new configuration.[Added 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 445]
LOT, BUTT — A lot the rear lot line of which abuts the side lot line of another
lot platted in the same block and not separated therefrom by an alley or
other open space.
LOT WIDTH — The width of the lot measured at the setback line.
MASTER PLAN OF STREETS — The plan represented by the following:
OWNER — Includes the plural as well as the singular, and may mean
a natural person, firm, association, partnership, limited-liability company,
private corporation, public or quasi-public corporation or a combination of
any of them.
PEDESTRIAN WAY — A public walk or crosswalk used exclusively by
pedestrians and/or as a public right-of-way for utilities.
PLAT, FINAL — A map of a subdivision which has been accurately surveyed
and such survey marked on the ground so that streets, alleys, blocks, lots
and other divisions thereof can be identified.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — A map or plan of a proposed subdivision.
PUBLIC OFF-STREET PARKING AREA AND SERVICE STREET — An area
dedicated or set aside on the plat of a subdivision for the use of the
public for the parking and movement of automotive vehicles.[Amended
4-23-2007 by Ord. No. 513]
SETBACK LINE — A line within a lot or other parcel of land so designated
on the plat of the proposed subdivision between which line and the adjacent
boundary of the street upon which the lot abuts the erection of an enclosed
structure or portion thereof is prohibited.
STREET, MAJOR — A street having an established width of 90 feet or more
and used and designed primarily for fast or heavy traffic.
STREET, MINOR — A street, other than a major or public service street,
which affords access to abutting property.
STREET, PRIVATE — A private thoroughfare that affords a means of access
to abutting property and includes, but is not limited to, a way for vehicular
traffic, whether designated a street, road, lane, or as otherwise
designated.[Added 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
STREET, PUBLIC — A public thoroughfare which affords a means of access
to abutting property and includes, without limitation by reason of
A. The state trunk highway system in the Village.
B. The county trunk highway system in the Village.
C. The various Village streets.90
90.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “municipal plat,” added 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 445,
was repealed 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 650.
§ 235-5 TREES § 235-5
211:437
enumeration, a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street,
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard,
lane, place or however otherwise designated.[Amended 1-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 489]
STREET, PUBLIC SERVICE — A street paralleling and immediately adjacent
to a major street.
SUBDIVIDER — A person, whether owner or owner’s agent, who divides
lot(s), tract(s) or parcel(s) of land, whether by creation of a subdivision,
certified survey map, or expanded certified survey map.[Added 3-13-2017
by Ord. No. 650]
SUBDIVISION — A land division of one or more lot(s), tract(s) or parcel(s) of
land by the owner thereof or the owner’s agent for the purpose of sale or of
building development, whether immediate or future, and to which any of the
following apply: the land division creates five or more parcels or building
sites of 1.5 acres each or less in area, where five or more parcels or building
sites of 1.5 acres or less in area are created by successive divisions within a
period of five years. Subdivision does not include a division of land into five
or more parcels or building sites by a certified survey map in accordance
with § 235-16.1.[Amended 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 445; 3-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 650]
TENTATIVE APPROVAL — The approval or conditional approval, with or
without recommended alterations given to a subdivision by the Village Plan
Commission, which approval constitutes the necessary authority to proceed
with the preparation and presentation of the land division to the Village
Board.[Amended 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 445]
VICINITY SKETCH — A key map covering not less than a quarter section of
land showing the location of the tract being subdivided with reference to a
corner or corners established in the United States Public Land Survey.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR — The Village Zoning Administrator appointed
by the Village President pursuant to § 245-59 of this Municipal Code.
§ 235-5 WATERFORD CODE § 235-5
211:438
ARTICLE II
Administration and Enforcement
§ 235-6. Duties of Village officials. [Amended 3-22-2004 by Ord. No.
445; 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 575; 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 650]
§ 235-7. Powers of Village officials restricted.
Whenever this chapter, including all codes and orders adopted herein by
reference, requires anything to be done with the approval or subject to
the direction of the Zoning Administrator or any other Village officer, this
shall be construed to give such officer only the discretionary authority to
determine whether the rules and standards established by ordinance or
law have been complied with; and no such provisions shall be construed
as giving any officer discretionary powers as to what such regulations
or standards shall be, or power to require conditions not prescribed by
ordinance or law, or to enforce ordinance provisions or laws in an arbitrary
or discriminatory manner; provided this section shall not be so construed so
as to preclude the Zoning Administrator, inspectors and enforcing officers
from rendering decisions and determining factual compliance with this
chapter.
A. Zoning Administrator. This chapter shall be enforced by or under the
direction of the Zoning Administrator.
B. Investigations of proposed land divisions. The Zoning Administrator, the
Chair of the Public Works and Utilities Committee of the Village Board,
the Village Engineer and the Village Attorney are designated as
advisory agents and shall make investigations and reports on the design
and/or improvement of proposed land divisions when requested to do so
by the Village Plan Commission.
C. Report on action. The Zoning Administrator may, and at the request of
the Village Plan Commission shall, report to the owner or owner's agent
the action taken by the Plan Commission on a proposed land division.
D. Investigation of preliminary and final plats, certified survey maps and
expanded CSMs. The Zoning Administrator, the Chair of the Public
Works and Utilities Committee of the Village Board, the Village
Engineer and the Village Attorney shall make investigations of
preliminary and final plats, certified survey maps and expanded CSMs
to ensure compliance with this chapter and Wis. Stats. Ch. 236 and
shall report thereon to the Village Plan Commission and the Village
Board.
E. Report on action on preliminary and final plats, certified survey maps
and expanded CSMs. The Zoning Administrator shall report the final
action of the Village Board on a preliminary or final plat, certified
survey map or expanded CSM to the owner or owner's agent.
§ 235-6 TREES § 235-8
211:439
§ 235-8. Plan Commission. [Amended 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 445;
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 650]
§ 235-9. Disclaimer of liability.
§ 235-10. Violations and penalties.
A. How Plan Commission constituted. See Chapter 5, Authorities, Boards
and Commissions, § 5-3, of this Municipal Code.
B. Powers and duties. The Village Plan Commission shall have the
following powers and duties, along with those found in Wis. Stats.
§ 62.23:
(1) Planning and recommendation. To oversee the planning of new
development within the Village of Waterford, and to consider and
report to the Village Board concerning matters of Village
development, land division and annexation.
(2) Conditional uses and permits. To hear applications for conditional
use permits and to issue or deny same under the requirements of
§ 245-16.
(3) Action on preliminary plats, final plats, certified survey maps and
expanded CSMs. The Village Plan Commission may approve,
tentatively approve, or disapprove preliminary plats, final plats,
certified survey maps and expanded CSMs prepared and submitted
in compliance with this chapter and Wis. Stats. Ch. 236 and shall
forward its recommendation to the Village Board.
A. Village not liable. This chapter shall not be construed to relieve or
lessen the responsibility or liability of any person, firm or corporation
subdividing lots, tracts or parcels of land within the provisions of this
chapter from damages to persons or property caused by any damage or
defect therein or therefrom; nor shall the Village be held as assuming
any such responsibility or liability by reason of the issuance or
revocation of any license, permit or certificate or by reason of the
approval or disapproval of any subdivision plat, plans and
specifications, information or schedules in this chapter; nor shall the
Village be held liable for any damages resulting from enforcement of
this chapter.
B. Village officials not liable. Whenever action has been taken by the
Zoning Administrator, the Plan Commission, any member of the Village
Board or by any other official authorized to enforce the provisions and
regulations of this chapter, such action or act shall be considered as
done in the name of and on behalf of the Village; and any such person so
acting shall not be liable for any damages that may accrue to persons or
property as the result of any such act committed in the discharge of his
duties.
§ 235-8 WATERFORD CODE § 235-10
211:440
A. Forfeiture. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter or any regulation, rule or order made
hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided by Chapter 1,
Article II, of this Municipal Code.
B. Injunction. Compliance with this chapter may also be enforced by
injunction at the suit of the Village. It shall not be necessary to
prosecute for a forfeiture before resorting to injunctional order or
proceedings.
§ 235-10 TREES § 235-10
211:441

ARTICLE III
Land Division Procedure
§ 235-11. Preliminary and final plats required. [Amended 3-22-2004
by Ord. No. 445; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 12-11-2006 by Ord. No.
505; 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 650]
A. Preliminary and final plats, certified survey map or expanded CSM
required.
(1) Before an owner, owner's agent or subdivider may proceed with the
improvement or sale of a lot or lots in a subdivision, as defined in
§ 235-5, he or she shall cause to be prepared by a professional land
surveyor and shall submit to the Plan Commission for its approval
first a preliminary plat and later a final plat of the proposed
subdivision or, if a plat is not required by Wis. Stats. Ch. 236, a
certified survey map or expanded certified survey map of the
proposed subdivision. If division of the land is to be accomplished
by certified survey map, the owner, owner's agent or subdivider
shall proceed under § 235-16 of this chapter. Under certain
circumstances, an expanded CSM may be used in lieu of a plat; See
§ 235-16.1.
(2) Before an owner or owner's agent may proceed with a land division
by certified survey map or expanded CSM for purposes other than
development of a subdivision, as defined in § 235-5, he or she shall
proceed under § 235-17 of this chapter.
B. In addition, all subdivision plats, certified survey maps or expanded
certified survey maps reviewed by the Village shall include upon such
plats and maps any regional flood hazard data and the means to provide
adequate surface drainage and to minimize flood damage, as follows:
The applicant shall provide all survey data and computations required
to show the effects of the project on flood heights, velocities and
floodplain storage, for all subdivision proposals, as "subdivision" is
defined herein, and other proposed developments exceeding five acres
in area or where the estimated cost exceeds $125,000.
(1) The applicant shall provide:
(a) An analysis of the effect of the development on the regional
flood profile, velocity of flow and floodplain storage capacity;
(b) A map showing location and details of vehicular access to lands
outside the floodplain; and
(c) A surface drainage plan showing how flood damage will be
minimized.
(2) The estimated cost of the proposal shall include all structural
development, landscaping, access and road development, utilities,
and other pertinent items, but need not include land costs. See also
§ 235-11 TREES § 235-11
211:443
§ 235-12. Preliminary plat. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489;
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 650]
Chapter 250, Erosion Control and Stormwater Management, and
Chapter 256, Floodplain Zoning.
A. Required. Before presenting a final plat to the Plan Commission for
review and the Village Board for its approval, the owner or subdivider
or his agent shall cause to be prepared by a professional land surveyor
and shall submit a preliminary plat to the Plan Commission and Village
Board for approval.
B. Form. Such plat shall be clearly marked "Preliminary Plat" and shall be
in sufficient detail to determine whether the final plat will meet layout
requirements required in Wis. Stats. Ch. 236. The preliminary plat shall
show, in addition to the statutorily required information, the following:
(1) Layout, numbers, areas and typical dimensions of lots and building
setback lines, including dimensions thereof.
(2) Public off-street parking areas.
(3) Parcels of land intended to be reserved for public use or to be
reserved by deed covenant for use of all property owners in the
subdivision, along with the conditions of such dedication or
reservation.
(4) Resubdivision of large parcels that may be reasonably expected at
some future time shall be shown by broken lines.
(5) Nonresidential uses proposed by the subdivider, which shall be
clearly indicated on the lots affected.
(6) Restrictive covenants running with the land, but if it is not
appropriate to include the restrictions on the preliminary plat, a
reference shall be made to a document to be recorded, and such
covenants shall be submitted as a separate document for review.
(7) All the facts required to enable the Village Plan Commission and
Village Board to determine whether the proposed layout of the land
in question is in conformance with Wis. Stats. Ch. 236 and the
provisions of this chapter and Chapter 245, Zoning.
C. Filing preliminary plat.
(1) Consideration contingent on compliance. Acceptance of a
preliminary plat for consideration shall be contingent upon full
compliance with these regulations as to form, date and other
requirements and shall be based upon a general examination made
before formal filing.
(2) Number required. The owner or subdivider or his agent shall
submit an electronic copy and the number of black line copies of
§ 235-11 WATERFORD CODE § 235-12
211:444
§ 235-13. Final plat. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489;
1-10-2011 by Ord. No. 561; 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 650]
the preliminary plat required by the Village Clerk for review and
recommendation by the Plan Commission and action by the Village
Board.
(3) Submission of additional plats. Nothing herein contained shall
prohibit the filing of any number of preliminary plats, regardless of
whether the first one has been approved, and optional preliminary
plats may be filed at any time.
(4) Submission for approving and objecting authority review. The
owner, subdivider or agent shall submit the preliminary plat for all
required approvals pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 236.12.
(5) The Village Engineer shall provide the Village with his or her
conclusions as to whether the preliminary plat conforms with the
Code and state law and with his or her recommendation on
approval of the preliminary plat. The conclusions and
recommendations of the Engineer shall be made part of the record
of the proceeding at which the preliminary plat is considered.
D. Action on preliminary plat.
(1) All preliminary plats shall be reviewed by the Village Plan
Commission, which shall make a recommendation to approve,
reject or conditionally approve the plat to the Village Board. Action
on the preliminary plat by the Village Board shall take place within
90 days after its submission to the Village unless such time is
extended by agreement with the owner or subdivider or his
authorized agent.
(2) Conformity with the provisions of this chapter, Chapter 245,
Zoning, this Municipal Code and Wis. Stats. Ch. 236, where
applicable, shall be a condition of approval of a preliminary plat.
(3) Conditional approval or rejection of the preliminary plat by the
Village Board shall be accompanied by a memorandum stating in
clear and concise terms the reasons for such action, referring to
the specific requirements of this chapter and/or Code that are not
being complied with and stating what changes are necessary to
make the preliminary plat acceptable.
(4) Notice to the owner or subdivider or his agent of action taken shall
be given by returning to such person one copy of the preliminary
plat and the memorandum required by Subsection D(3).
(5) A permanent record of action taken shall be maintained in the
minutes of the Village Board.
§ 235-12 TREES § 235-13
211:445
A. Required. When the survey of the subdivision is completed, the owner
shall cause to be made by a professional land surveyor a final plat,
which shall represent fully and accurately the completed survey of the
subdivision and shall comply with all the requirements of this section.
B. Form. The form of the final plat shall meet the requirements of the
Racine County Register of Deeds and shall comply with Wis. Stats. Ch.
236. In addition, the plat shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Lot areas: a brief statement relating to lot areas, which shall be in
compliance with the requirements of Chapter 245, Zoning,
substantially as follows: "The minimum area of any residential lot in
this subdivision is _____ square feet."
(2) Reserved areas: all areas to be reserved by deed or covenant for
the common use of all property owners in the subdivision.
(3) Other pertinent features: all other existing physical features
pertinent to proper land division.
C. Submission of final plat.
(1) Time limit. The final plat shall be submitted to the Village Plan
Commission and Village Board for approval within 36 months from
the date of the last required approval of the preliminary plat,
provided that the Village may extend such time limit upon request
therefor made by the subdivider, owner or agent. If the final plat is
not submitted within such time limit or extended time limit, the
Village Board may refuse to approve the final plat.
(2) Recommended changes to be incorporated. Corrections and
additions to the preliminary plat recommended by the Village shall
be incorporated in the final plat before it is submitted for approval.
(3) Improvement plans and specifications required. Plans and
specifications for all improvements required by this chapter shall
accompany the final plat.
(4) Plat of part of proposed subdivision may be submitted. The final
plat may, if permitted by the Village Board, include only that
portion of the approved preliminary plat that the subdivider
proposes to record at that time.
D. Action on final plat.
(1) Investigation. The Village Engineer shall provide the Village with
his or her conclusions as to whether the final plat conforms
substantially to the preliminary plat and with his or her
recommendation on approval of the final plat. The conclusions and
recommendations of the Engineer shall be made part of the record
of the proceeding at which the final plat is considered.
§ 235-13 WATERFORD CODE § 235-13
211:446
§ 235-14. Recording final plat. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No.
489; 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 650]
§ 235-15. Resubdivision restricted. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 489]
To prevent resubdivision of lots platted with areas of less than 13,000
square feet into smaller lots, the owner shall provide a notarized agreement
with the Village that not more than one main or principal building will be
erected on any residential lot in the subdivision. This instrument shall be
recorded at the time the plat is recorded.
§ 235-16. Certified survey map for land division. [Added 3-22-2004
by Ord. No. 445; amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 3-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 650]
(2) Time limit. The Village Board shall approve or reject the final plat
within 60 days of its submission to the Village, unless the time is
extended by agreement.
(3) Conditions of approval. No final plat shall be approved by the
Village Board until the following requirements have been complied
with, which shall be evidenced by a certified copy of a resolution of
the Village Board indicating such approval:
(a) The requirements relating to surveying as specified in Wis.
Stats. § 236.15.
(b) All the requirements of § 235-12 pertaining to preliminary plat
specifications, required improvements and agreements,
submission of final plat and final plat specifications.
(c) All applicable ordinances and codes of the Village in effect at
the time the applicant submits the preliminary plat, or final
plat if no preliminary plat is submitted.
A. No final plat shall be recorded unless the affidavits and certificates
required by Wis. Stats. Ch. 236 are lettered, printed or typed legibly
thereon.
B. No plat of a subdivision shall be recorded and no lot shown thereon
shall be sold until all approvals as required by state statutes and this
chapter have been affixed thereto. Such approvals shall be lettered,
printed or typed legibly on the face of the plat.
C. The owner shall submit one original and one copy of the final plat as
approved to the Register of Deeds within the time limit specified in Wis.
Stats. § 236.25(2)(b).
A. Development plan and certified survey map required. Before an owner,
owner's agent or subdivider may proceed with the improvement or sale
of a lot or lots in a land division, as defined in § 235-5, if a plat is not
§ 235-13 TREES § 235-16
211:447
required by Wis. Stats. Ch. 236, he or she shall submit a development
plan meeting the requirements of § 245-65C of this Municipal Code
(unless already required by the zoning designation of the parcel) and
shall cause to be prepared by a professional land surveyor a certified
survey map of the proposed land division and shall submit the plan and
the map to the Plan Commission and the Village Board for approval.
Subsequent certified survey maps of the area contained in the
development plan may be submitted in conformance with a previously
approved development plan.
B. Form; information required. The form of and the information required
on the certified survey map shall conform to the requirements of Wis.
Stats. § 236.34 and, in addition, shall include, when applicable, a brief
statement relating to lot areas, which shall be in compliance with
Chapter 245, Zoning, substantially as follows: "The minimum area of
any residential lot on this certified survey map is _____ square feet."
C. Other features; certificates and acknowledgments. Other features of
the proposed land division required on the certified survey map shall be
those required in § 235-13B of this chapter. Certificates and
acknowledgments shall be shown in conformance with Wis. Stats.
§ 236.34.
D. Submission of certified survey map. Infrastructure improvement plans
and specifications required. Plans and specifications for all
infrastructure improvements required by this chapter shall accompany
the certified survey map.
E. Action on certified survey map and development plan.
(1) Investigation. To determine the accuracy of the survey, the Village
Engineer may examine the certified survey map and make field
checks for the accuracy and closure of surveys, the kind and
location of monuments and the legibility of drawings.
(2) Recommended changes to be incorporated. Corrections and
additions to the certified survey map recommended by the Plan
Commission shall be incorporated prior to its submission to the
Village Board.
(3) Time limit. The Village Board shall approve or reject the certified
survey map and development plan within 90 days after its
submission to the Village by the subdivider, owner or agent, unless
said time is extended by mutual consent.
(4) Conditions of approval. No certified survey map shall be approved
by the Village Board until the following requirements have been
complied with, which shall be evidenced by a certified copy of a
resolution of the Village Board or a statement on the face of the
certified survey map indicating such approval:
§ 235-16 WATERFORD CODE § 235-16
211:448
§ 235-16.1. Extended Certified Survey Map. [Added 3-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 650]
(a) The requirements related to surveying as specified in Wis.
Stats. § 236.15(1).
(b) All the requirements of § 235-19 of this chapter pertaining to
required improvements and agreements.
(c) All applicable ordinances and codes of the Village.
F. Recording the certified survey map.
(1) No certified survey map shall be recorded and no lot shown thereon
shall be sold unless the affidavits, certificates and approvals
required by Wis. Stats. Ch. 236 and this chapter are present
thereon.
(2) The owner shall record the certified survey map with the Register
of Deeds within the time limit specified in Wis. Stats. s. 236.34(2),
and shall deliver a recorded copy to the Village Administrator
within one month of said recording.
A. As provided in Wis. Stats. § 234.34(1)(ar), land which would normally
be required to be divided by subdivision plat may be divided by
extended certified survey map (extended CSM) that includes more than
four parcels under the following conditions:
(1) The land is zoned for commercial (business), industrial or mixeduse
development.
(2) No more than 50 parcels are created by the extended CSM or
successive CSMs and/or extended CSMs dividing the same root
parcel over a five-year period.
B. Submittal and approval of extended CSMs under this section shall
conform to the provisions of § 235-16 and Wis. Stats. § 236.34.
C. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 236.34(1m)(em), expanded CSMs that
reconfigure lots or outlots within a recorded plat, assessor's plat or
CSM, where no additional parcels are created, are not reviewed by the
Department of Administration; all other expanded CSMs must meet the
requirements set forth in Wis. Stats. §§ 236.15, Surveying
Requirements; 236.20, Final Plat; 236.21(1), Professional land
surveyor's certificate of compliance with statute; and 236.21(2),
Owner's certificate, and must be reviewed by the Department of
Administration for conformance with those provisions.
D. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 236.34(1m)(er), expanded CSMs shall comply
with the rules of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation if the
expanded CSM divides land into more than four parcels, changes the
exterior boundary of a recorded plat, recorded assessor's plat, or
§ 235-16 TREES § 235-16.1
211:449
§ 235-17. Certified survey map when sale or development not
planned. [Added 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 445; amended 1-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 489; 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 650]
§ 235-18. Condominium plats. [Added 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489;
amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 650]
A condominium plat that does not include a land division is exempt from
review under this chapter but must meet the regulations of the Zoning
Code, i.e., if the condominium is one five-unit building, it is treated as a
multifamily development under the Zoning Code, and if it is five singlefamily
units, or five duplexes, without a land division, it is treated
accordingly, with the appropriate lot sizes per family, number of buildings
allowed on a lot, etc. If the owners/developers wish to change the required
yard sizes, setbacks, buildings allowed on a lot, etc., under the Zoning Code,
a Planned Community Development District must be requested under the
Zoning Code. If a land division is required, this chapter is applicable only to
the land division and not the condominium plat itself.
recorded CSM, and that recorded plat, assessor's plat or CSM shows
lots that abut or adjoin a state trunk highway or connecting highway.
E. This section does not apply to land lying in the outside the Village
boundaries but within the extraterritorial plat review power of the
Village.
A. Certified survey map required. Before an owner, owner's agent or
subdivider may proceed with the division of land when the sale or
development of that land is not planned and four or fewer parcels are
created, he or she shall cause to be prepared by a professional land
surveyor and shall submit to the Plan Commission and Village Board for
approval a certified survey map of the proposed land division.
B. Form and procedure. The form of the CSM and procedure for approval
shall be as set forth in § 235-16.
C. Submission of certified survey map improvement plans and
specifications required. Plans and specifications for all improvements
required by this chapter shall accompany the certified survey map. If no
improvements are contemplated and the land subject of the CSM will
not be sold or developed within five years of the date of the submission,
the owner or subdivider shall submit an affidavit to that effect, which
will become part of the record of the proceedings, and the approval of
the CSM shall be contingent on the owner's affidavit, and in the event
that the land is sold or developed, the then-owner shall be responsible
for conformance with the requirements of § 235-16 of this chapter.
§ 235-16.1 WATERFORD CODE § 235-18
211:450
ARTICLE IV
Required Improvements
§ 235-19. Improvements to be condition of final approval. [Amended
3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 445; 4-23-2007 by Ord. No. 511; 1-10-2011 by
Ord. No. 561; 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 650]
A. Required. No final plat, certified survey map or extended CSM for the
division of land within the Village shall be submitted to the Village
Board for approval, and no such land division shall be approved by the
Village Board, until the owner, owner's agent or subdivider either
completes the improvements required by this article at his or her own
expense and in the manner required herein and pays for Village
inspection thereof and costs related thereto or enters into an
agreement with the Village that he or she will do so, as provided in
Subsection D. No final plat, certified survey map or extended CSM for
the division of land within the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction
of the Village shall be submitted to the Village Board for approval, and
no such land division shall be approved by the Village Board, until the
owner, owner's agent or subdivider either completes the improvements
required by this article at his or her own expense and in the manner
required herein and pays for Village inspection thereof and costs
related thereto, or enters into an agreement with the Village that he or
she will do so, as provided in Subsection D, or provides evidence that
improvements required by the applicable authority will be completed.
B. Public improvements. The following shall be required and are to be
constructed according to Village specifications and under Village
inspection, including, but not limited to:
(1) Streets: grading and improvement of all streets, highways,
thoroughfares and other ways in the subdivision, and, if required to
serve the subdivision, outside of the subdivision.
(2) Sewers: installation and construction of all sanitary and storm
sewers, together with laterals and lift stations for sewage,
complete with a necessary force main of adequate size to a point
designated by the Village in the existing gravity sewers and all
necessary stormwater management or treatment facilities.
Locating wires shall be installed on all nonconductive mains and
laterals as set forth in § 191-3E(2).
(3) Water mains and laterals. Locating wires shall be installed on all
nonconductive mains and laterals as set forth in § 191-3E(2).
(4) Sidewalks.
(5) Driveways and driveway aprons.
(6) Curbs and gutters.
(7) Streetlighting and other utilities. See § 235-23.1.
§ 235-19 TREES § 235-19
211:451
C. Certification by Village Engineer required. No final plat, certified
survey map or extended CSM shall be approved without conclusions by
the Village Engineer as to whether the final plat, CSM or extended CSM
conforms substantially to the preliminary plat (if applicable) and with
his or her recommendations on approval of the final plat, CSM or
extended CSM. The conclusions and recommendation shall be made a
part of the record of the proceeding at which the final plat, CSM or
extended CSM is being considered and are not required to be submitted
in writing. The Village Engineer shall also certify that the improvements
described in the subdivider's plans and specifications, together with the
agreements, where applicable under Subsection D, meet the minimum
requirements of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances of the
Village as set forth in § 235-13D(3).
D. Agreement required.
(1) When land is divided for a subdivision, CSM or extended CSM as
defined in § 235-5, and any portion of the land lies within the
Village, the final plat, certified survey map or extended CSM to be
placed on record shall be accompanied by a developer's agreement,
executed by the owner, subdivider and the Village President upon
approval by the Village Board, and approved by the Village
Attorney, setting forth the plans and specifications for
improvements required by or under the authority of this chapter,
this Municipal Code, or state statutes or regulations. The land
division may be constructed in such phases as the Village approves,
which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, and the
phasing plan, together with the terms under which the security for
each phase will be provided, shall be included in the agreement. If
land is divided by certified survey map or extended CSM for sale
purposes only, and no development is anticipated within five years
from the date of the division, a developer's agreement is not
required at the time of the division; however, the resolution
approving said division shall specifically state that a developer's
agreement shall be required at the time of development and the
certified survey map or extended CSM shall contain said language
on its face or by recorded deed restriction. If improved land is
divided and no further improvements are required, no such
agreement shall be required.
(2) The agreement required in Subsection D(1) shall contain an
agreement by the owner and/or subdivider that it will construct or
install at its own expense all of the improvements required within
the time limits prescribed in this chapter, Municipal Code or state
statutes or regulations, and in accordance with the plans and
specifications accompanying the final plat, certified survey map or
extended CSM; such improvements shall be inspected during
installation and construction by an inspector appointed by the
Village Board or Village Engineer; and that, after completion of
construction, a final inspection shall be made by the Village
§ 235-19 WATERFORD CODE § 235-19
211:452
Engineer prior to final approval and acceptance by the Village
Board by resolution, salaries and other costs in connection with
such inspections be paid by the owner or subdivider, such costs
to be based on the reasonable and customary charges for such
service.
(3) The agreement required in Subsection D(1) shall contain an
agreement by the owner and/or subdivider that it will pay all costs
incurred by the Village related to the approval of the subdivision,
including, but not limited to, the costs of public notices required by
law or ordinance, the administrative, legal and engineering costs
related to review and approval of plans, plats, certified survey maps
or municipal plats, the drafting and/or review of all legal
documents, including developer's agreements, ordinances and
resolutions, all legal and engineering work related to the
enforcement of the agreement, the completion of the development
and acceptance of the public improvements by the Village, and any
other Village costs reasonably related to said subdivision.
(4) Financial guarantees.
(a) Security. If the Village Board approves the action of the Village
Plan Commission in approving the final plat, certified survey
map or extended CSM, it shall withhold its final approval until
the improvements required by this Code have been completed
or an agreement executed by the owner or subdivider as
provided in Subsection D(2) and (3) above shall be given. No
construction shall be allowed until security is provided to the
Village by the owner or subdivider to ensure that the actual
construction, installation and completion of all of the
improvements required will be done in a reasonable time. Such
security shall be in the amount of the estimated costs as
determined by the Village Engineer and the Village Plan
Commission of the reasonably necessary public improvements
required, inclusive of a twenty-percent contingency, and shall
be executed by the subdivider, owner or agent and shall be
approved by the Village Attorney.
(b) The required security shall be provided in conformance with
Wis. Stats. § 236.13(2).
[1] If the project will be constructed in phases, the amount of
the security shall be limited to the phase of the project that
is currently being constructed and is not required to be
provided sooner than reasonably necessary before the
commencement of the improvements.
[2] The security shall be conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the work required to be done by the owner
or subdivider and shall be subject to the condition that
after one main or principal building, dwelling or residence
§ 235-19 TREES § 235-19
211:453
has been constructed or erected on 60% of all the lots
fronting a street in any block in a subdivision, the
subdivider or owner shall cause all lots in such block to
be improved as required by this article within two years
thereafter, provided that sanitary sewer and water
facilities, together with all the mains and laterals
connected therewith, and stormwater facilities shall be
completely constructed and installed in each phase before
any principal building, dwelling or residence is completed
or occupied.
[3] Alternative form of security. As an alternative to the surety
bond or letter of credit required by Wis. Stats. § 236.13(2),
the Village may allow the subdivider, owner or agent to
deposit cash or a certified check with the Village, such
deposit or trust agreement to provide that the security will
be terminated only on certificate by the Village Board that
the work has been completed, approved and accepted, and
all guarantee periods have expired, and provided, further,
that reductions in the security may be allowed upon
approval by the Village Engineer and Village Attorney as
improvements are installed and approved by the Engineer.
[4] Guarantee period. The security required herein shall
remain in place until 14 months after the date that the
public improvements for which the security is provided are
substantially completed, and upon substantial completion,
the security will be reduced to an amount equal to the total
cost to complete any public improvement plus 10% of the
total cost of the completed public improvements, in
conformance with the requirements of Wis. Stats.
§ 236.13(2).
[5] Village may do work. Any security shall be conditioned
that should the subdivider, owner or agent fail to complete
the work within the time limit specified, the Village may
cause all uncompleted work to be done, and the parties
executing the security shall be firmly bound for the
payment of all necessary costs therefor. In the event that
the security is not sufficient to complete the work, the
Village will specially assess the property for the work.
(c) Cash deposit. The Village Board shall withhold its final
approval until the owner or subdivider deposits with the
Village, in cash or by certified check, a sum equal to the costs
incurred and anticipated as set forth in Subsection D(3). The
Village shall deposit said sum pursuant to policies established
from time to time by the Village of Waterford and shall provide
itemized statements of withdrawal to the owner or subdivider
at the time of withdrawal.
§ 235-19 WATERFORD CODE § 235-19
211:454
§ 235-20. Street improvements.
E. Deferred assessments. The Village Board, pursuant to Wis. Stats. Chs.
61, 62 and 66, shall determine the benefits to be derived from any
public works installation made after the passage of this section as the
same may accrue to any undeveloped tract or parcel of land located
within the plat approval jurisdiction of the Village. The owner of such
tract or parcel shall be accorded the same legal and statutory privileges
as are the owner of land immediately affected by such installation. Any
assessment accordingly made by the Village Board against such tract or
parcel of land may be made payable on a deferred basis, and if so, the
payment shall be made to the Village at the time such tract or parcel or
any part thereof is connected or otherwise put to use.
A. Installation to permanent line and grade required. Upon approval of the
lines and grades of the proposed streets by the Village Engineer and the
Village Plan Commission, all street improvements shall be installed to a
permanent line and grade.
B. Minimum improvements. The minimum street improvements required
shall be the removal and excavation of all sod and vegetable matter
from all thoroughfares, streets, highways and other ways from curbline
to curbline and the full extent thereof to a depth sufficient to permit the
same to be brought to an approved established grade by means of a
minimum of eight inches of gravel after compaction, top-graded to
provide for adequate and approved drainage facilities necessary for the
proper use and safety thereof.
C. Additional improvements. When public streets other than state and
county highways are improved by the subdivider, owner or agent with
pavements bounded by integral concrete curbs and gutters, such
streets shall conform to all applicable ordinances of the Village relating
to pavements and street surfacing and shall have not less than the
following minimum dimensions. When private streets are approved by
the Plan Commission, they shall conform to the requirements set forth
in the developer's agreement. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No.
489]
Type of Street
Dedicated
Width
(feet) Pavement Width
Major CTP* CTP*
Minor 66 40 feet back to back of curbs
Cul-de-sac 66 40 feet back to back of curbs
Notes:
* Conform to Thoroughfare Plan
§ 235-19 TREES § 235-20
211:455
§ 235-21. Sidewalk improvements. [Amended 8-9-1999 by Ord. No.
383]
§ 235-22. Sewer improvements.
D. Exemption from minimum improvement and additional improvement
requirements. In addition to the designated street types as hereinabove
set forth, there shall also be a designated street type known as "rural
access road," which shall be defined as a street, other than a state or
county highway, which leads into the Village from areas which have
primarily rural and agricultural characteristics, which characteristics
are present in the contiguous areas to the roadway within the Village of
Waterford. In each instance where such designation is determined with
respect to any part of a road or street within the Village of Waterford,
the minimum and additional improvements as hereinabove set forth
shall be applied to the roadway within the discretion of the Village of
Waterford Plan Commission. The Plan Commission may waive the
requirement, defer the requirement, or apply the requirements in part
or whole as determined necessary for the improvement for the street in
question.91
A. In all land divisions, the Village Board shall require the subdivider to
construct four-foot-wide concrete sidewalks on both sides of all minor,
major and private streets. Where, in the opinion of the Plan Commission
and Village Board, the land division would be better served by an
alternative form of pedestrian access, the Village Board may grant an
exception to the sidewalk requirements; however, if such exception is
granted, the owner shall nevertheless grade the entire width of the
right-of-way as though sidewalks are being installed, so that sidewalks
may be installed at a later date. The construction of all sidewalks or
alternative pedestrian access shall be in accordance with plans and
standard specifications approved by the Village Engineer and shall be
installed to a permanent line and grade. [Amended 1-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 489]
B. Wider-than-standard sidewalks may be required by the Village Board in
the vicinity of schools, commercial areas, and other places of public
assemblage, and the Village Board may require the construction of
sidewalks in locations other than required under the preceding
provisions of this code if such walks are necessary, in its opinion, for
safe and adequate pedestrian circulation.
A. Sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve all properties in the
subdivision.
B. Storm sewers shall be constructed throughout the entire subdivision to
carry off water from all inlets and catch basins and shall be connected
91.Editor's Note: Former Subsection (b), applying the rural access road designation to a
portion of North Milwaukee Street, added 4-11-1994 by Ord. No. 300, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 445.
§ 235-20 WATERFORD CODE § 235-22
211:456
§ 235-23. Street trees. [Added 9-22-2003 by Ord. No. 438]
The subdivider shall install at least one street tree for every residential
lot or for every 50 lineal feet, or fraction thereof, whichever is greater.
Trees shall be located within the tree lawn area wherever possible, midway
between the sidewalk and curb. Street trees shall be of a species acceptable
to the Village and shall be at least two inches in diameter (caliper) upon
planting.
§ 235-23.1. Other utilities. [Added 4-23-2007 by Ord. No. 511]
to an adequate outfall. The stormwater drainage system shall be
separate and independent of the sanitary sewer system.
A. As a condition of approval of a subdivision, the owner and/or subdivider
shall be responsible for the installation of such other utilities, including
but not limited to gas, electric, fiber optic cable, cable, telephone,
remote reading equipment for water meters, and such other utilities
and appurtenances as may be set forth in the developer’s agreement.
All facilities of such utilities, including all equipment owned, operated,
leased or subleased in connection with the operation of a service or
utility service, including but not limited to wires, pipes, cables,
cabinets, boxes, underground conduits, ducts, manholes, vaults, fiber
optic cables, lines, and other structures and appurtenances, shall be
installed underground within the boundaries of the development. If the
utility charges an additional amount for installation underground, the
subdivider will be responsible for payment of the additional amount.
[Amended 6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 662]
B. The detailed plans for the placement of the facilities of the utility shall
be submitted to the Village prior to installation, including the location
of the underground facilities, and the exact placement of the
aboveground appurtenances, including structures, cabinets and boxes.
(1) The Village Engineer or the Director of Public Works shall review
the plans and may require alternative placement of aboveground
structures, cabinets or boxes as part of the approval process if the
Engineer or Director determines that the planned placement
interferes with public safety, health or welfare. The Director or
Engineer may also reasonably require screening of said structures,
cabinets or boxes if it determines that the public welfare is harmed
by the potential diminution of property values in the area because
of the appearance of said structures, cabinets or boxes. No
aboveground facility, structure, cabinet or box may interfere with
the use of the adjacent property.
(2) All underground facilities shall be precisely indicated on the plans
submitted pursuant to this subsection. The Village Engineer or
Director of Public Works may require alternative placement of said
facilities as part of the approval process if the Engineer or Director
determines that said facilities interfere with the public safety,
§ 235-22 TREES § 235-23.1
211:457
health or welfare. No underground facility may interfere with the
use of the adjacent property or its connection with required
utilities.
§ 235-23.1 WATERFORD CODE § 235-23.1
211:458
ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 235-24. Streets and other accessways.
A. Conformity with master plan. Major streets shall be arranged in
conformity with the master plan of streets and highways of the Village,
and minor streets shall be considered in relation to existing streets and
to those which may be planned for the future.
B. Street frontage. All lots on a plat, CSM or municipal plat shall have
frontage on a public street, unless a private street affording access to
the lot is approved by the Village Board. Where a private street is
approved, the specifications therefor shall be included in the
developer's agreement, and appropriate easements for utilities, public
safety, and other necessary access shall be required by the Village.
[Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 3-13-2017 by Ord. No.
650]
C. Natural features to be considered. Topography, creeks, wooded areas
and other natural features which would lend themselves to attractive
and economical development shall, where possible, be given special
consideration in locating streets.
D. Future resubdivisions to allow conformity with street specifications.
The division of land into tracts larger than building lots shall be
accomplished in such a manner that later resubdivision can be made in
conformity with the street requirements specified herein.
E. Existing streets to be continued or completed. Proposed streets shall
provide for the continuation or completion of any existing streets,
whether constructed or recorded or reserved in deeds of conveyance, in
accordance with the following:
(1) The rigid rectangular gridiron street pattern shall not be
unnecessarily adhered to. The use of curvilinear streets, cul-desacs
or U-shaped streets shall be encouraged where such use will
result in a more desirable layout.
(2) Minor streets need not necessarily continue across all major
streets; but if on preliminary plats such minor streets approach the
major streets from the opposite sides thereof within 200 feet of
each other, measured between their center lines on the center line
of the major streets, they shall be adjusted so that the alignment
across the major street is continuous and a jog in the street
alignment is avoided.
(3) Major streets shall be continuous or in alignment with existing
streets.
(4) Streets shall intersect as nearly at right angles to each other as
possible.
§ 235-24 TREES § 235-24
211:459
F. Accessways and private entrances. [Amended 8-9-1999 by Ord. No.
383]
(1) Highway access.
(a) No direct public or private access shall be permitted to the
existing or proposed rights-of-way of the following, except by
Plan Commission approval:
[1] Arterial streets intersecting another arterial street within
100 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines.
[2] Streets intersecting an arterial street within 50 feet of the
intersection of the right-of-way lines.
(b) Access barriers, such as curbing, fencing, ditching,
landscaping or other topographic barriers, shall be erected to
prevent unauthorized vehicular ingress or egress to the above
specified streets or highways.
(2) Temporary access to the above rights-of-way may be granted by the
Plan Commission after review and recommendation by the highway
agencies having jurisdiction. Such access permit shall be
temporary, revocable and subject to any conditions required and
shall be issued for a period not to exceed 12 months.
(3) Accessways and private entrances opening on major streets or
parkways shall be kept at a minimum. There shall be no vehicular
access to major streets and parkways except at street intersections
or specified points determined by the Village Plan Commission
upon recommendation of the Chairman of the Public Works and
Utilities Committee. Vehicular access to residential lots adjoining
or adjacent to a major street or a parkway shall be provided by one
of the following means: [Amended 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 575]
(a) A parallel street supplying frontage for lots backing onto the
major street or parkway. In such case, an agreement shall be
recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds for Racine
County prior to the approval by the Village Plan Commission of
the final plat, which agreement shall prohibit vehicular access
to the residential lots from the major street and shall require
the use of such parallel street for vehicular ingress and egress.
(b) A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets or short loops entered
from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel
street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto
the major street.
(c) A public service street, separated from the major street by a
planting or grass strip and having access thereto at suitable
points.
§ 235-24 WATERFORD CODE § 235-24
211:460
(d) An alley, minor street or private street in the rear of lots
abutting and facing the major street or parkway. In such case,
an agreement shall be recorded by the owner in the Office of
the Register of Deeds for Racine County when the final plat is
presented to the Register of Deeds for record. Such agreement
shall prohibit vehicular access to the residential lots from the
major street or parkway and shall require the use of the alley,
minor street or private street for vehicular ingress and egress.
[Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
(4) Driveways. All driveways installed, altered, changed, replaced or
extended after the effective date of this ordinance shall meet the
following requirements:
(a) Islands. Islands between driveway openings shall be provided
with a minimum of twelve feet between all driveways and six
feet at all lot lines.
(b) Openings. Openings for vehicular ingress and egress shall not
exceed 24 feet in width at the right of-way line and 30 feet in
width at the roadway, except that in Business, Industrial and
Institutional Districts, the openings may be increased to 30
feet and 36 feet respectively. [Amended 4-23-2007 by Ord.
No. 513]
(c) Vehicular entrances and exits. Vehicular entrances and exits to
drive-in banks and restaurants, motels, funeral homes,
vehicular sales, service, washing and repair stations, garages,
or public parking lots shall be not less than 200 feet from any
pedestrian entrance or exit to a school, college, university,
church, hospital, park, playground, library, public emergency
shelter or other place of public assembly.
(d) The Village may review proposed driveway openings for public
safety purposes, and may require the relocation of a proposed
opening due to safety considerations. [Amended 1-23-2006
by Ord. No. 489]
G. Alleys. Alleys are not recommended in residential districts, except in
the rear of lots fronting major streets or parkways or where special
conditions make them necessary. Where used, they shall conform to the
following requirements:
(1) In residential districts, alleys shall have a minimum width of 30
feet.
(2) Dead-end alleys are prohibited, unless suitable turnarounds are
provided.
(3) When two alleys intersect or meet approximately at right angles, a
ten-foot cutoff having a chord approximately 14 feet in length shall
be provided at each corner.92
§ 235-24 TREES § 235-24
211:461
H. Street widths. Public street right-of-way widths shall conform to the
following specifications: [Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 309;
1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
(1) Minor residential streets shall have a minimum width of 66 feet
unless approved as an exception.
(2) Major streets shall have a minimum width of 90 feet unless
approved as an exception.
(3) Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 400 feet in length, shall have a
minimum width of 66 feet and shall terminate in a turnaround
having a radius of not less than 85 feet unless approved as an
exception.
(4) A minor residential street dead-ending at the boundary of a plat
shall be provided with a temporary cul-de-sac having a radius of 65
feet, or, in the alternative a T-turnaround constructed within the
sixty-six-foot right-of-way, to specifications established by the
Village Engineer. The Plan Commission of the Village of Waterford
shall make its determination with regard to the use of either a culde-
sac or T-turnaround at the end of any such minor residential
street, based upon the planning for the area subject of street
improvement, policy of the Village, and the topography of the area.
(5) All streets platted on quarter-section lines shall have widths of 90
feet. Where conditions make the required width impracticable, the
Village Board may modify the requirements of this subsection;
provided the minimum width shall not be less than 66 feet.
(6) Subdivision plats with half streets less than 49.5 feet in width on
the borders of the subdivision shall not be approved, unless:
(a) The owner, subdivider or agent places on record an agreement
stating in effect that lots which are dependent upon the half
street of less than 45 feet for ingress and egress purposes shall
not be sold, and stating further that no structures shall be
erected on such lots with ingress and egress facilities facing
such half street until the full width of the street to at least 66
feet has been opened and accepted by the Village Board.
(b) The subdivision is designed so as to place the side lot lines of
corner lots parallel to the half street, ingress and egress to
such lots being provided by streets intersecting the half street.
An agreement shall be placed on record at the time of
recording such plat, which shall prohibit the erection of
structures facing such half street and shall prohibit the
construction of ingress and egress facilities from such lots to
such half streets.
92.Editor's Note: Original § 18.40(7)(d), requiring alleys for lots in commercial zones, which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489.
§ 235-24 WATERFORD CODE § 235-24
211:462
§ 235-25. Off-street parking. [Amended 8-9-1999 by Ord. No. 383]
On major streets in areas zoned "business" or to be developed as business
districts, parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with § 245-15,
along with the following: A public off-street parking area and service street
50 feet wide shall be platted between the front line and the side lot line
or corner lots of the lots to be used for business and the street line of the
street. Where local conditions or the extent of ownership make the above
impossible and inadvisable, other areas properly situated and approved by
the Village Plan Commission shall be set aside in compliance with Chapter
245, Zoning.
§ 235-26. Blocks and lots.
Proper consideration shall be given to topography in the platting of blocks
and lots. The following shall be specifically required:
(c) An existing half street has been dedicated or opened by the
Village immediately adjoining the half street in the subdivision
under consideration.
(d) The half street being platted is one-half of a major street 90
feet in width; i.e., 45 feet in width.
A. Blocks.
(1) Blocks in residential areas shall be a minimum of 100 feet long.
Along major streets or highways, the length of a block shall
normally be not less than 800 feet.
(2) A block 800 feet or more in length shall be provided with a
pedestrian way 10 feet wide near the middle of the block and so
located that there is direct pedestrian access to schools; local
shopping centers, parks, etc.
(3) Blocks shall be sufficiently wide to allow two tiers of lots of the
appropriate depth.
(4) Blocks adjoining major streets, boulevards or parkways shall be so
oriented that the long dimension of the block fronts on them in
order to create as few intersections as possible with the traffic way.
(5) Irregularly shaped blocks, sometimes referred to as "super blocks,"
indented by cul-de-sacs or looped access streets and containing
interior parks or playgrounds and adequate parking space and
bounded by a continuous street shall be acceptable when properly
designed and covered by agreements as to the development and
maintenance of the public areas.
(6) Local business blocks shall be planned so as to be suited for
business occupancy, with shorter blocks than those used wholly for
residential purposes.
§ 235-24 TREES § 235-26
211:463
§ 235-27. Easements.
B. Lots.
(1) Width of residential lots. Residential lots shall be at least the
minimum width at the setback line as designated in Chapter 245,
Zoning, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. [Amended
3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 375]
(2) Area of residential lots. Residential lots shall be at least the
minimum area designated in Chapter 245, Zoning, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter. [Amended 3-8-1999 by Ord.
No. 375]
(3) Depth of residential lots. Residential lots shall be a minimum of 125
feet deep, except as is otherwise provided for in this chapter and
Chapter 245, Zoning.
(4) Orientation. Side lot lines shall be at right angles to the street line
on which the lot faces; and where street lines are curved, the side
lot lines of facing lots shall be approximately radial, unless special
conditions permit a variation of this regulation.
(5) Corner lots. Corner lots shall have a width and area sufficient to
provide for uniform building setback lines on the side streets
complying with all the setback requirements of the zoning district
in which the subdivision may lie.
(6) Street frontage. Street frontage shall be required for every lot.93
(7) Double frontage lots restricted. Double frontage lots shall generally
be avoided, except as provided in § 235-24F.
(8) Remnant lots. Remnant lots produced by irregularity of ownership
or street lines or other means shall be added to adjoining lots.
(9) Butt lots.
(a) Butt lots shall be avoided.
(b) Replacing of lots at the ends of blocks to create butt lots shall
not be permitted.
A. To be continuous. Whenever possible, easements shall be continuous to
the end of the block so that connection with an easement on the
adjoining block is in the shortest direct line.
B. Utility easements. The Village may require utility easements of not less
than six feet in width, making a total easement of 12 feet in width, on
each rear lot line where there are no alleys and along side lot lines
where necessary for poles, wires, conduits and other public services.94
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 235-26 WATERFORD CODE § 235-27
211:464
§ 235-28. Neighborhood residential units.96
Modification of the regulations concerning minor and local street widths,
dead-end streets, block lengths, and width and size and area of lots may
be made by the Village Plan Commission in the case of a plat for a large
tract of land to be completely developed as a unit with residential buildings,
provided the following requirements are met and complied with:
C. Drainage easements. Stormwater drainage easements shall be provided
as required by the Village Engineer. The owner shall dedicate
easements for stormwater drainage purposes, which shall be ample in
width to provide for adequate maintenance, according to the terms of
the developer's agreement.95
A. The community and building development plan considered in total shall
be for the public interest, welfare and safety.
B. Open spaces shall be regulated to provide for the circulation,
recreational, light and air needs of the tract.
C. Deed restrictions or other legal devices which will assure carrying out
of the plan in its entirety shall be placed on record.
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 235-27 TREES § 235-28
211:465

ARTICLE VI
Impact Fees
[Amended 11-27-1995 by Ord. No. 324; 11-24-1997 by Ord. No. 359;
9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 405; 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 430; 3-22-2004 by
Ord. No. 445; 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467; 4-24-2006 by Ord. No.
488]
§ 235-29. Impact fees established.
Pursuant to the authority to impose impact fees found in Wis. Stats.
§ 66.0617, and pursuant to the impact fee studies and plans required
therein, the Village of Waterford hereby establishes and imposes impact
fees as prescribed in this article.
§ 235-30. Establishment of service area. [Amended 2-28-2011 by
Ord. No. 568; 4-23-2012 by Ord. No. 58697]
There is hereby established a geographically defined area which shall be
known as the service area within which it will be necessary to enlarge
and improve new and existing public facilities attendant to the Village of
Waterford library system, public parks system, water system, and fire and
rescue system as a result of land development and growth within the Village
of Waterford. The service area for the public library system is shown in
Exhibit A of Ordinance Nos. 324 and 359, on file in the Clerk’s office and
made a part hereof by reference. The service area of the public park system
is shown in Exhibit A of the Public Facilities Needs Assessment, Park Impact
Fee, Baxter & Woodman, Inc., February 2012, on file in the Clerk’s office
and made a part hereof by reference. The service area of the water system
is shown in Exhibit A of the Water System Needs Assessment, Village of
Waterford, Baxter & Woodman, Inc., January, 2011, on file in the Clerk’s
office and made a part hereof by reference. The service area of the fire
and rescue system is shown in Appendix B of the Needs Assessment Update
for Water, Sewer, and Fire & Rescue Impact Fees, Crispell-Snyder, Inc.,
November, 2005, on file in the Clerk’s office and made a part hereof by
reference.
§ 235-31. Standards.
In accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0617, the Village of Waterford adopts
the following standards for impact fees which will be imposed under this
article. Impact fees adopted by the Village of Waterford:
A. Shall bear a rational relationship to the need for new, expanded or
improved public facilities that are required to serve land development.
B. May not exceed the proportionate share of the capital costs that are
required to serve land development, as compared to existing uses of
land within the Village of Waterford.
97.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would become effective 5-1-2012.
§ 235-29 TREES § 235-31
211:467
§ 235-32. Amount.
C. Shall be based upon actual capital costs or reasonable estimates of
capital costs for new, expanded, or improved public facilities.
D. Shall be reduced to compensate for other capital costs imposed by the
Village of Waterford with respect to land development to provide or pay
for public facilities, including special assessments, special charges,
land dedications or fees in lieu of land dedications under Wis. Stats. ch.
236, or any other items of value.
E. Shall be reduced to compensate for moneys received from the federal
or state government specifically to provide for the public facilities for
which the impact fees are imposed.
F. May not include amounts necessary to address existing deficiencies in
public facilities.
G. Shall be payable by any person or entity that constructs, creates or
modifies any improvement to real property that creates additional
residential dwelling units within the Village, or that results in
nonresidential uses that create a need for new, expanded or improved
public facilities within the Village, upon the issuance of a building
permit by the Village. [Amended 2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 568]
H. References hereinabove to public facilities shall be deemed to refer to
the following, to the extent that their inclusion is permitted under Wis.
Stats. § 66.0617: public park land areas with attendant improvements;
the Village of Waterford public library system, including structural
improvements and materials owned and operated by the system; the
water system, including wells, storage towers, transmission mains and
other appurtenances; and the fire and rescue system, including
structural improvements and equipment owned and utilized by the
system.
A. The amount of the impact fee imposed hereunder may be automatically
increased for inflation, but no such automatic increase may be effective
unless reviewed at least every five years after the first such increase. In
no case shall the adjusted amount be greater than the maximum fee
identified in the applicable study. [Amended 4-23-2012 by Ord. No.
58698]
B. The impact fees are adopted in the following amounts:
(1) Village of Waterford public library system impact fee: $137.
(2) Village of Waterford public park land impact fee: [Amended
4-23-2012 by Ord. No. 58699]
98.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would become effective 5-1-2012.
99.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would become effective 5-1-2012.
§ 235-31 WATERFORD CODE § 235-32
211:468
(a) From May 1, 2012, through April 30, 2013: $700.
(b) From May 1, 2013, through April 30, 2014: $750.
(c) From May 1, 2014, through April 30, 2015: $800.
(d) From May 1, 2015, through April 30, 2016: $850.
(e) From May 1, 2016, until such time as the fee is adjusted by
ordinance: $900.
(3) Village of Waterford water system impact fee: $ 1,280. [Amended
5-29-2010 by Ord. No. 553; 2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 568]
(4) Village of Waterford fire and rescue system impact fee: $1,201.
C. Imposition.
(1) Residential development.
(a) Each impact fee shall be imposed on a residential equivalent
unit (REU) basis, with each single-family residential unit,
whether located within a one-family, multifamily, condominium,
cooperative, rental, or owner-occupied unit, constituting one
such REU. A residential unit is defined as any individual living
unit which has, within the unit, at least an individual lockable
entrance/exit, a kitchen that includes a cooking appliance
(consisting of an appliance with burners and an oven and/or a
microwave of at least 1,000 watts), an individual bathroom
which contains a shower and/or bathtub, and a sleeping/living
area. One residence shall equal one REU, and the impact fee
shall be imposed upon every residence in the corresponding
study area.
(b) Notwithstanding the above:
[1] In residential buildings containing four or more residential
units, if one water meter is installed to serve more than
one residential unit, the water system impact fee shall be
based upon the size of the water meter according to the
schedule set forth in Subsection C(2)(c) below. If more
than one water meter is installed, the applicable water
system impact fee shall be imposed for each meter
according to the schedule set forth in Subsection C(2)(c),
below.
[2] Facilities such as nursing homes, and facilities such as
community-based residential care facilities (CBRFs) or
residential care apartment complexes (RCACs), as defined
by statute, whether for-profit or not-for-profit, which
include living space for five or more patients or residents
and are intended for long-term or permanent residential
purposes, are classified as nonresidential, commercial
§ 235-32 TREES § 235-32
211:469
businesses and shall pay impact fees as though they are
nonresidential development under Subsection C(2).
(2) Nonresidential development.
(a) Nonresidential development is defined as business, industrial,
institutional and any other use which is not defined as
residential under Subsection C(1) above.
(b) The public library system impact fee and the public park land
impact fee shall not be imposed on nonresidential
development, as nonresidential development does not
ordinarily generate a need for these facilities.
(c) The water system impact fee and the fire and rescue system
impact fee shall be imposed on nonresidential development.
These fees will be charged on a residential equivalent unit
(REU) basis, and the number of REUs to be charged will be
determined by the size of the water meter(s) installed. A threequarter-
inch meter would service one REU, and each increase
in the size of the meter or variation in the type of meter
(displacement, compound or turbine) results in a change in
flow, which in turn serves as multiplier. The REU ratio for each
meter size is set forth as follows:
Meter Size
(inches) Meter Type
Flow
(gpm)
REU
Ratio
3/4 or less Displacement 15 1.00
1 Displacement 25 1.67
1 1/2 Displacement 50 3.33
2 Displacement 80 5.33
2 Compound 80 5.33
2 Turbine 100 6.67
3 Compound 160 10.67
3 Turbine 240 16.00
4 Compound 250 16.67
4 Turbine 420 28.00
6 Compound 500 33.33
6 Turbine 920 61.33
8 Compound 800 53.33
8 Turbine 1,600 106.67
10 Compound 1,150 76.67
10 Turbine 2,500 166.67
(3) Adjustments.
§ 235-32 WATERFORD CODE § 235-32
211:470
§ 235-33. Payment. [Amended 2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 568;
6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 662]
All impact fees shall be due and payable upon the issuance of a building
permit. If the total amount of the impact fees for a development exceeds
$75,000, a developer may defer payment as set forth in Wis. Stats. §
66.0617(6)(g). In addition, the Village Board, by resolution, may authorize
the payment of impact fees, otherwise payable in full, in installment
payments. If installment payments are authorized, interest shall be paid
on the installment payments at the same rate then charged by the Village
on installments of special assessments. Upon payment, the Village shall
provide the person from whom the Village received the payment an
accounting of how the fee will be spent.
§ 235-34. Low-cost housing.
No exemption or reduction in the amount of said fee shall be made on land
development that provides for low-cost housing.
§ 235-35. Separate fund established.
(a) In certain cases, the Village may adjust the number of REUs
assigned, or the impact fee imposed, based upon satisfactory
evidence from the developer that such an adjustment is
justified, or because of contribution to the cost of public
improvements by other funding.
(b) Because of the contribution to the cost of the Water System
improvements by other funding applicable to the Waterford
Centre Business/Industrial Planned Community Development
District, as defined in § 245-74 of this Code, the Village of
Waterford water system impact fee in that zoning district, per
REU, shall be $800. [Amended 5-29-2010 by Ord. No. 553;
2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 568]
A. There is hereby established an impact fee fund for public park land
development within the Village of Waterford, an impact fee fund for
public library improvements within the Village of Waterford, an impact
fee fund for water system additions within the Village of Waterford, and
an impact fee fund for fire and rescue system improvements within the
Village of Waterford. Each such fund shall be placed in a segregated,
interest-bearing account and shall be accounted for separately from all
other funds of the Village. Revenues from said funds, including impact
fee revenues and interest earned on impact fee revenues, may be
expended only for the type of capital costs for which the impact fees
were imposed.
B. The existing impact fee fund for sewer system additions within the
Village of Waterford, as initially established in Ordinance No. 359, shall
be administered pursuant to this article, and shall be closed out when
the balance of said fund reaches zero. If said funds are not used within a
§ 235-32 TREES § 235-35
211:471
§ 235-36. Refund. [Amended 2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 568]
Impact fees that are imposed and collected by the Village of Waterford, but
which are not used within a reasonable time period after they are collected,
shall be refunded to the current owner of the property that was subject to
the fee as set forth below.
reasonable time period after collection, determined herein to be within
seven years of the date of collection, refunds shall be granted pursuant
to § 235-36, except as that time period may be extended as set forth
§ 235-36B.
A. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0617(9)(c)1, an impact fee that was
collected before January 1, 2003 must be used for the purpose for which
it was imposed not later than December 31, 2012. Any such fee that is
not used by that date shall be refunded to the current owner of the
property with respect to which the impact fee was imposed, along with
any interest that has accumulated.
B. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0617(9)(c)2, an impact fee that was
collected after December 31, 2002, and before April 11, 2006, must be
used for the purpose for which it was imposed not later than the first
day of the 120th month beginning after the date on which the fee was
collected. Any such fee that is not used by that date shall be refunded to
the current owner of the property with respect to which the impact fee
was imposed, along with any interest that has accumulated.
C. Reasonable time limits.
(1) Pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0617(9)(a) and (b), an impact fee that
is collected after April 10, 2006 and is collected within seven years
of the effective date of the ordinance that imposed the fee, but is
not used within 10 years after the effective date of the ordinance to
pay the capital costs for which it was imposed, shall be refunded to
the current owner of the property with respect to which the impact
fees were imposed, along with any interest that has accumulated.
(a) The Village of Waterford hereby determines that a reasonable
time period for the construction of improvements, considering
the appropriate planning and financing periods for the
particular types of public facilities for which the impact fees
are imposed, shall be considered as follows:
[1] Public park land development: 10 years.
[2] Public library system improvement: 10 years.
[3] Water system additions: 10 years.
[4] Fire and rescue system improvements: 10 years.
(2) The ten-year time limit for using impact fees that is specified under
Subsection C(1) may be extended for three years if the Village
§ 235-35 WATERFORD CODE § 235-36
211:472
§ 235-37. Exemptions and credits. [Amended 2-28-2011 by Ord. No.
568]
adopts a resolution stating that, due to extenuating circumstances
or hardship in meeting the ten-year limit, it needs an additional
three years to use the impact fees that were collected. The
resolution shall include detailed written findings that specify the
extenuating circumstances or hardship that led to the need to
adopt a resolution under this subsection.
D. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0617(9)(d), an impact fee that is collected
after April 10, 2006, and that is collected more than seven years after
the effective date of the ordinance that imposed the fee, shall be used
within a reasonable period of time after is collected to pay the capital
costs for which it was imposed, or it shall be refunded to the current
owner of the property with respect to which the impact fee was
imposed, along with any interest that has accumulated.
A. The following shall be exempted from payment of impact fees herein
provided, or may be eligible for a credit, as follows:
(1) Alterations or expansion of existing buildings where no additional
or larger water meter connections are requested or required. If a
larger water meter replaces an existing meter, the water impact fee
charged shall be the difference between the increased meter size
and the existing meter size. If a smaller water meter replaces an
existing meter, no refunds of previously paid impact fees shall be
given.
(2) The replacement of a building or structure with a new building or
structure where no additional or larger water or service
connections are requested. If a larger water meter replaces an
existing meter, the water impact fee charged shall be the difference
between the increased meter size and the existing meter size. If a
smaller water meter replaces an existing meter, no refunds of
previously paid impact fees shall be given.
(3) No impact fee shall be charged when secondary meters are
installed for water only where there is no discharge to sewer per
PSC Schedule Am-1.
(4) If the use of a property changes to a use that requires impact fees
not charged to the original use (e.g., from nonresidential to
residential) and a building permit is required, the additional impact
fees shall be charged. If the use of the property changes to a use
where fewer impact fees are charged, no refunds of previously
collected impact fees shall be made.
B. Any claim of exemption shall be made at the time of application for
building permit. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived.
§ 235-36 TREES § 235-38
211:473
§ 235-38. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to the
uniform penalty provisions of Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code,
or any other legal remedy available according to law.
§ 235-39. Appeals.
Any person upon whom an impact fee is imposed has the right to appeal
the amount, collection, or use of the impact fee to the Village Board of the
Village of Waterford. The procedure shall be as follows:
A. Any person appealing the amount, collection, or use of the impact fee
shall submit a letter or petition to the Village of Waterford Village Clerk,
describing the nature of the appeal and providing any supporting
documentation therewith.
B. The Clerk shall present the appeal letter or petition to the Finance
Committee for its recommendation to the Village Board. In the case of
an appeal of a water system impact fee, the Finance Committee shall
forward the appeal to the Public Works and Utilities Committee for its
recommendation prior to the Finance Committee's consideration of the
appeal. The Clerk shall notify the person appealing of the time and
place of the Finance Committee meeting, at which time the appellant
shall be given an opportunity to present additional information in
support of the appeal, following which the Finance Committee shall
make its recommendation to the Village Board which shall thereafter, at
a subsequent meeting, consider said recommendation and make a
determination thereon. [Amended 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 575]
C. The appellant shall thereafter have a further right, within 60 days, to
request and cause the Village Board of the Village of Waterford to
conduct a formal hearing of the contest within a reasonable time
following said request.100
100. Editor's Note: Former Art. VII, Annexations, added 9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 481, as
amended, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 6-11-2018 by Ord. No.
662.
§ 235-38 WATERFORD CODE § 235-39
211:474
Chapter 245
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Official Map — See Ch. 54.
Building, plumbing, electrical and
mechanical code — See Ch. 98.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 137.
Nuisances — See Ch. 165.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 178.
Solid waste — See Ch. 186.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 191.
Traffic and parking — See Ch. 207.
Trees — See Ch. 211.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 223.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 235.
Erosion control and stormwater
management — See Ch. 250.
Shoreland-wetland zoning — See Ch. 255.
Floodplain zoning — See Ch. 256.
§ 235-39 TREES § 235-39
211:475

ARTICLE I
Authority, Purpose and Intent
§ 245-1. Authority. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
This chapter is adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stat. §§ 61.35,
62.23(7) and 87.30 and amendments thereto.
§ 245-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the comfort, health, safety,
morals, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of the Village.
§ 245-3. Intent.
It is the general intent of this chapter to regulate and restrict the use of all
structures, lands and waters, and to:
A. Regulate lot coverage and the size and location of all structures so as to
prevent overcrowding and to provide adequate sunlight, air, sanitation,
and drainage.
B. Regulate population density distribution so as to avoid sprawl or undue
concentration and to facilitate the provision of adequate public services
and utilities.
C. Regulate parking, loading and access so as to lessen congestion in and
promote the safety and efficiency of streets and highways.
D. Secure safety from fire, flooding, pollution, contamination and other
dangers.
E. Stabilize and protect existing and potential property values.
F. Preserve and protect the beauty of the Village.
G. Prevent and control erosion, sedimentation, and other pollution of the
surface and subsurface waters.
H. Further the maintenance of safe and healthful water conditions.
I. Prevent flood damage to persons and property and minimize
expenditures for flood relief and flood control projects.
J. Provide for and protect a variety of suitable commercial and industrial
sites.
K. Protect the traffic-carrying capacity of existing and proposed streets
and highways. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
L. Implement those municipal, watershed and regional comprehensive
plans or components of such plans adopted by the Village.
§ 245-1 TREES § 245-3
211:477
§ 245-4. Conflict with other laws, easements and restrictions.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
agreements, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted
or issued pursuant to law. However, wherever this chapter imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
§ 245-5. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the Village and shall not be construed to be a limitation or repeal of
any other power now possessed by the Village.
M. Provide for the administration and enforcement of this chapter and
provide penalties for the violation of this chapter.
§ 245-3 WATERFORD CODE § 245-5
211:478
ARTICLE II
Districts
§ 245-6. Establishment of districts. [Amended 3-8-1999 by Ord. No.
375; 3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 376; 7-12-1999 by Ord. No. 381;
2-14-2000 by Ord. No. 388; 10-13-2003 by Ord. No. 439; 7-24-2006
by Ord. No. 500; 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 505; 4-23-2007 by Ord. No.
513; 1-10-2011 by Ord. No. 557; 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
§ 245-7. Boundaries; Zoning District Map. [Amended 1-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 489; 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 505]
The boundaries of the aforesaid districts are hereby established as shown
on the map entitled "Village of Waterford Zoning Map," also known as the
"District Map" or "Zoning Map," which map is adopted by reference and
made part of this chapter. The map will be updated from time to time to
reflect zoning changes, Village boundary changes, road extensions or other
matters affecting map content, and shall be maintained by the Village Clerk
and the Village Engineer. All notations and references shown on the Zoning
Map are as much a part of this chapter as though specifically described
herein.
A. For the purposes of this chapter and this Code, the Village is divided
into basic zoning districts, floodplain districts (see Ch. 256), planned
community development districts, and overlay districts, the boundaries
of which are set forth on the Zoning Map, and the regulations for which
are set forth in this chapter and other chapters in this Code. An
extraterritorial zoning district to regulate a portion of the land in the
Town of Waterford is also set forth in this chapter.
(1) The basic zoning districts are defined as the Single-Family, Two-
Family and Multiple-Family Zoning Districts, the Business and
Commercial, the Business and Industrial, and the Downtown
Zoning Districts, and the Institutional Zoning District.
(2) Each parcel shall contain only one basic underlying zoning district.
A parcel may have overlay, floodplain, wellhead protection, or other
appropriate overlying district designations as well.
B. Application of adjacent zoning regulations on parcels abutting zoning
district boundaries. When a parcel abuts a different basic zoning
district, including a parcel that is separated by a street, the owner of
that parcel may apply the regulations of the abutting district to that
parcel, provided that the permission of the Zoning Administrator is
granted via a zoning use permit prior to construction, alteration, or
change of use of the parcel. This subsection shall not apply to proposed
building areas that lie within or abut floodplain districts, planned
community development districts, the municipal campus district, the
extraterritorial district, or an overlay district.
§ 245-6 TREES § 245-7
211:479
§ 245-7.1. Comprehensive plan. [Added 6-22-2009 by Ord. No. 543]
The document titled "A Multi-Jurisdictional Plan for Racine County: 2035”
is hereby adopted as the comprehensive plan of the Village of Waterford
pursuant to §§ 62.23, 61.35 and 66.1001(4)(c) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
Pursuant to § 66.1001(3) of the Wisconsin Statutes, actions taken by the
Village shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan as may be amended
from time to time.
A. The district boundaries are either corporate limits; US Public Land
Survey lines; lot or property lines; center lines of streets, highways,
alleys, easements and railroad rights-of-way or such lines extended;
unless otherwise noted on the Zoning Map. The boundaries of the
Floodplain Districts shall be determined as set forth in Chapter 256.
B. In unsubdivided property, the location of the boundary lines shown on
the Zoning Map shall be determined by use of the scale on such map.
§ 245-7 WATERFORD CODE § 245-7.1
211:480
ARTICLE III
Definitions
§ 245-8. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and terms are defined as
follows: Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular
number includes the plural number, and the plural number includes the
singular number; the word "buildings" includes the word "structures," the
word "shall" is mandatory and not directory; the word "person" includes any
partnership, association, organization, firm, trust company, limited-liability
company or corporation. Any words not herein defined shall be construed
as defined by statute or in the State and Village Building Codes.101
§ 245-9. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE, BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — See § 245-117.[Added
8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
ADULT BATH HOUSE — An establishment or business which provides
the services of baths of all kinds, including all forms and methods of
hydrotherapy, that is not operated by a medical practitioner or a
professional physical therapist licensed by the state and which
establishment provides to its patrons an opportunity for engaging in
specified sexual activities.[Added 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 504]
ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO — An establishment or business wherein
patrons are afforded an opportunity to paint images on a specified
anatomical area. For purposes of this chapter, the adult body painting studio
shall not be deemed to include a tattoo parlor.[Added 12-11-2006 by Ord.
No. 504]
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment or business having a substantial
or significant portion of its stock and trade in books, magazines, and other
periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.[Added 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 504]
ADULT BOOTH — Any area of an adult establishment set off from the
remainder of such establishment by one or more walls or other dividers
or partitions and used to show, play, or otherwise demonstrate any adult
materials or to view any live performance that is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of
specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual
activities.[Added 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 504]
ADULT CABARET — Any nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment which features:[Added 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 504]
101. Editor's Note: See Ch. 98, Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical Codes.
§ 245-8 TREES § 245-9
211:481
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean and include but is not limited
to an adult bookstore, adult motion-picture theater (indoor or outdoor),
adult mini-motion-picture theater, adult video store, adult bath house, adult
motel, adult theater, adult novelty shop, adult massage parlor, adult
modeling studio, adult body painting studio, and adult cabaret.[Added
12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 504]
ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR — An establishment or business with or without
sleeping accommodations which provides services, including any method
of rubbing, pressing, stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating or
stimulating a specified anatomical area with the hands or with any
instruments, heat and light treatments of the body, and all forms and
methods of physiotherapy not operated by a medical practitioner or
professional physical therapist licensed by the state.[Added 12-11-2006
by Ord. No. 504]
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with
a capacity for fewer than 50 persons used for presenting materials
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons therein.[Added 12-11-2006 by Ord. No.
504]
ADULT MODELING STUDIO — Any establishment or business where a
person who displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted
by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. Adult
modeling studios shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the
State of Wisconsin or a college, technical college, or university; or in a
structure:[Added 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 504]
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment
which:[Added 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 504]
Live performances which are characterized or distinguished by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or the removal of articles of
clothing; or
A.
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, digital video disks, video
reproductions, slides or other visual presentations which are
distinguished or characterized by depicting or describing specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
B.
That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other
advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for
viewing; and
A.
Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least
three days in advance of the class; and
B.
Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises
at any one time.
C.
§ 245-9 WATERFORD CODE § 245-9
211:482
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation
by patrons therein.[Added 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 504]
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER (OUTDOOR) — A parcel of land from
which individuals may view a motion picture presented out of doors which
presents material distinguishably characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to a specified sexual activity or specified
anatomical areas.[Added 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 504]
ADULT NOVELTY SHOP — An establishment or business having a
substantial or significant portion of its stock and trade in novelty or other
items which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on or
designed for specified sexual activity or stimulating such activity.[Added
12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 504]
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, or live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified
sexual activities.[Added 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 504]
ADULT VIDEO STORE — An establishment or business having a substantial
or significant portion of its stock and trade for sale or rental of motion
pictures or other visual media which are distinguished or characterized
by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.[Added 12-11-2006 by Ord.
No. 504]
102AIRPORT — Any airport which complies with the definition contained
in Wis. Stat. § 114.002(7), or any airport which serves or offers to serve
common carriers engaged in air transport.
ACCESSORY USE, BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A use, building or
structure on the same lot with and subordinate to the main use, building, or
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has
a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the
availability of this adult-type of photographic reproductions; or
A.
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 10
hours; or
B.
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for
a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
C.
102. Editor's Note: The definition of "A Zones," as amended, which immediately preceded this
definition, was repealed 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 505. See now Ch. 256, Floodplain Zoning.
§ 245-9 TREES § 245-9
211:483
structure and customarily incidental thereto. An automobile trailer or other
vehicle or part thereof, or other building used as a temporary or permanent
dwelling or lodging place shall not be considered an accessory building or
use.
ALLEY — A street or thoroughfare 30 feet wide or less and affording only
secondary access to abutting property.
AMMUNITION — Firearm cartridges and shotgun shells.[Added
5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 541]
APARTMENT HOUSE — See "dwelling, multiple."
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD — Any premises on which more than one
automotive vehicle, not in running or operative condition, is stored in the
open.
BASEMENT — A story partly or wholly underground. The height of a
basement shall be the vertical distance between the surface of the basement
floor and the floor next above it.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — See § 245-113I.[Added
8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
BOARDINGHOUSE — See § 245-113K.[Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No.
658]
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance from the average curb level
in front of the lot or the finished grade at the front building line, whichever
is higher, to the highest point of a flat, gambrel, hip or gable roof.[Amended
1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
BUILDING, MAIN — A building constituting the principal use of a lot.103
CAMPGROUND — See § 245-113L.[Added 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
COMMERCIAL INDOOR LODGING — See § 245-113J.[Added 8-13-2018
by Ord. No. 658]
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL VEHICLE — Unless otherwise specifically
provided, in this chapter a "commercial" or "industrial" vehicle is a vehicle
used primarily in connection with a business or trade, regardless of the
actual weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle.[Added
5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 625]
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to construction of or additions or
substantial improvements to buildings, other structures, or accessory uses,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations
or disposition of materials.
DISTRICT, BASIC — A part or parts of the Village for which the regulations
of this chapter governing the use and location of land and buildings are
103. Editor's Note: The definition of "channel," which immediately followed this definition, was
repealed 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 505. See now Ch. 256, Floodplain Zoning.
§ 245-9 WATERFORD CODE § 245-9
211:484
uniform (such as the residential, commercial, and industrial district
classifications).
DISTRICT, OVERLAY — Overlay districts allow for superimposing certain
additional requirements or uses upon a basic zoning district which are
compatible with the basic district. If there are conflicting requirements,
those which are stricter shall apply.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE — See § 245-112.[Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord.
No. 658]
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — See § 245-112.[Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord.
No. 658]
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — See § 245-112.[Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord.
No. 658]
EXCEPTION — The use of property, including the use and location of
buildings, the size of lots and the dimensions of required yards, otherwise
not allowable under the terms of this chapter which is permissible by reason
of special provisions of this chapter, or for which a special permit may be
issued by the Board of Appeals under conditions specified in this chapter.
EXPLOSIVES — Anything manufactured, processed or packaged for
exploding, but not including ammunition, novelty fireworks, statutory
fireworks, fuel or a lubricant, flares used, possessed or sold for use as a
signal in an emergency or in the operation of a railway, aircraft, watercraft
or motor vehicle, matches, cigarette lighters, stoves, furnaces, candles,
lanterns, space heaters, model rocket engines, tobacco, and tobacco
products. [Added 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 541]
FAMILY — The body of persons who live together in one dwelling unit as a
single housekeeping entity.
FENCES — [Added 2-9-2004 by Ord. No. 443]
FENCE — An enclosed barrier consisting of wood, stone, metal, wire,
composite, and/or plastic material intended to prevent ingress and
egress.
A.
BOUNDARY FENCE — A fence placed on or near the property lines of
adjacent properties.
B.
PROTECTIVE FENCE — A fence constructed to enclose a hazard to the
public health, safety and welfare.
C.
ARCHITECTURAL OR AESTHETIC FENCE — A fence constructed to
enhance the appearance of the structure or the landscape.
D.
HEDGE — A row of bushes or small trees planted close together which
may form a barrier, enclosure or boundary.104105
E.
104. Editor's Note: The definition of “picket fence,” as amended, which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 1-28-2008 by Ord. No. 523.
105. Editor's Note: The following definitions, which immediately followed this definition, were
repealed 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 505. See now Ch. 256, Floodplain Zoning: "flood"; "Flood
§ 245-9 TREES § 245-9
211:485
FIXTURE — An article in the nature of personal property which has been
so annexed to the realty that it is regarded as a part of the real property.
That which is fixed or attached to something permanently as an appendage
and is not removable. A thing is deemed to be affixed to real property when
it is attached to it by roots, imbedded in it, permanently resting upon it, or
permanently attached to what is thus permanent, as by means of cement,
plaster, nails, bolts, or screws. Goods are fixtures when they become so
related to particular real estate that an interest in them arises under real
estate law, e.g., a furnace affixed to a house or other building, counters
permanently affixed to the floor of a store, or a sprinkler system installed
in a building. A sign permanently affixed to the land or a structure is a
fixture.[Added 6-11-2012 by Ord. No. 589]
FRONTAGE — All the property abutting on one side of a street between two
intersecting streets or all of the property abutting on one side of a street
between an intersecting street and the dead end of a street.
FRONTAGE, REVERSED — Frontage facing at right or approximate right
angles to each other within the same block.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — Any building or portion thereof, accessory to a
residential building or structure, for the storage of motor-driven vehicles.
See § 245-10H.[Amended 4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 496]
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any building or premises, other than a private or
a storage garage, where motor-driven vehicles are equipped, repaired,
serviced, hired, sold or stored.
GARAGE, STORAGE — Any building or premises used for the storage only
of motor-driven vehicles, pursuant to previous arrangements and not to
transients, where no equipment, parts, fuel, grease or oil is sold and
vehicles are not equipped, serviced, repaired, hired or sold.
HOME OCCUPATION — See § 245-117B.[Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 489; 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 625; 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
HOTEL, MOTEL, INN, TOURIST ROOMING HOUSE — See
§ 245-113J.[Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
INDUSTRY, HEAVY — See § 245-14B.[Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No.
658]
INDUSTRY, LIGHT; FABRICATING; ASSEMBLING — See
§ 245-14A.[Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
JUNKYARD — Any premises on which there is an accumulation of scrap
metal, paper, rags, glass, scrap lumber or other scrap materials stored or
customarily stored for salvage or sale, unless such accumulation shall be
housed in a completely enclosed building.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a
building, or contiguous to a group of buildings and abutting on or affording
Insurance Study"; "flood profile"; "flood protection elevation"; "flood stage"; "floodland";
"floodplain fringe"; "floodproofing"; and "floodway."
§ 245-9 WATERFORD CODE § 245-9
211:486
direct access to a public street or alley, for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading cargo.
LODGING HOUSE — A building other than a hotel where lodging only is
provided for not more than five persons not members of a family.
LOT — A parcel of land having a width and depth sufficient to provide the
space necessary for one main building and its accessory buildings, together
with the open spaces required by this chapter and abutting on a public
street or officially approved place.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting on two or more streets at their
intersection.[Amended 1-28-2008 by Ord. No. 523]
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, THROUGH — An interior lot having frontage on two nonintersecting
streets.
LOT LINES — The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
LOT, WIDTH OF — The least horizontal distance between the side lines of a
lot, measured at the setback line of the required front yard.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A building, premises, structure or
fixture that does not conform to one or more of the area requirements set
forth for the zoning district in which it is located, including but limited to
nonconformance with setback, yard, height, parking, loading, access, or lot
area per family regulations. See Chapter 256 for nonconforming structures
in the floodplain districts.[Added 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 506]
NONCONFORMING USE — A building, premises, structure, fixture, land or
water lawfully used or occupied at the time of the adoption of this chapter
(December 13, 1982) or amendment thereto, which use or occupancy does
not conform to the use regulations of this chapter or any amendments
thereto. See Chapter 256 for nonconforming uses in the floodplain
districts.106[Amended 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 506]
NOVELTY FIREWORKS — See § 132-2.[Added 5-11-2009 by Ord. No.
541]
NOVELTY FIREWORKS, COMMERCIAL — See § 132-2.[Added 5-11-2009
by Ord. No. 541]
PARKING LOT — A building or premises containing one or more parking
spaces, open to the public free or for a fee.
PARKING SPACE — An unobstructed piece of ground or floor space
sufficient for the temporary storage of one automobile. Each such parking
space shall be located off the public street but accessible thereto, and shall
be at least the size set forth in § 245-15B(2), exclusive of the means of
ingress and egress. A loading space is not a parking space.107[Amended
4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 496]
106. Editor's Note: The definition of "official letter of map amendment," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 505. See now Ch. 256,
Floodplain Zoning.
§ 245-9 TREES § 245-9
211:487
PROTECTED NATURAL AREAS — Resources such as floodways, floodfringes,
floodplain, conservancy areas, wetlands, woodlands, steep slopes,
and environmental corridors that are protected by the provisions of this
chapter.[Added 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
SETBACK — The minimum horizontal distance between the street line and
the nearest part of the building measured to the foundation, excluding only
overhangs and uncovered steps.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL — See § 245-113I.[Added 8-13-2018 by Ord. No.
658]
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — [Added 12-11-2006 by Ord. No.
504]
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — [Added 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 504]
STATUTORY FIREWORKS — See § 132-2.[Added 5-11-2009 by Ord. No.
541]
STEEP SLOPES — Areas which contain a gradient of 12% or
greater.[Added 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
STORY — That portion of a building including between the surface of a floor
and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be no floor above it, the
space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF — A space under any roof except a flat roof which, if occupied
for dwelling purposes, shall be construed to be a full story for the purposes
of this chapter.
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(1) Human genitals, pubic region;
(2) Buttock;
Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; or
(3)
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy;
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock, or female breast.
C.
107. Editor's Note: The former definitions of "professional office" and "roadside stand," which
immediately followed this definition, were repealed 7-23-2018 by Ord. No. 658. The
definitions of "reach" and "regional flood," which immediately followed the definition of
"professional office," were repealed 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 505. See now Ch. 256,
Floodplain Zoning.
§ 245-9 WATERFORD CODE § 245-9
211:488
STREET — All property dedicated or intended for public or private street
purposes or subject to public easements therefor.[Amended 1-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 489]
STREET LINE — A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a
contiguous street.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any change in the supporting members of
a building or any change in the roof structure or in the exterior walls.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
a permanent location on the ground or attachment or something having
a permanent location on the ground. Arbors and trellises, flagpoles, light
poles, basketball hoops and children’s play structures (swing sets, jungle
gyms and tree houses) shall not be defined as structures, but height and
placement on a lot are subject to zoning regulation pursuant to § 245-10H
of this Municipal Code.[Amended 9-24-2007 by Ord. No. 518]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the present equalized assessed value of the structure either before the
improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and
is being restored, before the damage occurred. The term does not, however,
include either: any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or any alteration of
a structure or site documented as deserving preservation by the State
Historical Society or listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered structural repairs,
modifications or additions; such ordinary maintenance repairs include
internal and external painting, decorating, paneling, and the replacement
of doors, windows and other nonstructural components.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — A structure that is not permanently attached
to the ground that is removed when the designated time period, activity
or use for which the temporary structure was erected or placed has
ceased.[Amended 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 601]
TEMPORARY USE — A use that is established for a limited duration with
the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period.
A temporary use may not be permitted for more than 30 days unless
specifically permitted in § 245-10J.108[Added 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 601]
VARIANCE — A departure from the terms of this chapter as applied to a
specific building, structure or parcel of land, which the Board of Appeals
may lawfully permit, and not in strict conformity with the regulations of this
chapter.
VISION CLEARANCE TRIANGLE — That area enclosed by the lines formed
by the outside edges of the intersecting pavements or driving surfaces and
108. Editor's Note: The former definitions of "tourist camp or motel" and "tourist rooming
house," as amended, which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 7-23-2018
by Ord. No. 658.
§ 245-9 TREES § 245-9
211:489
a straight line drawn diagonally across the corner, connecting those lines at
the various distances specified in § 245-13H. The measured distance along
the pavement is the vision clearance distance. Measurement shall be from
the point of intersection of the traveled surfaces.[Amended 1-28-2008 by
Ord. No. 523]
WOODLANDS — Areas of trees whose combined canopies cover a minimum
of 80% of an area of one acre or more, as shown on United States Geological
Survey (USGS) topographic maps for the Village of Waterford. (The USGS
map is available on the Racine County website.)[Added 8-13-2018 by Ord.
No. 658]
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided herein.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending the full width of the lot between the
front lot line and the nearest part of the main building, excluding uncovered
steps.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending the full width of the lot between the rear
lot line and the nearest part of the main building, excluding uncovered
steps; provided that if there be an alley abutting on a rear yard, the rear
lot line shall be the center line of such alley.[Amended 1-28-2008 by Ord.
No. 523]
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending from the front yard, or the front lot line
if there be no front yard, to the rear yard, being the minimum horizontal
distance between a building and the side lot line.
§ 245-9 WATERFORD CODE § 245-9
211:490
ARTICLE IV
General Provisions
§ 245-10. Buildings and uses; nonconforming uses and structures.
A. No provisions of this chapter shall be construed to bar an action to
enjoin or abate the use or occupancy of any land, buildings or other
structures as a nuisance under the appropriate laws of the state.
B. No provisions of this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the
customary and necessary construction or maintenance of over-ground
or underground public utilities neighborhood service lines and
mechanical appurtenances thereto, where reasonable and necessary
for the preservation of the public health, safety, convenience and
welfare; however: [Amended 4-23-2007 by Ord. No. 511]
(1) The placement of said utilities in Village rights-of-way shall be
subject to § 191-3 of this Code; and
(2) The placement of said utilities in the front or side yard of any lot in
the Village shall be subject to the following:
(a) Unless in conflict with state or federal law, except when
existing aboveground facilities are used, the installation of new
facilities and replacement of old facilities shall be done
underground or contained within buildings or other structures
in conformity with applicable codes.
(b) All aboveground structures, cabinets or boxes shall be
precisely indicated on plans submitted to the Zoning
Administrator, or, if applicable, the Plan Commission, including
the size and appearance thereof. The Zoning Administrator or
Plan Commission may require alternative placement of said
structures, cabinets or boxes as part of the permitting process
if the Administrator or Plan Commission determines that the
planned placement interferes with public safety, health or
welfare. The Administrator or Plan Commission may also
reasonably require screening of said structures, cabinets or
boxes if the Administrator determines that the public welfare is
harmed by the potential diminution of property values in the
area because of the appearance of said structures, cabinets or
boxes.
C. The use of buildings hereinafter erected, converted, enlarged or
structurally altered and the use of any land shall be in compliance with
the regulations established herein for the district in which such land or
building is located.
D. Every building hereafter erected, converted, enlarged or structurally
altered shall be located on a lot, and in no case shall there be more than
one main building on one lot except as provided in Subsection F below.
§ 245-10 TREES § 245-10
211:491
E. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size or designated use of any building or part hereof for
which a building permit has been issued before December 13, 1982, or
the effective date of the applicable amending ordinance, the
construction of which shall have been started within six months from
the date of such permit.
F. Nonconforming uses and structures. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 489; 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 506; 11-11-2013 by Ord. No.
610]
(1) The existing lawful use of a building, premises, structure, fixture,
land or water on December 13, 1982, or at the time of the
enactment of any applicable amendment to this chapter, may be
continued, although such use does not conform with the provisions
of this chapter for the district in which it is located. Nonconforming
signs shall be regulated pursuant to Article VI of this chapter (see
§ 245-53).
(2) Nonconforming uses. A nonconforming use is the use of a building,
premises, structure or fixture that was lawful at the time of
enactment of a use regulation under this chapter and is not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(a) Only that portion of the land or water in actual use at the time
of the enactment may be so continued, and a nonconforming
use may not be enlarged or extended.
(b) A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any other
nonconforming use unless and until a permit therefor shall first
have been secured from the Board of Appeals after notice and
hearing as set forth in § 245-54. The Board of Appeals may not
allow a change of a nonconforming use in a floodplain district
unless the change is in conformance with Chapter 256 of this
Code.
[1] For the purposes of this chapter, the uses permitted in the
Single-Family Residence District comprise the mostrestricted
classification, and the uses permitted in the
other districts comprise progressively less-restricted
classifications in the following order: Two-Family
Residence District, Multiple-Family Residence District,
Business and Commercial District, Business and Industrial
District. [Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
[2] The Board of Appeals may not allow a nonconforming use
to be changed to a less-restricted use.
[3] The Board of Appeals may authorize the change of a
nonconforming use to another of the same classification,
provided that the Board of Appeals shall find that the
proposed change of use will be no more harmful to the
§ 245-10 WATERFORD CODE § 245-10
211:492
character of the neighborhood than the existing
nonconforming use.
[4] The Board of Appeals may allow a nonconforming use of a
building, structure, fixture or premises to be changed to
another nonconforming use of a more-restricted
classification.
[5] Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a
more-restricted nonconforming use or a conforming use,
such use shall not thereafter be changed to a lessrestricted
use.
[6] The limitations on total structural repairs or alterations set
forth in Subsection F(2)(d) herein shall apply regardless of
the Board of Appeals' grant of a change of use hereunder
for so long as the use is nonconforming.
(c) If the nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 12
months, any future use of the building, premises, structure or
fixture shall conform to the regulations for the district in which
it is located.
(d) When a building, premises, fixture or structure containing a
nonconforming use is damaged to the extent of more than 50%
of its current assessed value, as determined by the Village
Assessor, it shall not be restored except in conformity with the
regulations of the district in which it is located. The total
structural repairs or alterations in any building, premises,
structure or fixture containing a nonconforming use shall not,
during its life, exceed 50% of the assessed value of the
building, premises, structure or fixture unless permanently
changed to a conforming use.
(3) Nonconforming structures. In this section, "development
regulations" means the part of this chapter that applies to elements
including but not limited to setback, height, lot coverage, side yard,
frontage, lot width, area, yard, parking, or loading requirements.
"Nonconforming structure" means a dwelling or other building that
existed lawfully before the current Zoning Code was adopted or
amended, but that does not conform with one or more of the
development regulations, including setback, height, lot coverage,
and side yard, in the current Zoning Code. [Amended 8-13-2018
by Ord. No. 658]
(a) Subject to the provisions of Subsection F(3)(c) of this section,
structural additions and enlargements to existing legal
nonconforming structures are permitted to the extent that
such structural additions and enlargements do not create or
increase nonconformity with applicable setback lines or
applicable yard, area, height, parking, loading or access
§ 245-10 TREES § 245-10
211:493
§ 245-11. Area and lot regulations. [Amended 9-22-2003 by Ord. No.
438; 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
provisions of this chapter. No point on the proposed addition or
enlargement shall have a distance to a lot line that is shorter
in length than the distance required by current street setback
and yard regulations.
(b) Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(hb), a nonconforming
structure may be repaired, maintained, renovated or
remodeled without regard to the cost of the work.
(c) Subject to Subsection F(3)(d) and Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(hc), a
nonconforming structure that is damaged beyond repair or
destroyed may not be restored or rebuilt except as follows:
such a structure may be restored to the size, location and use
that it had immediately before the damage or destruction
occurred, without limitation as to the costs of repair,
reconstruction, or improvement, if all of the following apply:
[1] The nonconforming structure was damaged or destroyed
on or after March 2, 2006; and
[2] The damage or destruction was caused by violent wind,
vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold or infestation.
(d) A damaged or destroyed nonconforming structure that meets
the requirements under Subsection F(3)(c)[2] may be restored
to a larger size than it was immediately before the damage or
destruction if necessary for the structure to comply with
applicable state or federal requirements.
(4) Nonconforming uses and structures located in the floodplain
districts. Repairs and alterations to a building, premises, structure,
fixture, land or water located in a floodplain district shall conform
to the requirements of Chapter 256, specifically § 256-6.109
A. No lot area shall be so reduced that the yards and open spaces shall be
smaller than is required by this chapter, nor shall the density of
population be increased in any manner except in conformity with the
area regulations hereby established for the district in which a building
or premises is located.
B. Where a lot has an area less than the minimum number of square feet
per family required for the district in which it is located and was of
record as such on the effective date of an amendment to said
109. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, regarding development plans for housing projects,
which immediately followed this subsections, was repealed 6-23-2008 by Ord. No. 529.
Additionally, former Subsections H, Accessory buildings, uses and other structures, as
amended; I, Board of Appeals provisions, as amended; and J, Temporary use permits, as
amended, were repealed 7-23-2018 by Ord. No. 658.
§ 245-10 WATERFORD CODE § 245-11
211:494
§ 245-12. Height regulations.
requirement, such lot may be occupied by one family, provided all state
laws and Village ordinances are complied with.
C. Lot regulations.
(1) In this chapter, "substandard lot" means a legally created lot or
parcel that met any applicable lot size requirements when it was
created, but does not meet current lot size requirements.
(2) No ordinance or person may prohibit a property owner from:
(a) Conveying an ownership interest in a substandard lot.
(b) Using a substandard lot as a building site if all of the following
apply:
[1] The substandard lot has never been developed with one or
more of its structures placed partly upon an adjacent lot or
parcel.
[2] The substandard lot is developed to comply with all other
ordinances of the Village.
(3) No ordinance or person may require one or more lots to be merged
with another lot, for any purpose, without the consent of the
owners of the lots that are to be merged.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the height of any building
hereafter erected, converted, enlarged or structurally altered shall be
in compliance with the regulations established herein for the district in
which such building is located.
B. (Reserved)110
C. Chimney, towers, poles and antennas. [Amended 3-13-2017 by Ord.
No. 650]
(1) Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers,
monuments, stacks, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers,
spires, wireless, television or broadcasting towers, masts or
aerials, microwave radio relay structures, cell towers, and
necessary mechanical appurtenances are hereby excepted from the
height regulations of the chapter and may be erected in accordance
with other regulations or ordinances of the Village. In order to
qualify for this exception, however, the setback from every property
line shall be increased to equal the height of the structure unless an
engineering study provided by the applicant proves that the fall
zone of the structure is less than the height of the structure, and in
110. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, establishing height regulations for churches, schools,
hospitals and other quasi-public buildings, was repealed 4-23-2007 by Ord. No. 513.
§ 245-11 TREES § 245-12
211:495
§ 245-13. Front, side and rear yard regulations.
that case the setback from all property lines shall be at least equal
to the fall zone.
(2) Telephone, telegraph and power transmission poles and lines 60
feet or less in height and noncommercial aerial antennas 25 feet or
less in height are excepted from the height regulations of this
chapter and may be erected in accordance with the other
regulations and ordinances of the Village.
D. Residences in the residence district may be increased in height by not
more than 10 feet when all yards and other required open spaces are
increased by one foot for each foot by which such building exceeds the
height limit otherwise established for the district in which it is located.
E. Where a lot abuts on two or more streets or alleys having different
mean established grades, the higher of such grades shall control only
for a depth of 120 feet from the line of the higher mean established
grade. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
F. On through lots which extend from street to street, the height of the
main building may be measured from the mean elevation of the finished
grade along the end of the building facing either street.
G. A basement shall be counted as a story for purposes of height
measurement if the vertical distance between the ceiling and the
average level of the adjoining ground is more than five feet or the
basement is used for dwelling purposes.
A. No part of a yard or other open space provided about any building for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
included as part of a yard or other open space required for another
building.
B. Any side yard, rear yard or court abutting a district boundary line shall
have a minimum width and depth in the less restricted district equal to
the average of the required minimum width and depths for such yards
and courts in the two districts which abut the district boundary line.
See § 245-22B(2).
C. Where adjacent properties are occupied by principal buildings which
have setbacks greater or less than the setback required by the district,
the minimum setback of the subject principal building shall be the
average setback established by the adjacent principal buildings, but in
no case shall be less than 15 feet in residential districts. Attached
garages shall be considered to be part of the principal building.
Accessory buildings which are separate from the principal building
shall not be located in the setback area, and existing freestanding
accessory buildings located within the setback or side yard area shall
not be used to establish average setbacks. [Amended 9-26-2005 by
Ord. No. 481; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
§ 245-12 WATERFORD CODE § 245-13
211:496
D. In cases where the adjacent building sites are vacant, the setback shall
equal the average of the setbacks of the next principal building in each
direction on the same side of the street in the same block. If there is
only one other principal building or there are no other principal
buildings on the same side of the street in the same block, the district
setback shall apply. [Amended 9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 481]
E. Buildings on through lots and extending from street to street may waive
the requirement for a rear yard by furnishing an equivalent open space
on the same lot in lieu of the required rear yard, provided that the
setback requirements on both streets are complied with.
F. Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky unobstructed,
except for accessory buildings in a rear yard, and the ordinary
projections of sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features
projecting not more than 36 inches. However, no such ornamental
feature shall project over a street line more than eight inches.
G. Open or enclosed fire escapes and fire towers may project into a
required yard not more than five feet and into a required court not more
than 3 1/2 feet, provided they be so located as not to obstruct light and
ventilation.
H. Vision clearance at intersections. [Added 8-9-1999 by Ord. No. 383;
amended 1-28-2008 by Ord. No. 523; 11-11-2013 by Ord. No.
610]
(1) Corner lot. On a corner lot in any district, no obstructions, such as
structures, parking or vegetation, shall be erected, placed, planted
or allowed to grow to impede vision between a height of two feet
and 10 feet above the curbline grade in the vision clearance
triangle.
(2) Dimensions.
(a) Definitions. In this subsection:
[1] The "vision distance lines" are:
[a] At the intersection of two public or private streets, the
lines extending a designated length from the
intersection of the streets along the back of the curb
of each street, and if no curb exists, along the edge of
the shoulder of the street;
[b] At the intersection of a public or private street and an
alley or driveway, the line extending a designated
length from the intersection of the street and the
driveway or alley along the back of the curb or the
edge of the shoulder of the street, and the line
extending a designated length from the intersection of
§ 245-13 TREES § 245-13
211:497
the street and the driveway or alley along the edge of
the pavement of the driveway or alley.
[2] The "vision clearance line" is the straight line connecting
the nonintersecting ends of the vision distance lines.
[3] The "vision clearance triangle" is the triangular area
created by the intersection of the two vision distance lines
with the vision clearance line.
(b) The dimensions of a specific vision clearance triangle shall be
determined by the Zoning Administrator, with input from the
Department of Public Works. If the landowner disagrees with
the decision of the Zoning Administrator, the landowner may
request a determination by the Village Engineer, at the cost of
the landowner as follows:
[1] At the intersection of any street with a state highway, the
vision clearance triangle shall be determined by the
method used by the State of Wisconsin Department of
Transportation.
[2] At the intersection of public or private streets, the length
of the vision distance lines shall be 40 feet from their
intersection.
[3] At the intersection of a driveway or alley with a public or
private street, the length of the vision distance lines shall
be 30 feet from their intersection.
(c) Exceptions. The requirements of Subsection H(2)(a) do not
apply to:
[1] Public utility poles;
[2] Trees trimmed (to the trunk) from the ground to a line at
least eight feet above the level of the pavement;
[3] Official warning signs or signals;
[4] Signs mounted nine feet or more above the ground and
supported by a single support with a maximum cross
section of 12 inches;
[5] Earth-formed obstructions, including retaining walls, at
intersections which were existing on the date of passage of
this Subsection H; and
[6] Mailboxes.
(3) Existing buildings. Except as set forth in § 245-10F(3) and/or this
Subsection H, no building located at the intersection of two or more
streets, where a vision clearance less than provided above exists as
of the date of the passage or amendment of this subsection, shall be
§ 245-13 WATERFORD CODE § 245-13
211:498
structurally altered on the exterior within the vision clearance
triangle unless a vision clearance triangle meeting the
requirements of this section is provided at the corner of the
building nearest such intersection.
(4) Heritage Overlay District. Nonresidentially zoned buildings in the
Heritage Overlay District are encouraged to about the street line.
Existing and new nonresidentially zoned buildings and structures
in the Heritage Overlay District may be placed in the vision
clearance triangle when they are placed in accordance with the
design guidelines. Other obstructions, except as set forth in
Subsection H(2)(c), may not be placed in the vision clearance
triangle.
(5) Exceptions by Plan Commission. The Plan Commission may grant
exceptions to the vision clearance requirements where the
characteristics of the intersection are such that traffic safety
hazards would not be created and the placement of signs or
structures within the vision clearance triangle would contribute to
the objectives of the zoning district. Such an exception shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department of Public Works.
§ 245-13 TREES § 245-13
211:499
§ 245-13 WATERFORD CODE § 245-13
211:500
§ 245-13.1. Lot measurement and requirements. [Added 1-28-2008
by Ord. No. 523]
§ 245-13 TREES § 245-13.1
211:501
A. Measurement of lot area. The lot area is the total area within the lot
lines of a lot, excluding any right-of-way in all districts.
B. Percentages and fractions. When a measurement results in a fractional
number or percentage, any fraction of 1/2 or less shall be rounded down
to the next lower whole number and any fraction of more than 1/2 shall
be rounded up to the next higher whole number. Any percentage of
0.5% or greater shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number
and any percentage less than 0.5% shall be rounded down to the next
lower whole number.
C. Corner lots. Structures on corner lots shall provide a front yard setback
as required by this chapter on the street that the structure faces. A
second front yard shall be provided on the side of the structure abutting
a second public or private street. See Figure 1. The setbacks on each
street shall be the same distance. The remaining yards shall be a side
yard and a rear yard.
D. Double frontage lots (through lots). Lots abutting two opposite streets
shall provide the front yard setback required by the district in which the
lot is located from each street upon which the lot abuts. See Figure 1.
E. Triple frontage lots. Lots abutting three streets shall provide the front
yard setback required by the district in which the lot is located from
each street upon which the lot abuts. See Figure 1.
F. Irregular or triangular lots. In the case of irregular or triangular lots,
where none of the lines bounding the rear of the lot are at a right angle
to the front lot line, the rear lot line for the purpose of meeting the
requirements of this chapter is a line at least 15 feet long, within the lot,
parallel to the front lot line, at the maximum distance from the front lot
line that the 15 foot measurement is possible. See Figure 1.
G. Determination of main front yard; provisions for uses not allowed in
yards as defined.
(1) Main front yard. For any principal structure on a corner lot, double
frontage lot, or triple frontage lot, the main front yard shall be the
yard abutting the street for which the structure is addressed.
(2) Provisions for uses not allowed in yards as defined.
(a) The yard opposite the main front yard, even if it is defined as a
front yard in this section, may be treated as a rear yard for
purposes of determining the allowable use of the yard pursuant
to this chapter, however, the setbacks required for a front yard
shall apply.
(b) A yard to the side of the main structure, even if defined as a
front yard, may be treated as a side yard for purposes of
determining the allowable use of the yard pursuant to this
chapter, however, the front yard setbacks shall apply.
§ 245-13.1 WATERFORD CODE § 245-13.1
211:502
§ 245-14. Fences. [Added 2-9-2004 by Ord. No. 443]
(c) Setback averaging, as provided in § 245-13, is applicable.
(d) Any front yard to be treated as a rear or side yard for purposes
of allowable use shall be clearly identified on an application for
any permit under this Municipal Code, and, once identified,
shall be treated as such for all subsequent permit applications.
(e) This subsection shall not apply to the provisions for fences in
§ 245-14 of this Municipal Code.
Figure 1. Illustration, Yards
Location of Yards on Typical Interior, Corner, and
Double Frontage, Triple Frontage and Triangular Lots
A. The construction of a fence anywhere within the Village of Waterford
shall require application for a fence permit from the Building Inspector,
the fee for which shall be in an amount set by the Village Board.
§ 245-13.1 TREES § 245-14
211:503
B. Application for a fence permit, when not part of a landscaping plan,
shall be made to the Building Inspector and include: the name and
address of the applicant; the owner of the site and the contractor; an
accurate drawing or plat of survey of the site, inclusive of structures
located thereon; the address of the site; the proposed location of the
fence superimposed on the drawing or plat of survey; the type,
materials, size and design of the proposed fence; and any other
information the Zoning Administrator may require.
C. Fence construction is subject to the following limitations:
(1) Placement and height. [Amended 4-23-2007 by Ord. No. 513;
1-28-2008 by Ord. No. 523]
(a) Placement on lot. A fence is permitted on or near the property
lines in all districts. No fence shall be closer than three feet to
a street frontage property line, except a protective fence or a
fence that is used to screen a parking lot from a residential
district as set forth in § 245-15E. [Amended 11-11-2013 by
Ord. No. 610]
(b) Height.
[1] All districts. Except as otherwise provided in this section,
the following height limitations apply in all districts:
[Amended 11-11-2013 by Ord. No. 610]
[a] Front yard. A fence that consists of at least 50% open
space shall not exceed 50 inches in height. A fence
that has less than 50% open space may not exceed 38
inches in height unless the fence is used to screen a
parking lot from a residential district as set forth in
§ 245-15E, in which case it shall not exceed 50 inches
in height.
[b] Side and rear yards. A fence may not exceed 74 inches
in height.
[c] Lots with more than one front yard. The above
provisions for front yards shall apply in each front
yard; however, a fence that does not meet those
requirements (i.e., is less than 50% open space and
exceeds 38 inches, or is more than 50% open space
and exceeds 50 inches), in any yard other than the
main front yard [as defined in § 245-13.1G(1)], is
allowed if the fence is at least 25 feet from the street
right-of-way line and does not exceed 74 inches in
height.
[2] Protective fences.
§ 245-14 WATERFORD CODE § 245-14
211:504
[a] A protective fence in residence, business and
institutional districts shall not exceed the height
requirements set forth in Subsection C(1)(b)[1].
[b] In industrial districts, a protective fence shall not
exceed a height of 122 inches. [Amended 1-10-2011
by Ord. No. 557]
[3] Measuring height.
[a] The installed height of a fence shall be measured from
the ground to the top of a fence section, and the
average height between two posts shall not exceed the
limitations in this section.
[b] A post, post cap or ornamental feature of a fence may
exceed the height limitations of this section, but shall
not be disproportionate to the fence. If the height of a
post, post cap or ornamental feature will exceed the
maximum height by more than six inches, the Building
Inspector may require the owner to apply to the Plan
Commission for approval.
(c) Refuse containers. Refuse containers may be screened with a
fence not meeting the requirements of this section upon
approval by the Plan Commission.
(2) Limitations and prohibitions.
(a) No fence or portion of a fence shall be placed within the vision
clearance triangle, as set forth in § 245-13H.
(b) No fences are permitted in the Floodway District. Fences
within Planned Community Development Districts are allowed
only as part of the approval or amendment of a Precise
Implementation Plan. Fences in overlay districts are subject to
the requirements of the underlying districts. [Amended
12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 505]
(c) No fence may be constructed as a fence which conducts
electricity or is designed to electrically shock or which uses
barbed wire, except as provided below. [Amended 1-28-2008
by Ord. No. 523]
(d) Underground "invisible" pet fences shall be allowed without a
permit, but must be installed at least three feet from all
property lines. Hedge fences shall be allowed without a permit,
but shall meet all of the placement and height limitations of
this section. Barbed wire may be used at the top of a fence in
an industrial district if the barbed wire and the devices
securing the barbed wire are at least 10 feet above the ground
§ 245-14 TREES § 245-14
211:505
§ 245-15. Motor vehicles and parking. [Added 4-14-1997 by Ord.
No. 349; amended 6-22-1998 by Ord. No. 363; 8-9-1999 by Ord. No.
383]
and project inward toward the fenced property and away from
public or adjoining property.
(e) No fence shall be constructed of unsightly or dangerous
materials. The finished or decorative side of a fence shall face
adjoining property.
(3) Temporary fences. Fences erected for the protection of planting or
to warn of construction hazard or similar purpose shall be allowed
without a permit, but shall be clearly visible or marked with
warning devices at four-foot intervals. Such fences shall meet the
placement and height requirements of this section unless such
placement and height defeats the purpose of the fence. Temporary
fences, other than snow fences, shall not be in place for more than
45 days.
(4) Nonconforming fences. Any fence existing on the effective date of
this section and not conforming to these requirements may be
maintained, but any alteration, modification or improvement of
more than 50% of said fence shall result in the entire fence being
brought into compliance with this section.
(5) Determination of location. The property owner erecting the fence is
solely responsible for ensuring that the fence is located on his or
her own property.
(6) Fence repair. All fences shall be maintained and kept safe and in a
state of good repair.
D. All fence materials shall be approved by the Building Inspector, who
shall issue a fence permit upon application therefor for fences meeting
the requirements of this subsection. If the Zoning Administrator denies
a permit hereunder, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Plan
Commission, which may uphold, modify or overturn the Building
Inspector's decision.
A. Parking. [Amended 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 596]
(1) Parking of vehicles accessory to a residential use shall be limited to
those actually used by the residents or for temporary parking for
guests. Vans or pickup trucks used for private and recreational use,
or a motor home (recreational vehicle), or a human service vehicle,
or a van or pickup truck used in a business or trade or a commercial
vehicle that meets the weight limits in Subsection A(2) that is used
for transportation to and from a place of employment or workplace
of the occupant may be parked on a residential property.
§ 245-14 WATERFORD CODE § 245-15
211:506
(2) One commercial vehicle may be parked per residential dwelling
unit, provided that all of the following conditions are met:
(a) The vehicle is registered and licensed;
(b) The vehicle is used by a resident of the premises;
(c) Gross vehicle weight rating does not exceed 16,000 pounds;
and
(d) Height does not exceed 12 feet as measured from ground level,
excluding antennas, air vents, and roof-mounted air
conditioning units, but including any load, bed, or box.
(3) No other vehicular equipment of a commercial or industrial nature,
except as stated above, shall be parked or stored for more than two
consecutive hours and four accumulated hours during any twentyfour-
hour period on any lot in any zoning district except districts
that allow business, industrial and institutional uses.
(4) Outdoor parking of semi-tractors/trailers on commercial property
(in any district that allows business and/or industrial uses), that is
not a principal use (e.g., trucking business), an accessory use (e.g.,
delivery vehicles), or which has not been approved through the
conditional use or site plan review process is prohibited.
B. Parking requirements. In all districts and in connection with every use,
there shall be provided at the time any use or building is erected,
enlarged, extended or increased sufficient off-street parking stalls for
all vehicles in accordance with the following:
(1) Adequate access. Adequate access to a public street shall be
provided for each parking space; driveways shall be at least 10 feet
wide for one- and two-family dwellings and a minimum of 20 feet
for all other uses.
(2) Size. [Amended 2-14-2000 by Ord. No. 387; 3-27-2006 by Ord.
No. 493; 4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 496; 11-11-2013 by Ord. No.
610]
(a) The size of each parking space to be provided shall be not less
than 180 square feet, exclusive of the space required for
ingress and egress, and each parking space shall be not less
than 10 feet wide.
(b) Downtown Parking District. There is created a Downtown
Parking District, the boundaries of which shall be the same as
the boundaries of the Waterford Heritage Overlay District, as
set forth in § 245-27 of this chapter. The size of each parking
space to be provided in such district shall be not less than 144
square feet in area, exclusive of the space required for ingress
and egress, and each parking space shall be not less than nine
feet wide.
§ 245-15 TREES § 245-15
211:507
(c) The minimum size requirements of Subsection B(2)(a) and (b)
shall not apply to one- and two-family residences located in any
zoning district.
C. Parking lot location. The parking lot location shall be on the same lot as
the principal use or, with Plan Commission approval, not over 400 feet
from the principal use as measured along the shortest available route of
pedestrian access, except that required spaces may be permitted at
other locations when and as authorized under Subsection N of this
section. When planning new parking lots, every attempt shall be made
to minimize the effect of headlights and noise from parking lot driveway
entrances and exits on adjacent residential areas. [Amended
9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 481; 3-23-2009 by Ord. No. 539]
D. Surfacing. [Amended 2-9-2004 by Ord. No. 442]
(1) All off-street parking areas shall be graded and surfaced so as to be
dust-free and properly drained. In every instance of use, regardless
of district, each driveway, parking space, and each area designated
for the display, storage, or retention of motor vehicles shall be of a
paved asphaltic or cement concrete surface, the depth of which
shall be established by specifications approved by the Village
Engineer prior to application, or, in the case of single- and twofamily
usage, pursuant to Chapter 178, Property Maintenance,
§ 178-7, of this Municipal Code. Any required parking area for more
than five vehicles shall have the aisles and spaces clearly marked.
(2) The provisions of this subsection shall be addressed by every
applicant for an occupancy permit, a conditional use permit, and by
every applicant for a zoning or building permit where the passage
of this amendment has created a nonconforming parking area. The
provisions of this subsection shall be a necessary consideration by
the Zoning Board of Appeals in every application for a zoning
ordinance variance. [Amended 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 506]
E. Screening. Any off-street parking area other than that provided for a
residence which abuts or faces a residence district shall provide a
planting screen, landscaped fence or wall at least four feet in height
along the side abutting or fronting on a residence district.
F. Offset. No off-street parking area shall include space within 10 feet of
an abutting residential lot line, except as such parking area may be
accessory to a residence.
G. Lighting. Lights provided in any parking area shall be hooded or
beamed so as to minimize glare and/or illumination of adjacent
residential property or public roads.
H. Curbs or barriers. Curbs or barriers in all required parking areas shall
be installed so as to prevent the parked vehicles from extending over
any lot lines.
§ 245-15 WATERFORD CODE § 245-15
211:508
I. Floor area defined. For purposes of determining the off-street parking
requirements for commercial establishments, "floor area" shall include
the gross floor area of those rooms of a building to which it is intended
generally to admit invitees for the transaction of business with an
occupant or area in which materials for sale are manufactured,
processed, repaired, or stored. It shall not include unused areas or
areas used for dead storage into which neither employees or customers
regularly enter.
J. Number of parking stalls. Any building hereafter erected, expanded, or
structurally altered shall be provided with off-street vehicle parking
spaces to be used by the residents, patrons, visitors or employees of the
building, according to the following schedule. When the application of
this schedule results in the requirement of a fractional parking space,
any fraction up to one-half may be disregarded and any fraction
equaling one-half or more shall be construed as requiring one full
parking space. Parking spaces located in garages or other building
areas may be included in computing spaces otherwise required.
[Amended 9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 481; 4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 496;
11-11-2013 by Ord. No. 610]
Uses
Minimum
Required
Spaces
(square feet
is gross
unless
otherwise
specified)
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
(number of
vehicles)
Other Required
Standard(s) for
Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Commercial/Retail:
Auto fuel station
(without service)
2.0 minimum Plus 4.75 per
1,000 retail SF
Auto fuel station
(with service)
3.0 minimum Plus 3.0 per
service bay
Auto fuel station
(with car wash)
Corresponding
auto fuel
station
requirements
Equal to 3
times car
wash
capacity
Auto service
station
3.0 minimum Plus 3.0 per
service bay
Barber/beauty
salon/spa
3 per licensed
chair/facility
Car wash (full
service)
Plus 1.0 per
employee on
largest shift
Equal to 8
times car
wash
capacity
§ 245-15 TREES § 245-15
211:509
Uses
Minimum
Required
Spaces
(square feet
is gross
unless
otherwise
specified)
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
(number of
vehicles)
Other Required
Standard(s) for
Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Car wash (selfservice)
4.0 cars per
wash stall
Car wash
(accessory)
Equal to 3
times car
wash
capacity
Commercial or
retail sales uses
(except as herein
noted)
4.0 per 1,000
SF
General
merchandise and
department store
greater than 5,000
SF
4.75 per 1,000
SF
General
merchandise and
convenience store
less than 5,000 SF
5.0 per 1,000
SF
Restaurant, dinein
(quality,
gourmet, family,
sit-down)
1.0 per 3 seats Plus 2.0 per 3
employees on
largest work shift;
10.0 minimum
Restaurant, dinein,
fast food (w/o
drive-through)
1.0 per 4 seats Plus 2.0 per 3
employees on
largest work shift
Restaurant, fast
food with drivethrough
1.0 per 4 seats 12.0 per
drive-up
window with
5 spaces
minimum at
ordering
station
Plus 2.0 per 3
employees on
largest work shift
Shopping center
(w/supermarket)
5.5 per 1,000
SF
§ 245-15 WATERFORD CODE § 245-15
211:510
Uses
Minimum
Required
Spaces
(square feet
is gross
unless
otherwise
specified)
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
(number of
vehicles)
Other Required
Standard(s) for
Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Shopping center
(w/o supermarket)
5.0 per 1,000
SF
Shopping center
(3+ stores, not
classified
elsewhere in
Table)
5.0 per 1,000
SF
Specialty retail
center (average
tenant space less
than 2,500 SF)
4.0 per 1,000
SF
Specialty store 4.0 per 1,000
SF
Supermarket,
grocery
6.0 per 1,000
SF
Tavern, bar,
cocktail lounge
1.0 per 2.5
seats
Plus 2.0 per 3
employees on
largest work shift
Video tape rental/
sales
5.5 per 1,000
SF
Residential (Private and Commercial):
Apartment 2.0 per unit Plus 0.5 per unit
for visitors
Assisted-living
facilities,
community-based
residential
facilities
1.0 per 3
patient beds
Plus 1.0 per
employee on
largest work shift
Condominium 2.0 per unit, of
which 1.0 must
be enclosed
Plus 0.5 per unit
for visitors
Dormitories or
group living
facilities
0.5 per
bedroom
Dwellings (singlefamily
detached)
2.0 per
dwelling
§ 245-15 TREES § 245-15
211:511
Uses
Minimum
Required
Spaces
(square feet
is gross
unless
otherwise
specified)
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
(number of
vehicles)
Other Required
Standard(s) for
Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Dwellings (twofamily/
duplex)
1.0 per
bedroom, of
which 1 must
be enclosed
Plus 0.5 per unit
for visitors
Nursing homes 1.0 per 2
patient beds
3.0 vehicles
on-site
Plus 1.0 per
employee on the
largest work shift
Residential units
in nonresidential
structures
1.0 per
bedroom
Senior citizen
multiple-family/
retirement
community/
independent living
facility
1.0 per unit 3.0 vehicles
on-site
Plus 0.5 per unit
for visitors
Transportation/Communication/Utilities:
All uses 1.0 per
employee on
largest work
shift
Plus 1.0 per
vehicle used or
stored; plus 1.0
per 500 SF of
office area
Institutional:
Child-care centers/
day nurseries
1.0 per
employee
Plus 1.0 per 15
children
Churches/chapels 1.0 per 3 seats 3.0 vehicles
on-site
Plus 1.0 per
vehicle used or
stored on premises
Clubs and lodges 1.0 per 4 seats
or 1.0 per 3
members,
whichever is
greater
§ 245-15 WATERFORD CODE § 245-15
211:512
Uses
Minimum
Required
Spaces
(square feet
is gross
unless
otherwise
specified)
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
(number of
vehicles)
Other Required
Standard(s) for
Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Hospitals 2.0 per 3
patient beds
5.0 vehicles
on-site for
emergency
room
Plus 1.0 per doctor
and employee on
the largest work
shift
Libraries 4.0 spaces per
1,000 SF
Plus 1.0 per
employee on the
largest work shift
Museums/galleries 2.5 per 1,000
SF gross floor
area
Postal stations 4.0 per
customer
service station
Plus 2.0 per 3
employees on
largest work shift;
plus 1.0 per
vehicle stored on
site
Schools, Pre- 1.0 per
employee
Plus 1.0 per 5
children
Schools,
Elementary and
Junior High
1.0 per
employee
Plus 1.0 per
classroom
Schools, Senior
High
1.0 per
employee
Plus 1.0 per 5 nonbused
students
Schools, Special
Education
1.0 per
classroom and
4.5 per 1,000
SF office
Schools, College/
University and
Vocational
1.0 per
employee
Plus 1.0 per 2
students
Cultural/Entertainment/Recreational:
§ 245-15 TREES § 245-15
211:513
Uses
Minimum
Required
Spaces
(square feet
is gross
unless
otherwise
specified)
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
(number of
vehicles)
Other Required
Standard(s) for
Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Athletic fields 12.0 per
improved
facility (field,
diamond, etc.)
Plus additional
spaces as
determined by
Plan Commission
for spectator
seating
Auditoriums/
meeting rooms/
places for public
assembly (except
as noted herein)
1.0 per 3 seats
or 1.0 per 50
SF floor area of
assembly area
where there is
no fixed
seating
Bowling alleys 5.0 per alley
Clubs/lodges, open
to public
1.0 per 2.5
seats
Plus 2.0 per 3
employees on
largest work shift
Community
centers and
private, nonprofit
recreation centers
(except as noted)
The greater of
4.0 per 1,000
SF or 1.0 per 4
patrons of
maximum
capacity
5 vehicles
on site
Plus 1.0 per
employee on
largest work shift
Golf, country clubs To be
determined by
Plan
Commission
based upon
report
prepared by
applicant
Golf, public 3.0 per hole Plus 50% of spaces
otherwise required
for any accessory
use (bar,
restaurant, etc.)
Golf, driving
ranges
2.0 per tee
§ 245-15 WATERFORD CODE § 245-15
211:514
Uses
Minimum
Required
Spaces
(square feet
is gross
unless
otherwise
specified)
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
(number of
vehicles)
Other Required
Standard(s) for
Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Golf, miniature 1.0 per 5,000
SF lot area
Gymnasiums 3.0 per 1,000
SF
Ice and roller rinks 5.5 per 1,000
SF
Libraries 4.0 per 1,000
SF
Plus 1.0 per
employee on the
largest work shift
Parks (city/county/
state),
playgrounds, and
picnic grounds
To be
determined by
Plan
Commission
Sports club/health
spa
The greater of
1.0 per 3
patron lockers
or 1.0 per 3
persons at
maximum
facility
capacity
Swimming pools 1.0 space per
75 SF of gross
water area
Plus 1.0 per
employee on the
largest work shift
Tennis clubs 3.0 per 1,000
SF
Plus additional
spaces as
determined by the
Plan Commission
for spectator
seating
Tennis courts,
outdoor
3.0 per court Plus additional
spaces as
determined by
Plan Commission
for spectator
seating
Theater, live 1.0 per 50 SF
§ 245-15 TREES § 245-15
211:515
Uses
Minimum
Required
Spaces
(square feet
is gross
unless
otherwise
specified)
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
(number of
vehicles)
Other Required
Standard(s) for
Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Theater, music 1.0 per 50 SF
Theater, movie 0.50 per seat
Open Space:
Cemeteries 2.0 per 3
employees on
largest work
shift
Plus 1.0 garage
space per vehicle
used or stored
Industrial:
Light industry 2.0 per 1,000
SF office/
customer use
Plus 1.0 per
employee on the
largest work shift;
plus 1.0 per
vehicle used/
stored
Manufacturing
and fabrication
2.0 per 1,000
SF office/
customer use
Plus 1.0 per
employee on the
largest work shift;
plus 1.0 per
vehicle used/
stored
Warehousing and
wholesaling
1.0 per
employee on
largest work
shift
Plus 1.0 per
vehicle used/
stored
Office:
Dental offices and
clinics
4.5 per 1,000
SF
Medical office
building or clinic
The greater of
4.0 per 1,000
SF floor area
or 5.0 per
doctor
Plus 1.0 per
vehicle used/
stored
Office building,
general
4.5 per 1,000
SF
Plus 1.0 per
vehicle used/
stored
§ 245-15 WATERFORD CODE § 245-15
211:516
Uses
Minimum
Required
Spaces
(square feet
is gross
unless
otherwise
specified)
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
(number of
vehicles)
Other Required
Standard(s) for
Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Research center
(non-leasable
space)
3.0 per 1,000
SF up to
50,000 SF
Plus 2.5 per 1,000
SF over 50,000 SF
Services:
Financial: bank
(walk-in only)
4.5 per 1,000
SF
Financial: bank
(drive up-and
walk-in)
4.5 per 1,000
SF
Equal to 5
times driveup
capacity
Financial: lending
agency,
stockbroker
4.0 per 1,000
SF
Hotels, motels,
bed-and-breakfast
1.0 per
sleeping unit
Plus 1.0 per
employee on
largest work shift;
plus 1.0 per
vehicle used or
stored
Insurance agents/
brokers
4.0 per 1,000
SF
Mortuaries/funeral
homes
1.0 per 3 seats
at maximum
capacity; 10
minimum
Plus 1.0 per
employee on the
maximum work
shift
Real estate agents/
brokers
4.5 per 1,000
SF
Veterinary clinics
and hospitals
6.0 minimum Plus 4.0 per each
exam room over 1
room
K. Uses not listed. In the case of structures or uses not mentioned, the
provision for a use which is similar shall apply and will be determined
by the Plan Commission.
L. Combinations. Combinations of any of the above uses shall provide the
total of the number of stalls required for each individual use.
§ 245-15 TREES § 245-15
211:517
M. Modifications to required parking spaces. The Village of Waterford
recognizes that, due to the particularities of any given land use or
development, the inflexible application of the parking supply
requirements set forth in Subsection J of this section may result in a
land use or development either with inadequate parking supply or
parking supply far in excess of its needs. Therefore, the Plan
Commission may permit or require deviations from the requirements of
Subsection J of this section and may require more parking or allow less
parking whenever it finds that such deviations are more likely to satisfy
the standards set out in Subsection M(1) and (2) of this section.
Whenever the Plan Commission permits or requires a modification to
the prescribed parking supply requirements, it may also request the
recording of the same under the provisions of Subsection O of this
section with the Racine County Register of Deeds. [Added 9-26-2005
by Ord. No. 481]
(1) Additional parking spaces can be required if it is determined that
the prescribed requirement for a particular development will lead
to traffic congestion or parking violations in adjacent streets or
unauthorized parking in nearby private parking lots.
(2) A reduction in parking spaces can be required if it is determined
that the prescribed requirement for a particular development
would result in the wasteful use of property that could more
desirably be used for additional building development, in the case
of a land use or development which would produce less parking
demand, or for environmentally useful or aesthetically pleasing
open space.
N. Alternatives to on-site parking: shared or off-site parking. [Added
9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 481]
(1) The petitioner shall submit written documentation to the
satisfaction of the Plan Commission that shared parking spaces are
available to satisfy the parking requirements. Shared parking
agreements shall provide evidence that either parking lots are
adequate in total number of spaces to accommodate multiple users
or that parking spaces will be shared at certain times of the day
(i.e., one activity uses the spaces during daytime hours and another
activity uses the spaces during evening hours). Off-site parking lots
shall be located not more than 400 feet from the principal building
entrance that it is intended to serve, unless the petitioner's
business or other use is located in the Downtown Parking District
[identified in Subsection B(2)] and may be served by a municipal
parking lot. [Amended 4-23-2007 by Ord. No. 513]
(2) When a reduction of parking spaces attributable to shared parking
or off-site parking is requested, the petitioner shall submit written
verification that such parking is available for the life of the
applicant's use and shall include copies of any contracts, joint lease
agreements, easements, and other such documentation to show
§ 245-15 WATERFORD CODE § 245-15
211:518
§ 245-16. Conditional use permits and procedures. [Added
2-13-1995 by Ord. No. 311; amended 6-26-1995 by Ord. No. 316;
1-25-1999 by Ord. No. 372; 5-13-2002 by Ord. No. 422; 11-22-2004
by Ord. No. 467; 9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 481; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No.
489; 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 506; 4-23-2007 by Ord. No. 513;
3-4-2008 by Ord. No. 528; 7-23-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
that such shared parking can be accomplished. The method by
which the required shared parking will be provided is subject to
the approval of the Village Attorney upon request by the Village
Administrator, and may be required to be recorded under the
provisions of Subsection O of this section. Off-site parking spaces
shall be clearly posted for the joint use of employees, tenants and/
or customers of each respective use sharing those spaces.
O. Recording of restrictions. The Plan Commission may require that a
declaration of land use restriction be recorded upon the subject
property at the Racine County Register of Deeds to ensure that future
owners are informed of use restrictions resulting from the
administration of this section. [Added 9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 481]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations that
govern the procedures and requirements for the review and approval,
or denial, of proposed conditional uses. Under this chapter, a proposed
conditional use shall be denied unless the applicant can demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the Village that the proposed conditional use will not
create undesirable impacts on nearby properties, the environment, or
the community as a whole.
B. Applicability. The execution of this chapter is based upon the division of
the Village into zoning districts, within which districts the use of land
and buildings and location of buildings and structures in relation to the
land are mutually compatible and substantially uniform. However, there
are certain uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot
be properly classified as unrestricted permitted uses in any particular
district or districts without consideration of the impact of those uses
upon neighboring land or public facilities and the public need for a
particular use in a particular location. In these instances, the
conditional use permit review and approval procedures shall apply.
C. Review and approval. All conditional use permit requests shall be
subject to the review of the Zoning Administrator. The Plan Commission
shall review and hear applications for conditional uses, and shall act on
the conditional use permit request in accordance with the procedures
in this section.
D. Initiation of request for approval of a conditional use. Proceedings for
approval of a conditional use may be initiated by an application of the
owner(s) of the subject property.
§ 245-15 TREES § 245-16
211:519
E. Application requirements. An application for a conditional use permit
shall contain the following. The Village may require the applicant to
submit 13 hard copies, plus a digital file, of the items listed herein:
(1) Names, addresses and day-time phone numbers of the applicant,
owner of the site, architect, professional engineer, contractor, when
engaged, and all opposite and abutting property owners of record.
(2) A map of the generalized location of the subject property in relation
to the Village as a whole.
(3) A map of the subject property (at a minimum scale of one inch
equals 800 feet) showing all lands for which the conditional use is
proposed and all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of
the subject property, together with the names and addresses of the
owners of all lands on said map as the same appear on the current
records of the Register of Deeds. Said map shall clearly indicate the
current zoning of the subject property and its environs and the
jurisdiction which maintains that control. All lot dimensions of the
subject property, a graphic scale, and a North arrow shall be
provided.
(4) A written description of the proposed conditional use describing
the type of activities, buildings, and structures proposed for the
subject property and their general locations.
(5) A site plan of the subject property as proposed for development.
Said site plan shall conform to any and all requirements of
§ 245-56.6.
(6) As an option, the applicant may provide written justification for the
proposed conditional use consisting of the reasons why the
applicant believes the proposed conditional use is appropriate.
(7) If a facility such as a nursing home, community-based residential
care facility (CBRF) or residential care apartment complex (RCAC),
as defined by statute, which includes living space for five or more
patients or residents and intended for long-term or permanent
residential purposes is to be operated as a not-for-profit entity, the
application for a conditional use permit shall address the potential
for increased services that will be required for that use and shall
include a proposal for a voluntary payment in lieu of taxes (PILOT)
agreement to be entered into between the entity/facility and the
Village.
(8) Additional information, as may be required by the Zoning
Administrator, Village Plan Commission, Village Attorney, or Village
Engineer.
F. Application certification. All applications for proposed conditional uses
shall be certified as complete by the Zoning Administrator a minimum
of two weeks prior to the initiation of this procedure. If the Zoning
§ 245-16 WATERFORD CODE § 245-16
211:520
Administrator determines that the application does not fulfill the
requirements of this chapter, he shall return a copy of the application
to the applicant and indicate incomplete or missing requirements. The
Zoning Administrator will also provide the application itself to the
Village Clerk, who shall certify that no taxes, assessments, forfeitures
or other claims of the Village are delinquent and unpaid on the property
or by the applicant, unless the same are being legally appealed.
G. Review by Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall review
and evaluate the application and prepare a written report to be sent to
the Plan Commission for review. Through the written report, the Zoning
Administrator shall evaluate whether:
(1) The proposed conditional use (the use in general, independent of
its location) is in harmony with the purposes, goals, objectives,
policies and standards of the Comprehensive Plan, this chapter, and
any other plan, program, or ordinance adopted or under
consideration pursuant to official notice by the Village. If the
Zoning Administrator determines that the proposed use,
independent of its location, may be in conflict with any of these, the
Zoning Administrator shall note this determination in the report.
(2) The proposed conditional use (in its specific location) is in harmony
with the purposes, goals, objectives, policies and standards of the
Comprehensive Plan, this chapter, and any other plan, program, or
ordinance adopted or under consideration pursuant to official
notice by the Village. If the Zoning Administrator determines that
the proposed use, in its specific location, may be in conflict with
any of these provisions, the Zoning Administrator shall note this
determination in the report.
(3) The proposed conditional use, in its proposed location and as
depicted on the required site plan, results in a substantial or undue
adverse impact on nearby property, the character of the
neighborhood, environmental factors, traffic factors, parking,
public improvements, public property or rights-of-way, or other
matters affecting the public health, safety, or general welfare,
either as they now exist or as they may in the future be developed
as a result of the implementation of the provisions of this chapter,
the Comprehensive Plan, or any other plan, program, map, or
ordinance adopted or under consideration pursuant to official
notice by the Village or other governmental agency having
jurisdiction to guide development.
(4) The proposed conditional use would maintain the desired
consistency of land uses, land use intensities, and land use impacts
as related to the environs of the subject property.
(5) The proposed conditional use is located in an area that will be
adequately served by, and will not impose an undue burden on, any
of the improvements, facilities, utilities or services provided by
§ 245-16 TREES § 245-16
211:521
public agencies serving the subject property. The proposed
conditional use may be reviewed by the Department of Public
Works.
(6) The potential public benefits of the proposed conditional use
outweigh any and all potential adverse impacts of the proposed
conditional use after taking into consideration the applicant's
proposal and any requirements recommended by the applicant to
ameliorate such impacts.
H. Public hearing by the Plan Commission.
(1) As soon as possible, but no later than 45 days after acceptance of a
complete application by the Zoning Administrator, the Plan
Commission shall conduct a public hearing to consider the
application. The applicant may appear in person or by agent and/or
by attorney.
(2) The Village Clerk shall publish a Class 2 notice of the requested
conditional use permit and the public hearing, and at least 10 days
before the hearing shall mail a notice to the abutting property
owners as listed in the application and to the clerk of any
municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of the
proposed conditional use. Said notice shall contain a description of
the subject property and the proposed conditional use. The failure
to mail said notice or failure to meet the time requirements herein,
provided that it is unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings
under this section.
I. Review and action by Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall
consider the report of the Zoning Administrator regarding the proposed
conditional use. The Plan Commission may request further information
and/or additional reports from the Zoning Administrator, applicant,
and/or from any other source. The Plan Commission shall conduct a
review including, but not limited to, the site, existing and proposed
structures, neighboring uses, parking areas, driveway location,
highway access, traffic generation and circulation, drainage, sewerage
and water systems, and the proposed operation.
(1) The Plan Commission may take final action on the application at the
time of its initial meeting or may continue the proceedings upon its
own motion or at the applicant's request. The Plan Commission may
approve the conditional use as originally proposed, may approve
the proposed conditional use with modifications, or may deny
approval of the proposed conditional use.
(2) In making its decision, the Plan Commission shall consider the
criteria below and make findings of fact regarding each. The Plan
Commission shall determine:
(a) The consistency of the proposed use with the Comprehensive
Plan;
§ 245-16 WATERFORD CODE § 245-16
211:522
(b) Whether the use proposed is hazardous, harmful, or offensive,
within the neighborhood or locale where proposed;
(c) Whether the use proposed is adverse to the environment;
(d) Whether the use proposed adversely affects the property value,
the aesthetics, or the general well being of the neighborhood
where proposed;
(e) Whether all of the criteria and information required herein has
been adequately provided by applicant;
(f) Any finding of facts supporting its recommendation as to
whether the potential public benefit outweighs any and all
potential adverse impacts.
(3) The Plan Commission's decision shall be based on substantial
evidence, i.e., facts and information, other than merely personal
preferences or speculation, directly related to the requirements
and conditions the applicant must meet to obtain a conditional use
permit and that reasonable persons would accept in support of a
conclusion.
(4) If the applicant for a conditional use permit meets or agrees to
meet all of the requirements and conditions specified in this
Municipal Code or those imposed by the Plan Commission, the Plan
Commission shall grant the conditional use permit.
(a) Any condition imposed must be empirical, must be related to
the purpose of the Code, and must be based on substantial
evidence.
(b) The requirements and conditions must be reasonable and, to
the extent practicable, measurable, and may include conditions
such as the permit's duration, transfer, or renewal. The
applicant must demonstrate that the application and all
requirements and conditions established by the Plan
Commission relating to the conditional use are or shall be
satisfied, both of which must be supported by substantial
evidence. The Plan Commission's decision to approve or deny
the permit must be supported by substantial evidence.
J. Effect of denial. No application which has been denied (either wholly or
in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of
said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of
change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
K. Duration and termination of an approved conditional use.
(1) Duration. Once granted, the conditional use permit shall remain in
effect as long as the conditions upon which the permit was issued
are followed, but the Plan Commission may impose conditions such
§ 245-16 TREES § 245-16
211:523
as the permit's duration, transfer, or renewal, in addition to the
conditions specified in the Zoning Code or by the Plan Commission.
(2) Upon approval by the Plan Commission, the applicant must
demonstrate that the proposed conditional use meets all general
and specific conditional use requirements in the site plan required
for initiation of development activity on the subject property per
§ 245-56.6. Once a conditional use is granted, no erosion control
permit, site plan, zoning permit, or building permit shall be issued
for any development that does not comply with all requirements of
this chapter.
(3) Any conditional use found not to be in compliance with the terms of
this chapter shall be considered in violation of this chapter and
shall be subject to all applicable procedures and penalties. A
conditional use may be revoked for such a violation by majority
vote of the Village Board, following the procedures outlined in
Subsection T below.
L. Time limits on the development of conditional use. Construction of any
and all conditional uses shall be initiated within 365 days of approval by
the Plan Commission and they shall be operational within 730 days of
said approval. Failure to initiate development within this period shall
automatically constitute a revocation of the conditional use permit. For
the purposes of this section, "operational" shall be defined as the
granting of a certificate of zoning compliance for the conditional use.
Prior to such a revocation, the applicant may request an extension of
this period. Said request shall require formal approval by the Plan
Commission and shall be based upon a showing of acceptable
justification (as determined by the Plan Commission).
M. Discontinuing an approved conditional use. Any and all conditional uses
that have been discontinued for a period exceeding 365 days shall have
their conditional use permit invalidated automatically. The burden of
proof shall be on the property owner to conclusively demonstrate that
the subject conditional use was operational during this period.
N. Change of ownership. All requirements of the approved conditional use
shall be continued regardless of ownership of the subject property;
however, submittal of a plan of operation shall be required prior to the
change in ownership. For bed-and-breakfast establishments, the
granting of a conditional use permit shall be valid while the
establishment is under the same ownership.
O. Amendment, modification, alteration or expansion.
(1) Amendment of existing permits.
(a) When permissible: application. At such time as the holder of a
conditional use permit wishes to change the terms of its permit
in a manner which does not change the nature of the use but
that could increase or expand the operation of the use by 25%
§ 245-16 WATERFORD CODE § 245-16
211:524
or less, the holder of the permit shall apply to the Plan
Commission for an amendment to its permit, and shall state in
its application the precise changes it wishes to make and the
expected effect of the changes upon the site, neighboring uses,
parking, traffic generation and circulation, and the drainage,
sewerage and water systems. The applicant shall also list the
names of the property owner and all abutting property owners.
Changes to a permit which are expected to change the nature
of a use, change the location of the use to a site which is not in
the same structure as the existing use, or create greater than a
twenty-five-percent increase in the operation of a use may not
be made; application must be made for a new conditional use
permit. The Zoning Administrator may approve minor changes
consistent with similar permitted uses.
(b) Procedure. No fee shall be required to apply for an amendment
to a conditional use permit. Upon application for an
amendment to a conditional use permit, the Clerk shall
schedule such application for review by the Plan Commission
at an open meeting, and shall mail notice thereof to the
property owner and all abutting property owners along with a
copy of the application not less than 10 days prior to the date of
the scheduled review. No public hearing shall be required, but
the Plan Commission shall accept comments from any person
attending the open meeting.
(2) Modification, alteration, or expansion of any conditional use
without approval by the Plan Commission shall be considered in
violation of this chapter and shall be grounds for revocation of said
conditional use approval per Subsection T below.
P. Notice to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. The Plan
Commission shall transmit a copy of each application for a conditional
use for affected by regulations in the Floodplain or Shoreland-Wetland
Overlay Zoning Districts to the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources (DNR) for review and comment at least 10 days prior to any
public hearings. Final action on the application shall not be taken for 30
days or until the DNR has made its recommendation, whichever comes
first. A copy of all decisions relating to conditional uses affected by
shoreland-wetland regulations or by floodplain regulations shall be
transmitted to the DNR within 10 days of the date of such decision.
Q. Formerly approved conditional uses.
(1) A use now regulated as a conditional use which was approved as a
legal land use, either permitted by right or as a conditional use,
prior to the effective date of this chapter [insert date _____] shall be
considered as a legal, conforming land use so long as the previously
approved conditions of use and site plan are followed. Any
modification of the previously approved conditions of use or site
§ 245-16 TREES § 245-16
211:525
plan shall require application and Village consideration under this
section.
(2) A use that was approved as a conditional use prior to the effective
date of this chapter [insert date _____] that is no longer regulated as
a conditional use shall be considered a legal, conforming land use
so long as the use continues to conform to the regulations of this
chapter.
R. Fees. One or more fees are required for this procedure. Refer to
§ 245-56M.
S. Appeals. Appeals from the decision of the Plan Commission of Village of
Waterford shall be to the Circuit Court pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 62.23(7)(de).
T. Penalties.
(1) In every instance where work commences upon a project subject to
§ 245-16 of this Code, prior to the conditional use permit being
applied for and granted, there shall be a double fee imposed for the
permit, and the applicant shall remain required to meet full
compliance with this chapter.
(2) It shall be unlawful to use or improve any structure or land in
violation of any of the provisions of the section. In addition to
penalties imposed under Chapter 1, Article II, of this Code, the
Village of Waterford may institute appropriate action to enjoin a
violation of this section, or to cause any structure so constructed or
altered to be vacated or removed.
(3) It shall be unlawful to use or improve any structure or land in
violation of any of the terms of a conditional use permit. In addition
to or as an alternative to the penalties imposed under § 245-57 of
this Code, the Village of Waterford may:
(a) Send notice to the permit holder of the violation, and require
that the violation be corrected within five days, or more if
allowed by the Zoning Administrator or Village Attorney, after
written notice is given.
(b) If the violation is not corrected, or a second violation is
incurred within a twelve-month period of the first violation, the
Village may act to suspend or revoke the conditional use
permit, as follows:
[1] Complaint. The Zoning Administrator or any resident may
file a sworn written complaint with the Village Clerk
alleging one or more violations.
[2] Summons. Upon the filing of the complaint, the Plan
Commission shall issue a summons, signed by the Clerk
and directed to any peace officer in the municipality. The
§ 245-16 WATERFORD CODE § 245-16
211:526
summons shall command the permit holder complained
of to appear before the Plan Commission on a day and
place named in the summons, not less than three days
and not more than 30 days from the date of issuance, and
show cause why his or her conditional use permit should
not be revoked or suspended. The summons and a copy
of the complaint shall be served on the permit holder at
least three days before the time at which the licensee
is commanded to appear. Service shall be in the manner
provided under Wis. Stats. Ch. 801 for service in civil
actions in Circuit Court.
[3] Procedure on hearing.
[a] If the permit holder does not appear as required by
the summons, the allegations of the complaint shall be
taken as true, and if the Plan Commission finds the
allegations sufficient, the conditional use permit shall
be revoked. The Village Clerk shall give notice of the
revocation to the person whose permit is revoked.
[b] If the permit holder appears as required by the
summons and denies the complaint, both the
complainant and the permit holder may produce
witnesses, cross-examine witnesses and be
represented by counsel. The permit holder shall be
provided a written transcript of the hearing at his or
her expense.
[i] If the Plan Commission finds the complaint to be
true, the Plan Commission shall determine
whether the conditional use permit shall either be
suspended for not less than 10 days nor more than
90 days or revoked and shall report the same to
the Village Board.
[ii] If the Plan Commission finds the complaint
untrue, it shall recommend that the proceeding be
dismissed without cost to the accused. If the Plan
Commission finds the complaint to be malicious
and without probable cause, it shall recommend
that the costs be paid by the complainant. The
Plan Commission may require the complainant to
provide security for such costs before issuing the
summons under Subsection T(3)(b)[2].
[c] The Plan Commission shall submit a report to the
Village Board, including findings of fact, conclusions
of law and a recommendation as to what action, if any,
the Village Board should take with respect to the
conditional use permit. The Commission shall provide
§ 245-16 TREES § 245-16
211:527
the complainant and the permit holder with a copy
of the report. Either the complainant or the permit
holder may file an objection to the report and shall
have the opportunity to present arguments supporting
the objection to the Village Board. The Village Board
shall determine whether the arguments shall be
presented orally or in writing or both.
[i] If the Village Board, after considering the Plan
Commission's report and any arguments
presented by the complainant or the permit
holder, finds the complaint to be true, or if there is
no objection to a report recommending
suspension or revocation, the conditional use
permit shall be suspended or revoked as
recommended by the Plan Commission.
[ii] If the Village Board finds the complaint untrue,
the proceeding shall be dismissed without cost to
the accused. If the Village Board finds the
complaint to be malicious and without probable
cause, the costs shall be paid by the complainant.
[d] The Village Clerk shall give notice of each suspension
or revocation to the person whose permit is suspended
or revoked.
[4] Effect of revocation. When a conditional use permit is
revoked under this subsection, the revocation shall be
recorded by the Village Clerk and no other conditional use
permit issued under this chapter may be granted within 12
months of the date of revocation to the person whose
permit was revoked.
[5] Judicial review. The action of the Village Board in
suspending or revoking any permit, or the failure to revoke
or suspend any permit for good cause, may be reviewed by
the circuit court for Racine County, upon application by
any permit holder or resident of the Village. The procedure
on review shall be the same as in civil actions instituted in
the Circuit Court. The person desiring review shall file
pleadings, which shall be served on the Village Board in
the manner provided in Wis. Stats. Ch. 801 for service in
civil actions, and a copy of the pleadings shall be served on
the permit holder. The Village Board or permit holder shall
have 45 days to file an answer to the complaint. Following
filing of the answer, the matter shall be deemed at issue
and hearing may be had upon due notice served upon the
opposing party. The hearing shall be before the court
without a jury. Subpoenas for witnesses may be issued and
their attendance compelled. The decision of the court shall
§ 245-16 WATERFORD CODE § 245-16
211:528
§ 245-16.1. Adult establishment uses. [Added 12-11-2006 by Ord.
No. 504]
be filed pursuant to Racine County Circuit Court Rules and
a copy of the decision shall be transmitted to each of the
parties. The decision shall be binding unless it is appealed
to the Court of Appeals.
A. Findings of fact.
(1) The Village finds that adult establishments as defined in this
chapter require special zoning in order to protect and preserve the
health, safety, and welfare of the Village.
(2) Based on its review of the Report to the American Center for Law
and Justice on the Secondary Impacts of Sex Oriented Businesses;
and based on its review of studies conducted in the City of Garden
Grove, California; Newport News, Virginia; Adams County,
Colorado; and Denver Colorado; and based on the findings
incorporated in City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S.
41 (1986); and Colman A. Young v. American Mini-Theaters, Inc.,
427 U.S. 50 (1976), the Village finds that there is convincing
evidence that the secondary effects of adult establishments include
an increased risk of prostitution, high-risk sexual behavior, crime,
and other deleterious effects upon existing business and
surrounding residential areas, and decreased property values. The
consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of an adult
business exacerbates the deleterious secondary effects of such
businesses on the community.
(3) The Village intends to control the impact of these secondary effects
in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry;
protect the citizens from increased crime; preserve the quality of
life; and preserve the property values and character of surrounding
neighborhoods and areas.
(4) It is not the Village's intent to suppress any speech activities
protected by the First Amendment, but to enact a content-neutral
ordinance which addresses the secondary effects of adult
establishments while providing an outlet for First Amendment
protected activities.
(5) In order to minimize and control the secondary effects of adult
establishments upon the Village, it is the Village's intent to prevent
the location of adult establishments within a certain distance of
other specified locations which are incompatible with and would
suffer from the secondary effects of adult establishments.
B. Uses. The First Amendment and other provisions of the United States
Constitution, as interpreted by the United States Supreme Court and
other courts, require that adult establishments, as defined in this
§ 245-16 TREES § 245-16.1
211:529
chapter, are entitled to certain protections, including the opportunity
to locate in the Village. Therefore, an adult establishment shall be an
allowed principal use in the Industrial Zoning District, subject to the
conditional use provisions set forth herein, and shall be a prohibited
use in any other zoning district, including Planned Community
Development Districts. The adult establishment may locate in the
specified district only if all the requirements of this chapter and the
zoning district's regulations are met.
C. Regulations applicable to all adult establishments.
(1) Hours of operation. No adult establishment shall be open for
business at any time between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00
noon.
(2) Animals. No animals, except only for service animals, shall be
permitted at any time at or in any adult establishment.
(3) Restricted access. No adult establishment patron shall be
permitted at any time to enter into any of the non-public portions of
any adult establishment, including specifically, but without
limitation, any storage areas or dressing or other rooms provided
for the benefit of adult establishment employees. This subsection
shall not apply to persons delivering goods and materials, food and
beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs to the permitted
premises; provided, however, that any such persons shall remain in
such non-public areas only for the purposes and to the extent and
time necessary to perform their job duties.
(4) Exterior display. No adult establishment shall be maintained or
operated in any manner that causes, creates, or allows public
viewing of any adult material, or any adult entertainment.
[Amended 1-14-2019 by Ord. No. 669]
(5) Signs. See Article VI of this chapter. [Amended 1-14-2019 by
Ord. No. 669]
(6) Noise. No loudspeakers or sound equipment audible beyond the
adult establishment shall be used at any time.
(7) Manager's stations. Each adult establishment shall have one or
more manager's stations. The interior of each adult establishment
shall be configured in such a manner that there is a direct and
substantially unobstructed view from at least one manager's
station to every part of each area, except restrooms, of the
establishment to which any adult establishment patron is permitted
access for any purpose. The cashier's or manager's station shall be
located so that someone working there can quickly move to
physically halt any attempted or accidental entry by a minor. An
employee shall occupy the station at all times when patrons are in
and on the premises.
§ 245-16.1 WATERFORD CODE § 245-16.1
211:530
(8) Adult booths prohibited. Adult booths shall be prohibited in all
adult establishments.
(9) No loitering policy. The adult establishment shall clearly post and
enforce a no loitering policy.
(10) Age limit restrictions. The adult establishment shall clearly post
and enforce age-limit restrictions. A one-square-foot sign shall be
placed on each public entrance which shall state "Admittance to
adults only" and may include other pertinent business information.
(11) Measuring disbursement distances. The distances in this section
shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures, from the public entrance (existing or
proposed) of an adult establishment to the nearest point of the
protected use as described below.
(12) Adequate parking. Notwithstanding § 245-15J of this chapter, one
parking space per 150 square feet of total gross floor area shall be
provided in a lighted area on the permitted premises of an adult
establishment.
(13) Spacing requirement. No more than one adult establishment may
be located on any one parcel.
(14) Display windows prohibited. All points of access into structures
containing adult establishments and all windows or other openings
shall be located, constructed, covered, or screened in a manner
which will prevent a view into the interior.
(15) Location requirement. No permit shall be granted where the public
entrance of the proposed adult establishment is within 150 feet of a
residential use, residential district, house of worship, school, daycare
center, playground, public park, recreation area, library, or
museum. In the case of an area zoned residential, the distance shall
be measured from the nearest point on the residential district
zoning boundary line. From an area not zoned residential but used
for residential purposes, the measurement shall be taken from the
public entrance of the adult establishment to the nearest entrance
of the building in residential use. From schools, houses of worship,
day-care centers, libraries, and museums, the distance shall be
measured from the public entrance of the adult establishment to
the main public entrance of the protected use. From playgrounds,
public parks, recreation areas, and schools, houses of worship and
day-care centers with playgrounds or recreation areas, the
distance shall be measured from the public entrance of the adult
establishment to the nearest property line of the playground, public
park, or recreation area.
(16) Residential quarters not allowed. No residential quarters shall be
allowed on a premises with an adult establishment.
§ 245-16.1 TREES § 245-16.1
211:531
(17)No adult establishment may be granted or hold an intoxicating
liquor and/or fermented malt beverage license.
(18)No adult establishment shall permit any physical contact between
employees appearing in a nude or semi-nude condition and
patrons, except for the taking of tips.
(19)No adult establishment shall permit any person on the premises to
solicit or perform acts of "sexual conduct" as that term is defined in
Wis. Stat. § 944.21(2)(e).
(20) The operator of an adult establishment shall permit officers or
agents of the Village of Waterford who are performing functions in
connection with the enforcement of this chapter to inspect portions
of the adult establishment premises where patrons are permitted,
for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter, at any
time the adult establishment is occupied by patrons or open for
business. The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an
adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use
as a permanent or temporary habitation.
D. Required information and documents. As part of the conditional use
permit required in this section, the applicant shall provide the following
information:
(1) Demographics.
(a) Individuals:
[1] Applicant's legal name, all of the applicant's aliases, and
the applicant's age.
[2] Applicant's business address.
(b) Corporations:
[1] Applicant corporation's complete name and official
business address;
[2] Legal names, all aliases, the ages, and business addresses
of all of the directors, officers, and managers of the
corporation and of every person owning or controlling
more than 25% of the voting shares of the corporation.
[3] Applicant corporation's date and place of incorporation
and the objective for which it was formed.
[4] Proof that the corporation is a corporation in good
standing and authorized to conduct business in the State
of Wisconsin.
[5] Name of the registered corporate agent and the address of
the registered office for service of process.
§ 245-16.1 WATERFORD CODE § 245-16.1
211:532
(c) Partnerships (general or limited), joint ventures, or any other
type of organization where two or more persons share in the
profits and liabilities of the organization:
[1] Applicant organization's complete name and official
business address.
[2] Legal name, all aliases, the ages, and business addresses
of each partner (other than limited partners) or any other
person entitled to share in the profits of the organization,
whether or not any such person is also obligated to share
in the liabilities of the organization.
(d) Land trusts:
[1] Applicant land trust's complete name.
[2] Legal name, all aliases, and the business address of the
trustee of the land trust.
[3] Legal name, all aliases, the ages, and business addresses
of each beneficiary of the land trust and the specific
interest of each such beneficiary in the land trust.
[4] The interest, if any, that the land trust holds in the
permitted premises.
(2) If a corporation or partnership is an interest holder that shall be
disclosed pursuant to Subsection C(1)(b) and (c), then such interest
holders shall disclose the information required in said subsections
with respect to their interest holders.
(3) The general character and nature of the applicant's business.
(4) The length of time that the applicant has been in the business of the
character specified in response to Subsection C(3) above.
(5) The location (including street address and legal description) and
telephone number of the premises for which the adult
establishment permit is sought.
(6) The specific name of the business that is to be operated under the
conditional use permit for the adult establishment.
(7) The identity of each fee simple owner of the premises.
(8) A diagram showing the internal and external configuration of the
premises, including all doors, windows, entrances, exits, the fixed
structural internal features of the premises, plus the interior
rooms, walls, partitions, stages, performance areas, and restrooms.
(A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's
or architect's blueprint shall not be required; provided, however,
that each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some
designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated
§ 245-16.1 TREES § 245-16.1
211:533
scale or with marked dimensions to an accuracy of plus or minus
six inches and sufficient to show clearly the various interior
dimensions of all areas of the permitted premises and to
demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The
approval or use of the diagram required pursuant to this subsection
shall not be deemed to be, and may not be interpreted or construed
to constitute, any other Village approval otherwise required
pursuant to applicable Village ordinances and regulations.)
(9) The specific type(s) of adult establishment(s) that the applicant
proposes to operate on the premises.
(10) A copy of each adult establishment's licenses or permits required
by this Code or state law currently held by the applicant, or any of
the individuals identified in the application pursuant to Subsection
C(1) or (2) above.
(11) The name of the individual(s) who shall be the day-to-day, on-site
manager(s) of the proposed adult establishment.
(12) The fee for a conditional use permit application, as set forth in
§ 245-16C.
(13) Any other information the Zoning Administrator or Plan
Commission may reasonably require to apply the requirements of
this chapter.
(14) The Village reserves the right to require a survey from a surveyor
licensed by the State of Wisconsin to determine the spacing
requirements under this chapter.
E. Incomplete applications returned. Any application for a conditional use
permit for an adult establishment that does not include all of the
information and documents required pursuant to this chapter, as well as
the required fees, shall be deemed to be incomplete and shall not be
acted on by the Plan Commission. The Village shall give the applicant a
written notification and explanation of such action pursuant to this
section.
F. Applicant cooperation required. An applicant for an adult establishment
permit shall cooperate fully in the inspections and investigations
conducted by the Village. The applicant's failure or refusal to: (1) give
any information reasonably relevant to the investigation of the
application; (2) allow the premises to be inspected; (3) appear at any
reasonable time and place, or (4) otherwise cooperate with the
investigation and inspection required by this chapter shall constitute an
admission by the applicant that the applicant is ineligible for a
conditional use permit for an adult establishment and shall be grounds
for denial of the permit by the Plan Commission.
G. Time for issuance or denial. The conditional use permit process shall be
identical to that set forth in § 245-16D; however, the consideration by
§ 245-16.1 WATERFORD CODE § 245-16.1
211:534
the Plan Commission of the conditional use permit application shall be
as set forth in this section.
H. Standards for issuance or denial of permit.
(1) Issuance. The Plan Commission shall issue a conditional use permit
for an adult establishment to an applicant if the Plan Commission
finds and determines all of the following:
(a) All information and documents required by this chapter for
issuance of an adult establishment permit have been properly
provided.
(b) No person identified in the application may:
[1] Have been denied a conditional use permit for an adult
establishment within 12 months immediately preceding
the date of the application;
[2] Be a person whose conditional use permit for an adult
establishment has been revoked within 12 months
immediately preceding the date of the application; or
[3] Be a person whose conditional use permit for an adult
establishment is under suspension at the time of
application.
(c) The adult establishment and the premises comply with all
requirements under this chapter and the applicant has
obtained whatever licenses are required under any other
provision of this Code or the state, if any.
(d) The applicant has signed the permit he or she has received
indicating his or her acceptance of the conditions of the
permit.
(2) Denial. If the Plan Commission determines that the applicant has
not met any one or more of the conditions set forth in this section,
then the Plan Commission shall deny issuance of the conditional
use permit for the adult establishment and shall give the applicant
a written notification and explanation of such denial. The criteria
for a conditional use permit listed in § 245-16A shall not be
applicable.
I. Enforcement.
(1) A violation of any conditions of a conditional use permit for an adult
establishment is a violation of this chapter.
(2) Notwithstanding any other remedy, a violation of any conditions of
a conditional use permit for an adult establishment shall be
grounds for revocation of the permit. The procedure for revocation
shall be as set forth in § 245-16G.
§ 245-16.1 TREES § 245-16.1
211:535
§ 245-17. Swimming pools. [Added 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 464]
§ 245-17.1. Fireworks, explosives and ammunition. [Added
5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 541]
J. Continued conforming status; amendments.
(1) An adult establishment lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to
the grant of the conditional use permit for the adult establishment,
if a protected use is located within 150 feet of the adult
establishment.
(2) The requirements for the amendment of a conditional use permit
shall be as set forth in § 245-16H. Consideration of the amendment
shall be as set forth herein.
A. Definition. In this section, "swimming pool" shall have the meaning set
forth in Chapter 98, Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical
Codes, § 98-27A, of this Municipal Code.
B. Permit required. See § 98-27A of this Municipal Code.
C. Use permitted. Swimming pools are permitted in any zoning district as
an accessory structure, subject to the following:
(1) The swimming pool must be intended for the sole use of the
occupants and guests of the principal use of the property on which
the pool is located.
(2) A swimming pool, together with its surrounding walk, deck, patio,
diving platforms and bathhouses, shall be considered an accessory
structure, shall be so located that all parts of the complex are in
conformity with the setback and yard requirements of the
applicable district, and shall not, together will all other accessory
structures located on the lot, exceed the maximum accessory
structure limitation for lots in the applicable zoning district. No
swimming pool shall be located in the front or side yard of the
principal building.
(3) A barrier to entry shall be required as set forth in § 195-3 of this
Municipal Code. Where a fence is required, a fence permit
pursuant to § 245-14 of this Municipal Code is required.
(4) Except for a properly installed diving board, access ladder, deck, or
safety railing, there shall be an unobstructed area of at least three
feet surrounding the entire pool for aboveground pools. [Amended
4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 496]
A. Fireworks.
(1) Commercial novelty fireworks. The seasonal sales of commercial
novelty fireworks in the Village may be allowed as an accessory use
§ 245-16.1 WATERFORD CODE § 245-17.1
211:536
§ 245-17.2. Regulation of cell phone transmission towers. [Added
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 650]
in the Business and Commercial District, Business and Industrial
District, and a Planned Community Development District if the
district is approved for commercial or industrial use and the use
is not specifically excluded therein, but a conditional use permit or
Precise Implementation Plan for such sales must be approved by
the Plan Commission in advance of any such sales, and a permit
therefor must be granted as set forth in Chapter 132. [Amended
8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
(2) Statutory fireworks. Statutory fireworks may be displayed in the
Village in a nonresidential district, but any person wishing to
display statutory fireworks anywhere in the Village must first
obtain a permit therefor as set forth in Chapter 132.
B. Storage.
(1) No person may store explosives in any district in the Village, except
in an Industrial District if allowed by the Board of Appeals.
(2) No person may store commercial novelty fireworks or statutory
fireworks in any district in the Village, except in an Industrial
District if allowed by the Board of Appeals, or as may be permitted
in connection with seasonal sales of commercial novelty fireworks
for which approval has been obtained pursuant to Subsection A(1)
and a permit has been obtained pursuant to Chapter 132, or a
display of statutory fireworks, for which a permit has been obtained
pursuant to Chapter 132.
A. Purpose. Wisconsin Statutes § 66.0404 specifies the manner in which a
political subdivision can use zoning to regulate cell phone towers and
provides for specific regulations that a political subdivision may not
apply. This section sets forth the Village's regulatory authority in
accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0404, and the provisions of this section
take precedence over the provisions of any other section of the Zoning
Code, including the application process and the procedures for
issuance of permits.
B. Applicability. The Village's regulatory power extends to three types of
projects, all for the installation of types of cell phone transmission
facilities:
(1) Projects requiring construction of a new tower.
(2) Projects requiring substantial modification of an existing tower and
facilities, but not construction of a new tower. Projects of this type
are referred to as "class 1 co-location."
§ 245-17.1 TREES § 245-17.2
211:537
(3) Projects requiring neither construction of a new tower nor
substantial modification of an existing tower and facilities. Projects
of this type are referred to as "class 2 co-location."
C. Definitions. The definitions contained in Wis. Stats. § 66.0404(1) are
hereby adopted and incorporated by reference.
D. Siting and construction of any new mobile service support structure
and facilities or the substantial modification of an existing support
structure and mobile service facilities (class 1 co-location).
(1) Conditional use permit required. A conditional use permit is
required for the siting and construction of a new mobile service
support structure and facility and/or the substantial modification of
an existing support structure and mobile service facilities (class 1
co-location) and, notwithstanding any other provision of this Code,
is subject only to the conditions set forth in this chapter and the
requirements of the Building Code.111
(2) Applications for permits. Applications for permits shall be provided
by the Village Clerk. Applications shall be completed and filed with
the Zoning Administrator and shall include the following
information:
(a) Name and business address and contact information for the
applicant.
(b) Location of the proposed or affected support structure.
(c) The location of the proposed mobile service facility.
(d) If the application substantially modifies an existing support
structure, a construction plan which describes the proposed
modification to the support structure and the equipment and
network components, including antennas, transmitters,
receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling and related
equipment associated with the proposed modifications.
(e) If the application is to construct a new mobile service support
structure, a construction plan which describes a proposed
mobile service support structure and equipment network
components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base
stations, power supplies, cabling and related equipment to be
placed on or around the new mobile service support structure.
(f) If the application is to construct a new mobile service support
structure, an explanation as to why the applicant chose the
proposed location and why the applicant did not choose colocation,
including a sworn statement from the individual who
has responsibility over the placement of the mobile service
111. Editor's Note: See Ch. 98, Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical Code.
§ 245-17.2 WATERFORD CODE § 245-17.2
211:538
support structure, attesting that co-location within the
applicant's search ring would not result in the same mobile
service functionality, coverage and capacity, is technically
unfeasible or is economically burdensome to the mobile service
provider.
(g) If an applicant submits an application for a permit to engage in
an activity described in this section, which contains all the
information required under Subsection D(2)(a) through (f)
above, the Zoning Administrator shall consider the application
complete. If the Zoning Administrator does not believe the
application complete, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the
applicant in writing, within 10 days of receiving the
application, that the application is not complete. The written
notification shall specify in detail the required information that
was incomplete. An applicant may resubmit an application as
often as necessary until it is complete.
(3) Referral to Plan Commission.
(a) If the application is complete as determined by the Zoning
Administrator, the matter shall be referred to the Plan
Commission for its review.
(b) Within 90 days of its receipt of a complete application, the Plan
Commission shall complete all of the following or the applicant
may consider the application approved, except that the
applicant and the Plan Commission may agree in writing to an
extension of the ninety-day period:
[1] Review the application to determine whether it complies
with all applicable aspects of the Village's Building Code
and, subject to the limitations in this section, zoning
ordinances.
[2] Make a final decision whether to approve or deny the
application.
[3] Notify the applicant, in writing, of its final decision.
[4] If the decision is to deny application, include with the
written notification substantial evidence that supports the
decision.
(c) The Plan Commission may deny an application if an applicant
refuses to evaluate the feasibility of co-location within the
applicant's search ring and provide the sworn statement
described under Subsection D(2)(f).
(d) If an applicant provides the Plan Commission with an
engineering certification showing that a mobile service
support structure, or an existing structure, is designed to
§ 245-17.2 TREES § 245-17.2
211:539
collapse within a smaller area than the setback or fall zone
area required in a zoning ordinance, that zoning ordinance
does not apply to such a structure unless the Plan Commission
provides the applicant with substantial evidence that the
engineering certification is flawed.
(e) The fee for the permit shall be set by the Village Board and
shall comply with Wis. Stats. § 66.0404(4)(d)2, i.e., it shall not
exceed $3,000.
(4) Surety. A performance bond shall be required in the amount of
$20,000 prior to the issuance of a permit under this section to
insure that the requirements of this chapter are maintained by the
permittee.
E. Co-location on existing support structures (class 2 co-location).
(1) A permit is required for a class 2 co-location. A class 2 co-location is
a permitted use but still requires the issuance of a permit.
(2) Applications for a permit shall be provided by the Village Clerk.
Applications shall be made and filed with the Zoning Administrator
and shall include the following information:
(a) Name and business address and contact information for the
applicant.
(b) Location of the proposed or affected support structure.
(c) The location of the proposed mobile service facility.
(3) A class 2 co-location is subject to the same requirements for the
issuance of a building permit to which any other type of commercial
development or land use development is subject.
(4) If an applicant submits an application to the Zoning Administrator
for a permit to engage in a class 2 co-location and the application
contains all of the information required by Subsection E(2), the
Zoning Administrator shall consider the application complete. If
the required information is not in the application, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing, within five days
of receiving the application, that the application is not complete.
The written notification shall specify in detail the required
information that was incomplete. An applicant may resubmit an
application as often as necessary until it is complete.
(5) Within 45 days of its receipt of a complete application, the Zoning
Administrator shall complete all of the following or the applicant
may consider the application approved, except that the applicant
and the Zoning Administrator may agree in writing to an extension
of the forty-five-day period:
§ 245-17.2 WATERFORD CODE § 245-17.2
211:540
(a) Make a final decision whether to approve or deny the
application.
(b) Notify the applicant, in writing, of the final decision.
(c) If the application is approved, issue the applicant the relevant
permit.
(d) If the decision is to deny the application, include with the
written notification substantial evidence that supports the
decision.
(6) The fee for the permit shall be established by the Village Board and
set forth in the Fee Schedule and shall comply with Wis. Stats. s.
66.0404(4)(d)1.
(7) Surety. A performance bond may be required in an amount no
greater than $20,000 prior to the issuance of a permit under this
section to insure that the requirements of this chapter are
maintained by the permittee.
F. No mobile service support structure or co-location is allowed on Village
property without the authorization of the Village Board.
§ 245-17.2 TREES § 245-17.2
211:541

ARTICLE V
District Regulations
§ 245-18. Single Family Residence District. [Amended 3-8-1999 by
Ord. No. 375; 8-9-1999 by Ord. No. 383; 9-24-2001 by Ord. No. 414;
9-22-2003 by Ord. No. 438; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 7-24-2006 by
Ord. No. 500; 4-23-2007 by Ord. No. 513; 1-28-2008 by Ord. No.
523; 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 625; 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
A. There shall be an R-1 Single Family Residence District, with specific
requirements as follows:
(1) Single Family Residence District Regulations.
(a) Minimum lot width: 60 feet at the setback line.
(b) Minimum lot size: 6,500 square feet.
(c) Street setback: 25 feet.
(d) Side yards. Not less than 10 feet per side; provided, however,
that the side yards may be reduced to five feet per side with the
written, recorded agreement between abutting property
owners.
(e) Rear setback: Not less than 25 feet.
(2) Substandard lots. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.10015, any lot legally
created before a revision of this chapter that met the applicable lot
size requirements when it was created, but does not meet current
lot size requirements, may be used for a building site if it meets the
conditions set forth in that statute. The Zoning Administrator shall
adjust the applicable area requirements to enable construction.
(3) Rear setback. Accessory buildings are allowed in the rear setback.
(4) Shoreline setbacks.
(a) In every instance where a single-family lot abuts shoreline, no
dwelling or part of a dwelling may be built within 40 feet of the
ordinary high water mark, except as set forth in Subsection
A(4)(b).
(b) Shoreline averaging. In neighborhoods existing prior to August
12, 1996, (the date of passage of Ordinance No. 340) where
50% or more of the lots with river frontage within 500 feet of
the building site contain occupied residences, the shoreline
setback for a particular building site shall be established by
averaging the distance of the two adjacent residences from the
shoreline at its ordinary high water mark. If one adjacent lot is
vacant, the distance of 40 feet shall be used for the calculation.
If both adjacent lots are vacant, the setback shall be 40 feet. In
§ 245-18 TREES § 245-18
211:543
§ 245-19. Two Family Residence District. [Added 3-8-1999 by Ord.
No. 375; amended 3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 376; 7-28-2003 by Ord. No.
436; 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
no case shall the combined rear yard/shoreline setback be less
than 25 feet.
(5) Regulations applicable to all single-family dwellings:
(a) The dwelling unit must be a site-built home, a modular home,
or a manufactured (mobile) home.
(b) The dwelling must have a masonry finish at the base of the
dwelling.
(c) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(d) Minimum required parking: see § 245-15.
B. Permitted, conditional and accessory uses. In the Single Family
Residence District, no building or premises shall be used and no
building shall be erected, moved or structurally altered, unless
otherwise provided in this chapter, except as set forth in Appendix A,
Table of Land Uses.112
A. There shall be an R-2 Two Family Residence District, with specific
requirements as follows:
(1) Two Family Residence District.
(a) Minimum lot width: 80 feet at the setback line.
(b) Minimum lot area: 10,890 square feet.
(c) Street setback: 25 feet.
(d) Side yard setback: 10 feet.
(e) Rear setback: Not less than 25 feet.
(2) Substandard lots. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.10015, any lot legally
created before a revision of this chapter that met the applicable lot
size requirements when it was created, but does not meet current
lot size requirements, may be used for a building site if it meets the
conditions set forth in that statute. The Zoning Administrator shall
adjust the applicable area requirements to enable construction.
(3) Rear setback. Accessory buildings are allowed in the rear setback.
(4) Shoreline setbacks.
(a) In every instance where a two-family lot abuts shoreline, no
dwelling or part of a dwelling may be built within 40 feet of the
112. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 245-18 WATERFORD CODE § 245-19
211:544
§ 245-20. Multiple Family Residence District. [Amended 9-13-1993
by Ord. No. 292; 9-26-1994 by Ord. No. 305; 3-8-1999 by Ord. No.
375; 8-9-1999 by Ord. No. 383; 9-24-2001 by Ord. No. 414;
4-23-2007 by Ord. No. 513; 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
ordinary high water mark, except as set forth in Subsection
A(4)(b).
(b) Shoreline averaging. In neighborhoods existing prior to August
12, 1996, (the date of passage of Ordinance No. 340) where
50% or more of the lots with river frontage within 500 feet of
the building site contain occupied residences, the shoreline
setback for a particular building site shall be established by
averaging the distance of the two adjacent residences from the
shoreline at its ordinary high water mark. If one adjacent lot is
vacant, the distance of 40 feet shall be used for the calculation.
If both adjacent lots are vacant, the setback shall be 40 feet. In
no case shall the combined rear yard/shoreline setback be less
than 25 feet.
(5) Regulations applicable to all two-family dwellings.
(a) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(b) Minimum required parking: see § 245-15.
B. Permitted, conditional and accessory uses. In the Two Family Residence
District, no building or premises shall be used and no building shall be
erected, moved or structurally altered, unless otherwise provided in
this chapter, except as set forth in Appendix A, Table of Land Uses.113
A. Area requirements:
(1) Minimum lot width: 80 feet at the setback line.
(2) Minimum lot area: 10,890 square feet.
(3) Street setback: 25 feet.
(4) Side yards: 10 feet per side.
(5) Rear setback: Not less than 25 feet.
(6) Substandard lots. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.10015, any lot legally
created before a revision of this chapter that met the applicable lot
size requirements when it was created, but does not meet current
lot size requirements, may be used for a building site if it meets the
conditions set forth in that statute. The Zoning Administrator shall
adjust the applicable area requirements to enable construction.
(7) Rear setback. Accessory buildings are allowed in the rear setback.
113. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 245-19 TREES § 245-20
211:545
§ 245-21. B-2 Business and Commercial District. [Amended
10-23-1995 by Ord. No. 322; 8-9-1999 by Ord. No. 383; 1-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 489; 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 505; 4-23-2007 by Ord. No.
513; 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
(8) Shoreline setbacks.
(a) In every instance where a multiple-family lot abuts shoreline,
no dwelling or part of a dwelling may be built within 40 feet of
the ordinary high water mark, except as set forth in Subsection
A(4)(b).
(b) Shoreline averaging. In neighborhoods existing prior to August
12, 1996, (the date of passage of Ordinance No. 340) where
50% or more of the lots with river frontage within 500 feet of
the building site contain occupied residences, the shoreline
setback for a particular building site shall be established by
averaging the distance of the two adjacent residences from the
shoreline at its ordinary high water mark. If one adjacent lot is
vacant, the distance of 40 feet shall be used for the calculation.
If both adjacent lots are vacant, the setback shall be 40 feet. In
no case shall the combined rear yard/shoreline setback be less
than 25 feet.
(9) Height. Buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered shall not
exceed 45 feet in height.
(10) Auto parking. See § 245-15.
B. Permitted, conditional and accessory uses. In the Multiple Family
Residence District, no building or premises shall be used and no
building shall be erected, moved or structurally altered, unless
otherwise provided in this chapter, except as set forth in Appendix A,
Table of Land Uses.114
A. Area requirements.
(1) Minimum lot width: None.
(2) Minimum lot area: None.
(3) Street setback: None required, unless a street setback is imposed
in the CUP or PCDD process, where the Plan Commission may
impose additional setback requirements where circumstances,
including neighboring properties, conformance with the locale, or
site requirements require additional setback consideration.
(4) Side yards: Business or mixed use: minimum required to meet the
provisions of the applicable building code.
(5) Rear setback: Not less than 25 feet.
114. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 245-20 WATERFORD CODE § 245-21
211:546
§ 245-22. B-1 Business and Industrial District. [Amended 8-12-1996
by Ord. No. 340; 8-9-1999 by Ord. No. 383; 12-11-2006 by Ord. No.
505; 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
(6) Shoreline setbacks. In every instance where a business district
abuts shoreline, no structure or part of a structure may be built
within 40 feet of the ordinary high water mark.
(7) Height. Buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered shall not
exceed 45 feet in height.
(8) Residential uses within the Business and Commercial District shall
be permitted only to the extent that the residential use on the
ground floor does not exceed 50% of the square footage of the
ground floor. Residential uses shall be allowed in up to 100% of a
structure in this district with a conditional use permit.
(9) Auto parking. See § 245-15.
(10) Vision clearance triangle. See § 245-13H.
B. Permitted, conditional and accessory uses. In the Business District, no
building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected,
moved or structurally altered, unless otherwise provided in this
chapter, except as set forth in Appendix A, Table of Land Uses.115
A. Area requirements.
(1) Minimum lot width and area: None.
(2) Street setback: None required, unless a street setback is imposed
in the CUP or PCDD process, where the Plan Commission may
impose additional setback requirements where circumstances,
including neighboring properties, conformance with the locale, or
site requirements require additional setback consideration, or a
greater setback is required to meet the bufferyard requirements
for the specific use (see Articles X and XI).
(3) Side yards: 10 feet or greater if required to meet the bufferyard
requirements for the specific use (see Articles X and XI).
(4) Rear setback: Not less than 25 feet.
(5) Shoreline setbacks. In every instance where an industrial district
abuts shoreline, no structure or part of a structure may be built
within 40 feet of the ordinary high water mark.
(6) Height. 45 feet, provided that appurtenances may be taller as set
forth in § 245-12.
(7) Auto parking. See § 245-15.
115. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 245-21 TREES § 245-22
211:547
§ 245-23. Floodplain Districts [Floodway District (FW), Floodplain
Fringe Overlay District (FFO) and General Floodplain District
(GFP)]. [Amended 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 505]
See Chapter 256.
§ 245-24. (Reserved)117
§ 245-25. Wellhead Protection Area Overlay District. [Added
7-12-1999 by Ord. No. 381; amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 462]
(8) Vision clearance triangle. See § 245-13H.
B. Permitted, conditional and accessory uses. In the Industrial District, no
building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected,
moved or structurally altered, unless otherwise provided in this
chapter, except as set forth in Appendix A, Table of Land Uses.116 No
residential, educational or institutional uses are allowed in the
industrial district.
A. Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 62.23(7)(c)
and the amendments thereto, which grants the Village the authority to
enact zoning regulations to encourage the protection of groundwater
resources and to promote health and the general welfare.
B. Purpose. The purpose of the Wellhead Protection Area Overlay District
is to institute land use regulations and restrictions protecting the
municipal water supply of the Village of Waterford.
C. Application of regulations. The regulations specified in this section shall
apply to the areas of the Village of Waterford that lie within a twelvehundred-
foot radius of Well No. 3, which is the area identified as the
Wellhead Protection Area for Well No. 3, as set forth in the Wellhead
Protection Plan for Well No. 3, Village of Waterford, May 13, 1999, and
for the area within the Village identified as the Wellhead Protection
Area for Well Nos. 4 and 5, legally described in Subsection E, as set
forth in the Wellhead Protection Plan for Well No. 4 and No. 5, Village of
Waterford, August, 2004, and are in addition to the requirements in the
underlying zoning district, if any. If there is a conflict between the
provisions of this overlay district and the underlying zoning district, the
more restrictive provision shall apply.
D. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AQUIFER — A saturated permeable geologic formation that contains
and will yield significant quantities of water.
116. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
117. Editor's Note: Former § 245-24, Floodplain Fringe Overlay District, was repealed
12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 505. See now Ch. 256, Floodplain Zoning.
§ 245-22 WATERFORD CODE § 245-25
211:548
CONE OF DEPRESSION — The area around a well, in which the water
level has been lowered at least one foot by pumping of the well.
FIVE-YEAR TIME OF TRAVEL — The recharge area upgradient of the
cone of depression, the outer boundary of which it is determined or
estimated that groundwater will take five years to reach a pumping
well.
MUNICIPAL WATER SUPPLY — The municipal water supply of the
Village of Waterford.
RECHARGE AREA — The area which encompasses all areas or features
that, by surface infiltration of water that reaches the zone of saturation
of an aquifer, supplies groundwater to a well.
THIRTY-DAY TIME OF TRAVEL — The recharge area upgradient of
a well, or its cone of depression, the outer boundary of which it is
determined or estimated that groundwater will take 30 days to reach a
pumping well.
ZONE OF SATURATION — The saturated zone is the area of
unconsolidation, fractured or porous material that is saturated with
water and constitutes groundwater.
E. Wellhead Protection Area Overlay District. The Wellhead Protection
Area Overlay District (WHPA) is intended to protect the groundwater
recharge area for Well Nos. 3, 4 and No. 5 from contamination. The
WHPA is necessary to institute land use regulations and restrictions
within the area which contributes water directly to the municipal water
supply, so as to promote public health, safety and welfare in the Village
and to minimize public costs. The boundaries of each WHPA are shown
in the "Wellhead Protection Plan for the Village of Waterford Municipal
Well No. 3," and in "Exhibit A — Wells No. 4 and 5 Wellhead Protection
Area" to the "Wellhead Protection Plan for the Village of Waterford
Municipal Wells No. 4 and No. 5" and shall be incorporated on the
official Village of Waterford map.
(1) The wellhead protection zone for Well No. 3 is described as that
part of the Village of Waterford lying within the twelve-hundredfoot
radius around Well No. 3.
(2) The wellhead protection zones for Well Nos. 4 and 5 are delineated
on "Exhibit A — Wells No. 4 and 5 Wellhead Protection Area" to the
"Wellhead Protection Plan for the Village of Waterford Municipal
Wells No. 4 and No. 5" and described as follows: that part of the
Village of Waterford and Town of Waterford described as follows:
from the NE corner of Section 36 T4N R19E, N 0-9-17 W 187.3 feet
along said section line to the point of beginning. From the point of
beginning, N 0-9-17 W, 1673.9 feet; hence N 51-26-13 W, 1656.82
feet; Hence S 87-52-2 W, 1563.09 feet; Hence S 42-42-34 W,
1311.64 feet; Hence S 0-16-26 E, 1961.38 feet; Hence S 44-27-28
E, 1214.5 feet; Hence N 87-44-28 E, 1821.43; Hence N 45 E,
1515.6 feet to the point of beginning. The area legally described
§ 245-25 TREES § 245-25
211:549
herein which is located in the Town of Waterford shall be excluded
herefrom and subject to an extraterritorial zoning ordinance
regulating the uses within that area, but if that land is annexed to
the Village of Waterford it shall be automatically covered by the
regulations hereunder.
F. Permitted uses. Permitted uses within the WHPA are subject to the
separation distance requirements set forth in Subsection G below, and
the prohibition of uses, activities or structures designated in Subsection
H below, and are also subject to the underlying zoning requirements,
and include:
(1) Public and private parks, provided there are no on-site wastewater
disposal systems.
(2) Playgrounds.
(3) Wildlife areas and natural areas.
(4) Trails such as biking, hiking, skiing, nature and fitness trails.
(5) Residential which is municipally sewered.
(6) Agricultural activities which are conducted in accordance with
USDA-SCS Wisconsin Field Office Technical Guide Specification
590 nutrient management standards.
(7) Commercial and institutional establishments which are municipally
sewered. [Amended 4-23-2007 by Ord. No. 513]
(8) Industrial establishments which are municipally sewered.
G. Separation distance requirements. The following separation distances
as specified in Wis. Admin. Code s. NR 811.16(4)(d) shall be maintained
(and even though a separation distance is listed here, the used may be
further regulated in Subsection H):
(1) Between Well No. 3, 4 or 5 and a stormwater sewer main or any
sanitary sewer main constructed of water main materials and joints
which is pressure tested in place to meet current AWWA 600
specifications: 50 feet.
(2) Between Well No. 3, 4 or 5 and any sanitary sewer main, sanitary
sewer manhole, lift station or single-family residential fuel oil tank:
200 feet.
(3) Between Well No. 3, 4 or 5 and a septic tank or soil adsorption unit
receiving less than 8,000 gallons per day or a stormwater drainage
pond: 400 feet.
(4) Between Well No. 3, 4 or 5 and any gasoline or fuel oil storage tank
installation that has received written approval from the
Department of Commerce or its designated agent under Wis.
Admin. Code s. Comm 10.10: 600 feet.
§ 245-25 WATERFORD CODE § 245-25
211:550
(5) Between Well No. 3, 4 or 5 and land application of municipal,
commercial or industrial waste; or industrial, commercial or
municipal waste water storage structures: 1,000 feet.
(6) Between Well No. 3, 4 or 5 and any post-consumer recycling facility
engaged in solid waste storage, transportation, transfer,
incineration, air curtain destructor, processing, wood burning, onetime
disposal or small demolition; coal storage area; salt or deicing
material storage area; gasoline or fuel oil storage tanks that have
not received written approval from the Department of Commerce
or its designated agent under Wis. Admin. Code s. Comm 10.10;
bulk fuel storage facilities; and pesticide or fertilizer handling or
storage facilities: 1,200 feet.
(7) Separation distances listed in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR
811.16(4)(d) but not listed in this subsection shall be applicable in
the Village of Waterford, as those uses, activities or structures are
also regulated in the WHPA.
H. Prohibited uses. The method of regulation by prohibition of certain uses
is employed to provide the greatest assurance that inadvertent
discharge of pollutants into the groundwater supply will not occur,
since such an event would result in almost certain contamination of the
public water supply and costly mitigation or remediation for which
liability is difficult or impossible to establish. The prohibited uses,
activities or structures inside the WHPA include:
(1) Above- and below-ground hydrocarbon or petroleum storage tanks
that have not received written approval from the Department of
Commerce or its designated agent under Wis. Admin. Code s.
Comm 10.10.
(2) Cemeteries.
(3) Chemical manufacturers (Standard Industrial Classification Major
Group 28).
(4) Bulk coal storage.
(5) Dry cleaners with on-site cleaning facilities.
(6) Hazardous, toxic or radioactive materials transfer and storage
under Title III or SARA planning.
(7) Industrial lagoons and pits.
(8) Landfills and any other solid waste facility, except post-consumer
recycling.
(9) Manure storage or manure stacks or storage structures.
(10) Nonmetallic earthen materials extraction or sand and gravel pits.
(11) Bulk pesticide and bulk fertilizer transfer or storage.
§ 245-25 TREES § 245-25
211:551
(12)Railroad yards and maintenance stations.
(13) Rendering plants and slaughterhouses.
(14) Bulk salt or bulk deicing material storage.
(15) Salvage or junk yards.
(16) Septage or sludge spreading, storage or treatment.
(17) Septage, wastewater, or sewage lagoons.
(18) Septic tanks, soil adsorption units, or any other private on-site
wastewater treatment systems or holding tanks receiving 8,000
gallons per day or more.
(19) Stockyards and feedlots.
(20) Vehicular services stations, repair, renovation and body working
(gasoline filling stations are allowed if they meet the separation
distance requirements in Subsection G).
(21)Wood preserving.
(22) The boundaries of a landspreading facility for spreading of
petroleum-contaminated soil regulated under Wis. Admin. Code ch.
NR 718 while that facility is in operation.
I. Requirements for existing facilities which may cause or threaten to
cause environmental pollution. Existing facilities within the WHPA at
the time of enactment of this section which may cause or threaten to
cause environmental pollution include, but are not limited to, those
which are named in the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
current Inventory of Sites or Facilities Which May Cause or Threaten to
Cause Environmental Pollution, or the Wisconsin Department of
Commerce's list of underground storage tanks or list of facilities with
hazardous solid waste permits, and all other facilities which are
considered a prohibited use in Subsection H, all of which are
incorporated herein as if fully set forth.
(1) Such facilities as above which exist within the WHPA at the time of
enactment shall provide copies of all federal, state and local facility
operation approval or certificates and on-going environmental
monitoring results to the Village.
(2) Such facilities as above which exist within the WHPA at the time of
enactment shall provide environmental or safety structures/
monitoring to include an operational safety plan, hazardous
material containment, best management practices, stormwater
runoff management and groundwater monitoring.
(3) Such facilities as above which exist within the WHPA at the time of
enactment shall replace equipment, or expand on the site or
property of record associated with the facility, in a manner that
§ 245-25 WATERFORD CODE § 245-25
211:552
improves the environmental and safety technologies already being
utilized.
(4) Such facilities as above which exist within the WHPA at the time of
enactment shall have the responsibility of devising, filing and
maintaining, with the Village, a contingency plan which details how
they intend to respond to any emergency which occurs at their
facility, including notifying municipal, county and state officials.
(5) Such facilities as above shall not engage in or employ a use,
activity, or structure listed in Subsection H above which they did
not engage in or employ at the time of the enactment of this
section, and may only expand those present uses, activities, or
structures on the site or property of record associated with the
facility at the time of enactment in a manner that improves the
environmental and safety technologies already being utilized.
J. Changing technology.
(1) The uses prohibited in the WHPA are prohibited based upon the
combined pollution experience of many individual uses, and the
technology generally employed by a particular use considered to be
of a high risk for pollution to the groundwater resource. As the
technology of other uses change to low- or non-risk materials or
methods, upon petition from such use, after conferring with the
Department of Natural Resources, or other expert opinion, and
after appropriate public notice and hearing, the Village, through
appropriate procedures and actions to change these provisions of
the Municipal Code, may remove from the designated prohibited
uses such uses as are demonstrated convincingly that they no
longer pose a groundwater pollution hazard.
(2) In dealing with uses which attempt to become permissible, under
the terms of the WHPA, by continuing to use pollutant materials but
altering their processing, storage and handling, it is not the
intention to accept alternate or reduced hazards as the basis for
making a use permissible. It is the intention to continue a
prohibition on such uses until the technology of the use removes
reliance upon the pollutant materials or processes deemed to be a
groundwater hazard.
K. Enforcement, violation and penalty. All general and zoning
enforcement, violation and penalty provisions set forth in the Municipal
Code apply to the enforcement of the provisions of this section. In
addition the following provisions apply:
(1) In the event any person, partnership, corporation, or other legal
entity (hereinafter "person") that owns or operates a "facility" as
defined in Subsection I (Requirements for existing facilities which
may cause or threaten to cause environmental pollution), and that
person/facility causes, or is the site of, the release of any
contaminants which endanger the municipal water supply
§ 245-25 TREES § 245-25
211:553
§ 245-26. Municipal Campus District. [Added 2-14-2000 by Ord. No.
388; amended 1-9-2017 by Ord. No. 648; 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
associated with the WHPA, the activity causing said release shall
immediately cease and a cleanup satisfactory to the Village shall
occur.
(2) The person/facility shall be responsible for all costs for cleanup,
Village consultant or outside contractor fees, fees at the invoice
amount plus administrative costs for oversight, review and
documentation, plus the following:
(a) The cost of Village employees' time associated in any way with
the cleanup based on the hourly rate paid to the employee
multiplied by a factor determined by the Village representing
the Village's cost for expenses, benefits, insurance, sick leave,
holidays, worker's compensation, holidays, overtime, vacation,
and similar benefits.
(b) The cost of Village equipment employed in the cleanup.
(c) The cost of mileage incurred on Village vehicles used in any
activity related to the cleanup, or of mileage fees reimbursed
to Village employees attributed to the cleanup.
(d) See also Chapter 137, Hazardous Materials, of this Municipal
Code.
A. There shall be a Municipal Campus District with the following
regulations:
(1) Area requirements. There are no required lot area and width, front,
side, rear, or shoreline, yard, parking, or vision clearance triangle
regulations in the Municipal Campus District. No building or part
of a building may exceed 45 feet in height. More than one building
may be placed on a lot.
(2) Application for use; site plan. All uses and site plans shall be
reviewed and approved by the Plan Commission, and the
Commission may grant approval. The applicant shall submit a site
plan and an operational plan, which shall address the following:
(a) Type of structure(s), whether permanent or temporary,
proposed use of the structure(s), number of employees.
(b) Plat of survey or site plan showing the location, dimensions,
uses and size of the subject site, existing and proposed
structures, existing and proposed easements, streets and other
public ways, off-street parking, loading areas and driveways,
existing and proposed street, side and rear yards and shoreline
setbacks, soil mapping unit lines, types and slopes, ground
surface elevations, vision clearance.
§ 245-25 WATERFORD CODE § 245-26
211:554
§ 245-26.1. Institutional District. [Added 4-23-2007 by Ord. No.
513; amended 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 650; 8-13-2018 by Ord. No.
658]
(c) Existing and proposed landscaping and lighting.
(d) Location of all temporary and permanent signage.
(3) Review and approval. The Village Plan Commission shall conduct a
review, including, but not limited to, the site, existing and proposed
structures, neighboring uses, parking areas, driveway location,
highway access, traffic generation and circulation, drainage,
sewerage and water systems, and the proposed operation. The
rules and directives established by the Plan Commission for the site
shall designate requirements for those items if necessary.
B. Permitted, conditional and accessory uses. In the Municipal Campus
District, no building or premises shall be used and no building shall be
erected, moved or structurally altered, unless otherwise provided in
this chapter, except as set forth in Appendix A, Table of Land Uses.118
A. Minimum area requirements.
(1) Lot width: 100 feet at the front setback line.
(2) Lot area: 10,890 square feet.
(3) Street setback: 25 feet.
(4) Side yards: 10 feet per side.
(5) Rear setback: 25 feet.
(6) Shoreline setbacks. In every instance where an institutional district
abuts shoreline, no structure or part of a structure may be built
within 40 feet of the ordinary high water mark.
(7) Height: Maximum 45 feet.
(8) Exceptions to area requirements.
(a) Substandard lots. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.10015, any lot
legally created before a revision of this chapter that met the
applicable lot size requirements when it was created, but does
not meet current lot size requirements, may be used for a
building site if it meets the conditions set forth in that statute.
The Zoning Administrator shall adjust the applicable area
requirements to enable construction.
(b) Structures in existence on April 23, 2007, that do not meet the
minimum lot sizes, setbacks or yard requirements of this
section shall not be required to conform to the minimum area
118. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 245-26 TREES § 245-26.1
211:555
§ 245-26.2. B-3 Downtown District. [Added 8-13-2018 by Ord. No.
658]
There shall be a B-3 Downtown District, which shall be a business mixeduse
district and consist of all of that land within the Village identified on the
Zoning Map.
requirements (i.e., setbacks or yard requirements) of this
section. Subsequent additions to or reconstruction of said
existing structures will be permitted if the addition or
reconstruction does not decrease the nonconforming setback
and/or yards existing on the date of adoption of this section.
(9) Auto parking. See § 245-15.
(10) Vision clearance triangle. See § 245-13H.
B. Permitted, conditional and accessory uses. In the Institutional District,
no building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected,
moved or structurally altered, unless otherwise provided in this
chapter, except as set forth in Appendix A, Table of Land Uses.119
A. Purpose. It is recognized that lands laid out and buildings erected prior
to the enactment of subdivision and zoning ordinances in the Village,
while their existing uses and lot sizes are grandfathered, may contain
buildings which, because of their history or architecture, may be
suitable for purposes falling outside of typical single-use districts. In
addition, the improvements existing in this area rarely conform to
current, modern setbacks or yard area requirements, and the
enforcement of these requirements may not preserve the character of
the area. This district is designed to recognize and enhance the viability
of the Village Center by allowing and encouraging retail, mixed-use and
civic uses that are compatible with the scale and character of the
Village Center. The goals of this district are:
(1) Maintain and enhance the downtown as one of the predominant
activity center and community gathering place for the Village and
the surrounding region.
(2) Promote and enhance the downtown's vitality and cultural
character by enhancing day and night activity, providing and
maintaining public spaces, and requiring pedestrian-oriented
design.
(3) Protect the significant historical resources in the downtown and
encourage their renovation or adaptive reuse to commercial
structures.
(4) Increase high-quality employment, retail, and diverse mixed-use
and commercial housing opportunities in the downtown area.
119. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 245-26.1 WATERFORD CODE § 245-26.2
211:556
B. Area requirements.
(1) Minimum lot width: Zero, unless necessary to meet the applicable
Building Code.
(2) Minimum lot area: None, provided that there is sufficient area to
satisfy the off-street parking requirements set forth in § 245-15.
(3) Street setback:
(a) All new buildings must be constructed to a zero lot line setback
from the street.
(b) Buildings in existence on the date of the passage of this section
(July 23, 2018) that do not conform to the zero lot line setback
are considered legal nonconforming structures (see
§ 245-10F). Additions to and expansions of existing buildings
should conform to the required setbacks for new buildings
whenever possible.
(4) Side yards: Zero, unless necessary to meet the applicable Building
Code.
(5) Rear setback: There is no required rear setback, except as follows:
(a) There must be a rear setback when necessary to meet the
applicable Building Code.
(b) There must be sufficient area to satisfy the off-street parking
requirements set forth in § 245-15.
(6) Shoreline setbacks. In every instance where a lot abuts shoreline,
there shall be a forty-foot setback from the shoreline at its ordinary
high water mark.
(7) Height. Buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered shall not
exceed 45 feet in height.
(8) Auto parking. See § 245-15, except as follows:
(a) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 245-15N(1), use of onstreet
or the municipal parking lots may not be counted as
meeting the required number of parking stalls for any building
constructed after the effective date of this section unless a
payment in lieu of parking has been assessed against the
building and is paid.
(b) All newly constructed parking lots shall be constructed to the
rear of or underneath buildings.
(9) Vision clearance triangle. See § 245-13H.
C. Permitted, conditional and accessory uses.
§ 245-26.2 TREES § 245-26.2
211:557
§ 245-27. Waterford Heritage Overlay District. [Added 10-13-2003
by Ord. No. 439; amended 1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 471; 1-23-2006 by
(1) Residential uses in existence in the Downtown District on the
effective date of this section are legal nonconforming uses (see
§ 245-10F). No new purely residential use is allowed. All new
residential uses shall be either in a mixed-use building, or shall only
allow residential use for short-term rentals.
(2) An existing residential use may be converted to a mixed-use
(commercial and residential) building or a purely commercial
building. Once converted, the building may not be converted back
to purely residential use.
(3) No more than 50% of the ground floor of a new structure or a
structure converted to a business use may contain a residential
use.
(4) In the Downtown District, no building or premises shall be used
and no building shall be erected, moved or structurally altered,
unless otherwise provided in this chapter, except as set forth in
Appendix A, Table of Land Uses.120
D. Design guidelines and permit requirements and procedures. The design
standards set forth in the publication titled "Design Guidelines:
Waterford Heritage Overlay District," as may be amended from time to
time by resolution of the Village Board, adopted in § 245-27E, shall be
fully applicable in this district, provided that the regulations set forth in
this section shall be applied and shall override any conflicting provision
of the guidelines. The Heritage District Design Committee shall have
the same powers, duties, and procedures in this district as are set forth
in § 245-27F. The Zoning Administrator may deny any application that
he or she determines to be out of compliance with the standards set
forth in § 245-27F.
E. Penalties.
(1) In every instance where work commences upon a project subject to
this section, prior to the Heritage District permit being applied for
and granted, there shall be a double fee imposed for the permit,
and the applicant shall remain required to meet full compliance
with this section.
(2) It shall be unlawful to use or improve any structure or land in
violation of any of the provisions of the section. In addition to
penalties imposed under Chapter 1, Article II, of this Code, the
Village of Waterford may institute appropriate action to enjoin a
violation of this section or to cause any structure so constructed or
altered to be vacated, removed, or altered.
120. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 245-26.2 WATERFORD CODE § 245-27
211:558
Ord. No. 489; 6-11-2012 by Ord. No. 589; 9-24-2012 by Ord. No.
593; 11-11-2013 by Ord. No. 610; 9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 640]
There shall be a Waterford Heritage Overlay District, which shall consist of
properties generally lying between Center Street on the west, Weber Street
on the south, the Racine County Bicycle Trail/Seven Waters Bike Trail on
the east and Rockrohr Court on the north, as specifically shown on the
map attached hereto as Exhibit A and incorporated herein.121 Streets in the
district begin at the middle of the intersection.
A. Purpose.
(1) Area and usage. It is recognized that lands laid out and buildings
erected prior to the enactment of Subdivision and Zoning
Ordinances in the Village, while their existing uses and lot sizes are
grandfathered, may contain buildings which, because of their
history or architecture, may be suitable for purposes falling outside
of existing allowed uses. In addition, the improvements existing in
this area rarely conform to current, modern setbacks or yard area
requirements, and the enforcement of these requirements may not
preserve the character of the area. This zoning classification is
intended to allow flexibility in allowing the use and, for certain
uses, the site plan of a property which may not precisely conform to
the uses and site layouts permitted in the underlying district, but
which, because of the lot layout, building history or architecture, or
other valid reason, may be suitable for an alternate use or site plan
layout.
(2) Visual and aesthetic character. The Village wishes to protect,
enhance and preserve the improvements in the original downtown
and in the surrounding areas that transition to the downtown.
Doing so fosters civic pride, stabilizes and improves property
values, enhances the visual and aesthetic character of the Village,
protects and enhances the attraction to residents and visitors, and
supports and stimulates business.
B. Uses.
(1) Permitted use. All uses allowed in the underlying district are
allowed in the Waterford Heritage Overlay District. The following
uses are also allowed; provided, however, that such use shall not
interfere with or be detrimental to the uses in the underlying
district or a neighboring use.
(a) Bed-and-breakfast establishments as home occupations which
provide not more than two bedrooms for rent with a maximum
occupancy of four guests at any one time.
121. Editor's Note: The map of the Waterford Heritage Overlay District is on file in the Village
offices.
§ 245-27 TREES § 245-27
211:559
(b) Temporary seasonal gift or antique shop use of the property for
not more than four days at any one time and not more than
eight days of such use in any twelve-month period.
(c) Hybrid uses. In an area where the underlying zoning is
Business and Commercial District, but the building was
originally constructed for another use, a part of the premises
may be used in conformance with the building's original use. In
the event that the entire premises is to be used for the original
or any other use that is not in conformance with the Business
and Commercial District zoning, the owner shall apply for a
zoning amendment to change the underlying use. [Amended
8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
(2) Conditional uses. Other uses similar to an underlying use with
Village Plan Commission approval. The Plan Commission shall
conduct a review, including, but not limited to, the site, existing and
proposed structures, neighboring uses, parking areas, driveway
location, highway access, traffic generation and circulation,
drainage, sewerage and water systems, and the proposed
operation. No conditional use in the overlay district shall be
approved unless the Plan Commission finds that the use is
appropriate for the neighborhood, the site, and the building
pursuant to the purpose set forth in this section.
C. Area, height, side yard, setback, rear yard, lot area per family, and auto
parking. Except as they may be modified for certain uses pursuant to
Subsection D of this section, or certain setback or yard requirements
that must be met pursuant to the Design Guidelines adopted in
Subsection E of this section, the area, height, side yard, setback, rear
yard, lot area per family, and auto parking requirements shall be as set
forth in the underlying district.
D. Modification of Zoning Code requirements for school, municipal or
institutional uses. For school, municipal, or institutional uses, the area,
height, side yard, setback, rear yard, lot area per family, vision
clearance triangle, parking and/or other area-type zoning requirements
for a lot or site located within the overlay district may be modified
under the following conditions. A use may not be authorized by a zoning
modification permit.
(1) Application for zoning modification permit. An application for a
zoning modification permit shall be made to the Village Plan
Commission and shall include the following where pertinent and
necessary for proper review by the Village Plan Commission. The
applicant shall submit the number of copies and attachments
required by the Clerk.
(a) Names and addresses of the applicant, owner of the site,
architect, professional engineer, contractor, when engaged,
§ 245-27 WATERFORD CODE § 245-27
211:560
and the property owners of record of all lands extending 100
feet immediately abutting or lying opposite of the subject site.
(b) Description of the subject site by lot, block, and recorded
subdivision or by metes and bounds; address of the subject
site; type of structure; proposed operator or use of the
structure or site; number of employees; and the zoning district
within which the subject site lies.
(c) Plat of survey prepared by a land surveyor registered in
Wisconsin or other map drawn to scale and approved by the
Village Plan Commission, showing the location, property
boundaries, dimensions, uses, and size of the following: subject
site; existing and proposed structures; existing and proposed
easements, streets, and other public ways; off-street parking,
loading areas and driveways; existing highway access
restrictions; existing and proposed street, side and rear yards.
(d) In addition, the plat of survey shall show the allocation,
elevation, and use of any abutting lands and their structures
within 40 feet of the subject site; soil mapping unit lines, types
and slopes, ground surface elevations; and existing and
proposed landscaping.
(e) Additional information, as may be required by the Village
Board, Village Plan Commission, or Village Engineer.
(f) Conditions such as landscaping, type of construction,
construction commencement and completion dates, sureties,
lighting.
(g) A detailed list of the zoning modifications sought.
(2) Fees. Every applicant for zoning modification permit shall pay to
the Clerk of the Village of Waterford a fee in an amount set by the
Village Board specifically as and for the zoning modification permit
application process, which fee shall assist the Village in covering
the cost of investigation, administration, publication, and hearing.
This fee shall be paid at the time of application and shall be
retained by the Village regardless of the outcome on the
application. This fee shall be in addition to any and all required
permit fees within the various building codes of the Village of
Waterford.
(3) Public hearing. Upon application for a zoning modification permit,
the Village Clerk shall establish a date for public hearing before the
Plan Commission of the Village of Waterford, shall mail notice to
the abutting property owners as listed in the application of the
applicant, and shall publish the notice as a Class 2 notice.
(4) The Village Plan Commission shall conduct a review, including, but
not limited to, the site, existing and proposed structures,
§ 245-27 TREES § 245-27
211:561
conformance with required Design Guidelines, neighboring uses,
parking areas, driveway location, highway access, traffic
generation and circulation, drainage, sewerage and water systems,
and the proposed operation. Upon review and a public hearing
by the Plan Commission, and its consideration of the following
criteria, the Plan Commission shall make a recommendation
regarding the issuance of the permit, and shall forward its
recommendation to the Village Board. The criteria to be considered
are:
(a) The determination as to whether the modification proposed is
hazardous, harmful, or offensive, within the neighborhood or
locale where proposed;
(b) Whether the modification proposed is adverse to the
environment;
(c) Whether the modification proposed adversely affects the
property value, the aesthetics, or the general well-being of the
neighborhood where proposed; and
(d) Whether the modification proposed presents safety or other
issues that cannot be resolved.
(5) Village Board consideration. The Village Board shall review the
proposed modification and the recommendation of the Village Plan
Commission, and shall determine whether to issue, issue with
conditions, or deny the zoning modification permit. If written
objection to the modification by is received from 20% or more of
the property owners of record of all lands extending 100 feet
immediately abutting or lying opposite of the subject site, the
Village Board shall not issue said permit except by the favorable
vote of 3/4 of the members of the Village Board.
(6) Appeals. Appeals from the decision of the Village Board shall be
made to the Board of Appeals pursuant to § 245-54 of this
Municipal Code, and the Board of Appeals shall have the power to
hear and decide such matters.
(7) Penalties.
(a) In every instance where work commences upon a project
subject to this section, prior to the zoning modification permit
being applied for and granted, there shall be a double fee
imposed for the permit, and the applicant shall remain
required to meet full compliance with this section.
(b) It shall be unlawful to use or improve any structure or land in
violation of any of the provisions of the section. In addition to
penalties imposed under Chapter 1, Article II, of this Code, the
Village of Waterford may institute appropriate action to enjoin
§ 245-27 WATERFORD CODE § 245-27
211:562
a violation of this section or to cause any structure so
constructed or altered to be vacated or removed.
E. Design guidelines.
(1) Guidelines adopted. The design standards set forth in the
publication titled "Design Guidelines: Waterford Heritage Overlay
District," as may be amended from time to time by resolution of the
Village Board, are adopted by the Village of Waterford, are
available at the Village Hall, and are published on the Village of
Waterford website. These guidelines, which may be referred to as
the Heritage District Guidelines, shall be used by the Village, the
Plan Commission and the Heritage District Design Committee as
design standards for properties located within non-residentially
zoned areas lying within the Waterford Heritage Overlay District.
(2) Purpose of Design Guidelines. The Heritage District Guidelines are
intended to improve and protect the appearance, value, and
function of the downtown and the surrounding properties in the
Waterford Heritage Overlay District by providing a welcoming
atmosphere for area residents and visitors. The Guidelines allow
for creativity and variety within a framework of basic design
parameters that reinforce the best attributes of the historic
downtown and its surrounding area.
(3) Limitation on structural or appearance changes and new
construction; permit required.
(a) Except as set forth in Subsection E(3)(b), there shall be no
alteration in the architectural appearance or appearance of
any structure, parking lot or open space area, or construction
of any structure or parking lot, within the Waterford Heritage
Overlay District without the approval of plans for the alteration
or construction as set forth in this section and § 245-27F. All
alterations and construction shall be made in conformance
with the Heritage District Guidelines as adopted in this
section. For the purposes of this section, alterations shall
include any exterior change (including painting), addition to,
or demolition of all or any part of the exterior of a structure.
(b) Exceptions.
[1] Subsection E(3)(a) shall not be applicable in areas within
the Waterford Heritage Overlay District where the
underlying zoning is residential.
[2] Except for paint colors, and siding colors and materials,
modifications to the rear walls and rear yards of singleand
two-family residential buildings that are used strictly
for residential purposes are not subject to review or permit
requirements under Subsection E(3)(a) if those
modifications cannot be readily seen from the street.
§ 245-27 TREES § 245-27
211:563
(4) Mandatory requirements.
(a) Heritage District Guidelines that use the words "shall," "must,"
"no more than," "prohibited," or other commands are
requirements that must be met to obtain approval of proposed
alterations or construction. All other guidelines are
suggestions. Applicants that do not believe they can or should
follow a required guideline may request that their application
be directed to the Plan Commission after review by the
Heritage District Design Committee and Zoning Administrator.
(b) The requirements for a Heritage District Permit are in addition
to all other permits required.
(c) Signs, including exterior window signs, in the Heritage Overlay
District, shall require sign permits as set forth in Article VI of
this chapter, as well as Heritage District permits; provided,
however, that a sign permit application shall also serve as the
application for a Heritage District permit, and the separate
application and information required under § 245-27E(5)(a) is
not required for signs. The application for a sign permit for a
permanent sign shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator.
The Zoning Administrator may request a determination from
the Heritage District Design Committee as set forth in this
section for review and approval. Applications for temporary
signs do not require Zoning Administrator Review, but must
meet the requirements set forth in the Heritage District Design
Guidelines.
(5) Procedure.
(a) Application for Heritage District permit. An application for a
Heritage District permit shall be made to the Village Zoning
Administrator and shall include the following where pertinent
and necessary for proper review:
[1] Names and addresses of the applicant, owner of the site,
architect, professional engineer, and contractor.
[2] Description of the subject site by lot, block, and recorded
subdivision or by metes and bounds; address of the subject
site; type of structure; proposed operator or use of the
structure or site; number of employees; and the underlying
zoning district within which the subject site lies.
[3] Plat of survey prepared by a land surveyor registered in
Wisconsin or other map drawn to scale, showing the
location, property boundaries, dimensions, uses, and size
of the following: subject site; existing and proposed
structures; existing and proposed easements, streets, and
other public ways; off-street parking, loading areas and
driveways; existing highway access restrictions; existing
§ 245-27 WATERFORD CODE § 245-27
211:564
and proposed street, side and rear yards. The plat of
survey shall show the allocation, elevation, and use of any
abutting lands and their structures within 40 feet of the
subject site; and existing and proposed landscaping.
[4] Details that include, where applicable, how the design will
comply with each of the following sections of the Heritage
District Guidelines: Pattern & Rhythm; Building
Proportion; Building Setbacks; Building Height & Width;
Segmentation of Building Facades; Facade Elements;
Window & Door Openings; Materials; Color; Signage;
Awnings; On-Site Parking; Open Space; Sustainability; and
other information as may be required by the Zoning
Administrator, the Heritage District Design Committee,
and/or Plan Commission.
[5] A historic photograph of the building, if available. If the
applicant does not have a historic photograph, the
applicant is required to check with the Waterford Public
Library, which has an online catalogue of historic
photographs.
[6] An artist's rendering of the proposed improvements.
Artist's renderings may be available from Absolutely
Waterford, Inc., and if not available, the applicant must
submit a sketch of the proposed improvements on a
current photograph of the building, showing where the
colors will be used, where the signs will be hung, what
awnings would cover, etc.
[7] Conditions such as landscaping, type of construction,
construction commencement and completion dates, and
lighting.
(b) Fees. Every applicant for Heritage District permit shall pay to
the Clerk of the Village of Waterford a fee in an amount set by
the Village Board specifically as and for the permit application
process, which fee shall assist the Village in covering the cost
of investigation and administration. This fee shall be paid at
the time of application and shall be retained by the Village
regardless of the outcome on the application. This fee shall be
in addition to any and all required permit fees within the
various codes of the Village of Waterford and State of
Wisconsin.
(c) Review.
[1] As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
MAJOR ALTERATION — A significant change in the
exterior structure or architectural appearance of a
§ 245-27 TREES § 245-27
211:565
building or land, including but not limited to, any change
in the exterior color of the building, trim or roof; a change
in the roof pitch or structure; a change in a window or door
shape, size or location; or an addition to, or demolition of,
any part or all of the exterior of a structure.
MAJOR APPLICATION — An application for review of all
new construction and for major alterations.
MINOR ALTERATION — A change in the exterior of a
structure or land including but not limited to, reroofing
with no change to the structure or color of the roof;
window replacement without a change in the shape or
location of the window; or the replacement of fixtures such
as air conditioners.
MINOR APPLICATION — An application for review of new
or revised permanent signage or exterior lighting, and
minor alterations.
[2] The Zoning Administrator shall conduct a brief review of
the application, and shall determine whether the
application includes new construction, a major alteration,
signage, or a minor alteration, and whether it appears to
be complete. In the event that it is incomplete, the Zoning
Administrator shall return it to the applicant. When
complete, the Zoning Administrator shall label the
application as a major or minor application.
[3] The Zoning Administrator shall refer all major applications
to the Heritage District Design Committee for review. The
Committee shall proceed pursuant to § 245-27F. The
Zoning Administrator shall review all minor applications,
and may enlist the aid of Village Staff in determining
whether the proposed design meets the Heritage District
Guidelines. If the proposed design clearly meets the
Guidelines, the Zoning Administrator may issue the
permit; provided, however, that the Zoning Administrator
may refer the application to the Heritage District Design
Committee for review in the Zoning Administrator's sole
discretion. In the event that the application is referred to
the Heritage District Design Committee, the Village will
require the applicant to submit copies of the items listed in
this section in the amount required on the application, and
the Committee shall proceed pursuant to § 245-27F.
[4] If, after review of the application by the Heritage District
Design Committee, the application is referred to the Plan
Commission, the Plan Commission shall conduct a review
for conformance with the Design Guidelines, and shall
consider the recommendations of the Heritage District
Design Committee. After review, the Plan Commission
§ 245-27 WATERFORD CODE § 245-27
211:566
shall direct the Zoning Administrator to issue or deny a
permit. If the permit is denied, the applicant may appeal
the decision to, or apply for a variance from, the Board of
Appeals.
[5] Appeals. Appeals from the decision of the Plan
Commission, or application for a variance, shall be made to
the Board of Appeals pursuant to § 245-54 of this
Municipal Code, and the Board of Appeals shall have the
power to hear and decide such matters. In making its
determination for a variance, the Board of Appeals, in
addition to the requirements set forth in § 245-54, shall
consider the following:
[a] No variance shall be permitted that would tend to
destroy or seriously impair the particular character
and quality of the Waterford Heritage Overlay District.
No change or alteration (including painting) of a
structure or site shall be permitted which destroys,
seriously impairs, or significantly alters its character
in terms of its historical or architectural interest.
[b] No variance shall be permitted if doing so would
diverge from the purpose of the Guidelines as set forth
in § 245-27E(2).
[c] In order to obtain a variance, the applicant shall be
required to show good cause for the variance, which
shall include, but not be limited to, a showing that the
required design feature cannot be met on the site; the
requirement would create undue hardship for the
applicant as compared to other properties in the
district, or the intent of the Guidelines can be
successfully met with an alternative design.
(6) Government order for emergencies. Nothing contained in this
chapter shall prohibit the making of necessary construction,
reconstruction, alteration, or demolition of any improvement in the
Heritage Overlay District pursuant to the order of any
governmental agency or pursuant to any court judgment for
remedying emergency conditions determined to be dangerous to
life, health, or property. In such emergency cases only, no Heritage
District design approval shall be required.
F. Heritage District Design Committee.
(1) Purpose. The Heritage District Design Committee (HDDC) is
intended to safeguard the Village's Heritage Overlay District and
carry out the purpose of the Design Guidelines adopted in
§ 245-27E. By doing so, the HDDC will stabilize and improve
property values, promote civic pride in the beauty of the Heritage
Overlay District, protect and enhance the Village for its residents,
§ 245-27 TREES § 245-27
211:567
tourists and visitors and general welfare, and strengthen the
economy of the Village.
(2) Membership; terms; officers; vacancies.
(a) Membership and terms. The Heritage District Design
Committee shall consist of seven or eight voting members
appointed by the Village President for one-year terms at the
first meeting in May each year, subject to confirmation by the
Village Board. Memberships shall consist of the following:
[1] Two members of the Absolutely Waterford Design
Committee;
[2] One member of the Absolutely Waterford Economic
Restructuring Committee;
[3] An owner of a building located in the Heritage Overlay
District;
[4] An owner of a business located in the Heritage Overlay
District;
[5] A Realtor, banker, architect or similar professional;
[6] A member of the Plan Commission, and if the Plan
Commission member is not a Village Trustee, a Village
Trustee shall also be a member;
[7] The Building Inspector, who shall be an ex officio,
nonvoting member.
(b) Chairperson. The Village President shall appoint the
Chairperson.
(c) Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in
the same manner as appointments for a full term.
(3) Meetings; minutes; quorum.
(a) Meetings. Regular meetings shall be held once per month, as
necessary. Special meetings may be held at the call of the
Chairperson of the Heritage District Design Committee or
when requested by the Village Board or Plan Commission.
Meetings shall be open to the public.
(b) Minutes. Minutes shall be kept showing all actions taken and
shall be a public record. The grounds for every decision shall
be stated in the minutes.
(c) Quorum. Quorum shall be four members when there are seven
voting members, and five members when there are eight voting
members, and all actions shall require the concurring vote of a
majority of the members present.
§ 245-27 WATERFORD CODE § 245-27
211:568
(4) Powers. Except as set forth in § 245-27E(3)(b), the Heritage District
Design Committee shall have the power to review applications for
permits for construction, reconstruction, and exterior alteration of
all properties in the Heritage Overlay District. Except as set forth
in § 245-27E(3)(b), no permit shall be issued to any owner or
person in charge of a structure or site within the Heritage Overlay
District, and no owner of a such a structure or site shall reconstruct
or alter all or any part of the exterior of such property, construct
any improvement upon such designated property, or cause or
permit any such work to be performed upon such property
(including the placement of permanent exterior signage), unless a
Heritage District permit has been granted.
(5) Procedures. Applications for a Heritage District permit shall be
filed with the Zoning Administrator in conformance with
§ 245-27E(5).
(a) Minor application. All minor applications referred to the
Heritage District Design Committee by the Zoning
Administrator shall, within 60 days of submission of the
application, be reviewed by the Heritage District Design
Committee based upon whether the proposed construction,
reconstruction, or exterior alteration conforms to the
objectives and design criteria of the Design Guidelines duly
adopted by the Village, and the Committee shall:
[1] Direct the Zoning Administrator to issue the Heritage
District permit;
[2] Direct the Zoning Administrator to issue the Heritage
District permit with conditions;
[3] Reject the request for a Heritage District permit; or
[4] Recommend that the matter be reviewed by the Plan
Commission and state the reasons for the referral.
[5] In the event that an applicant has requested Plan
Commission review because the applicant does not believe
that it can or should follow a required guideline, the
Heritage District Design Committee shall attach its
recommendations regarding the request to its referral to
the Plan Commission.
(b) Major application. In the case of a major application, within 60
days of submission of the application, the Heritage District
Design Committee shall review the application based upon
whether the proposed construction, reconstruction, or exterior
alteration conforms to the objectives and design criteria of the
Design Guidelines duly adopted by the Village. If the major
application is solely for a color change, the Committee shall
proceed pursuant to Subsection E(5)(a) above. For all other
§ 245-27 TREES § 245-27
211:569
§ 245-27.1. Industrial Park Overlay District. [Added 1-10-2011 by
Ord. No. 557]
There shall be an Industrial Park Overlay District in the Village, which shall
consist of the land known as the Village of Waterford Industrial Park, as
shown on the attached map.122
major applications, the Committee shall forward its
recommendation to the Plan Commission for a final
determination regarding the Heritage District Permit. The
Heritage District Design Committee shall:
[1] Recommend to the Plan Commission that it grant approval
of the Heritage District permit;
[2] Recommend to the Plan Commission that it approve the
Heritage District permit with conditions;
[3] Recommend to the Plan Commission that it reject the
request for a Heritage District permit; or
[4] Recommend to the Plan Commission that it require
changes to the planned construction, reconstruction, or
exterior alteration, and state the reasons therefor.
(6) Other duties. The Heritage District Design Committee shall make
recommendations to the Village's Board of Appeals on all appeals
and applications to the Board of Appeals regarding errors,
variances, and interpretations relating to the Heritage Overlay
District. Said recommendation to the Board of Appeals shall be
made by the Heritage District Design Committee within 30 days of
such request. The Committee shall perform such other tasks as
may be assigned by the Village Board or Village Plan Commission.
G. Penalties.
(1) In every instance where work commences upon a project subject to
this section, prior to the Heritage District Permit being applied for
and granted, there shall be a double fee imposed for the permit,
and the applicant shall remain required to meet full compliance
with this section.
(2) It shall be unlawful to use or improve any structure or land in
violation of any of the provisions of the section. In addition to
penalties imposed under Chapter 1, Article II, of this Code, the
Village of Waterford may institute appropriate action to enjoin a
violation of this section or to cause any structure so constructed or
altered to be vacated, removed, or altered.
122. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Village offices.
§ 245-27 WATERFORD CODE § 245-27.1
211:570
A. Purpose. The Village of Waterford Industrial Park was developed in
1968 to accommodate the needs of industry in the Village while at the
same time providing a clean and attractive area in which the buildings
and land are well-maintained and land values are preserved. This
zoning overlay district classification is intended to continue to preserve
and protect the beauty of the Village and stabilize and protect the
property values by regulations that meet the original intent of the
creation and continuation of the Industrial Park.
B. Uses. All uses allowed in the underlying district are allowed in the
Industrial Park Overlay District.
C. Height, area, yards and parking. Except as they may be modified in this
section, the area, height and auto parking requirements shall be as set
forth in the underlying zoning district.
(1) Front yard setback. No building or part of a building may be
constructed nearer than 40 feet from the street right-of-way.
(2) Side yard setback. No building or part of a building may be
constructed nearer than 12 feet from the lot line, and the combined
total of side yards for interior lots shall be not less than 30 feet.
(3) Rear yard setback. No building or part of a building may be
constructed nearer than 25 feet from the lot line.
(4) Additional yard restrictions.
(a) Yards are to be landscaped, or graded, sodded or seeded in a
manner that will produce an acceptable lawn. The landscaping
and lawn shall be maintained.
(b) Use of yards for storage or display.
[1] In this section, storage is defined as the keeping of a
quantity or supply of the businesses' goods, materials, or
equipment placed or kept on the property for use by the
business, or the keeping of property of others, including
vehicles, as part of a business. Vehicles normally used by
the business as a part of the business enterprise are not
considered stored on the property if the parking location is
approved by the Plan Commission. The location of parking
for business vehicles shall be identified as part of the
conditional use permit approval.
[2] Stockpiles, soil and other loose material stored on lots
shall be placed in side yards or rear yards, as those terms
are defined in § 245-9 and illustrated in § 245-13.1, and
may not be stored for a period longer than 30 days unless
screened from view from the street with solid fencing or
screening approved by the Plan Commission. No material
kept on a lot shall be allowed to wash off of the lot or
§ 245-27.1 TREES § 245-27.1
211:571
otherwise encroach on other lots or public land or rightsof-
way. In the event that material is washed off a lot or
encroaches on other lots or public lands or rights of way,
the owner of the lot shall be responsible for removal of the
material within 48 hours of its discovery. In the event that
the owner fails to remove the material within 48 hours,
the Village may remove the material and charge the owner
as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627 in
addition to all other penalties provided in this chapter.
[3] All material or products stored outside of buildings must
be placed in side yards or rear yards, as those terms are
defined in § 245-9 and illustrated in § 245-13.1, and must
be screened from view from the street with solid fencing or
screening that is approved by the Plan Commission that is
at least six feet in height. Fences shall not exceed the
height set forth in § 245-14C of this Municipal Code.
[4] All boats, vehicles, recreational vehicles, snowmobiles and
similar items parked on lots for the purpose of storage
shall be placed in side yards or rear yards, as those terms
are defined in § 245-9 and illustrated in § 245-13.1, on
parking areas that shall be paved as required in
Subsection C(6), or shall be stored indoors.
[5] Maintenance of fencing and screening. Fencing and
screening must be kept maintained, and if damaged,
deteriorated, or in need of replacement or painting, shall
be repaired, replaced or painted as necessary.
[6] Refuse. All refuse must be placed or enclosed behind a
solid fence at least six feet in height, or, if placed within 20
feet of a structure, in a masonry enclosure pursuant to
§ 186-2 of this Municipal Code. This subsection shall not
apply to refuse placed in roll-off containers located in a
side or rear yard and placed at least 20 feet from a
structure.
[7] Display of materials for sale, rent or lease. No materials
for sale, rent or lease may be placed within any street
setback area, i.e., 40 feet from the front lot line and 73 feet
from the center line of adjacent streets. All such materials,
if placed in any yard, shall be removed from the yard at the
close of the business each day.
[8] Outdoor storage of vehicles, equipment, recreational
vehicles, boats, snowmobiles and similar items not used as
part of a business, or not stored by a storage business, is
prohibited.
(5) Parking. Parking and storage of company vehicles, trucks or
equipment is prohibited in the side and front yards; provided,
§ 245-27.1 WATERFORD CODE § 245-27.1
211:572
however, that the Plan Commission may allow parking of company
vehicles in any yard as part of the conditional use permit review
under § 245-16 of this chapter if site conditions necessitate a
deviation from this standard.
(6) Driveways, walks and parking areas.
(a) Surfacing. All driveways, walks and parking areas shall be
surfaced with asphalt or concrete from the street surface to the
front building face. Every drive and parking area installed
behind the front building face after April 14, 1997, or on a lot
for which a building, zoning or conditional use permit is
applied for after April 14, 1997, shall be surfaced with asphalt
or concrete in accordance with § 245-15D of this chapter. This
subsection shall not apply to parking areas in side or rear yards
for vehicles classified as commercial vehicles by the Wisconsin
Department of Motor Vehicles and requiring a commercial
driver's license to operate, including those that weigh over
26,000 pounds, determined by the highest of the following
weights: manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR),
manufacturer's gross combination weight rating (GCWR),
actual weight, or registered weight, or which are designed or
used to carry 16 or more persons including the driver.
(b) Maintenance. All drives, walks and parking areas shall be
maintained.
[1] Asphalt surfaces. When more than 25% of any asphalt
surface has alligator cracking (at least two inches deep),
severe distortion or rutting, potholes, or patches in poor
condition, it shall be repaired or replaced.
[2] Concrete surfaces. When more than 25% of any concrete
surface has failed patches, closely spaced transverse
cracks, extensive joint failure, or severe deterioration, it
shall be repaired or replaced.
[3] In determining whether to enforce this subsection for
paved surfaces, the Village will utilize the Pavement
Surface Evaluation and Rating System (PASER) developed
by the University of Wisconsin Transportation Information
Center. If the Village Engineer rates the paved surface as
2, Very Poor, the Zoning Administrator shall issue an order
to the property owner to repair or replace the surface.
[4] Unsurfaced parking areas. Gravel parking areas shall be
maintained in an erosion free condition and shall be
properly drained.
D. Signs and advertising. Signs shall conform to the requirements of
Article VI of this chapter. [Amended 11-14-2011 by Ord. No. 582]
§ 245-27.1 TREES § 245-27.1
211:573
§ 245-27.2. Summary. [Added 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
E. Burning. Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 100 of this
Municipal Code, for the purpose of public safety, no open burning of any
nature is allowed in the district.
A. Table 245-27.2 summarizes the basic zoning area requirements set
forth in this article, as follows:
Village of Waterford Zoning Code
Table 245-27.2 Basic Zoning Area Requirements
Minimum Yard/Setbacks from Property
Line
Max
Building
Height
Zoning
District
Area
(square
feet)
Lot Width
at Setback
(feet)
Front
(feet)
Each Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
(feet, to top
of roof)
§ 245-18A
Single Family
(R-1)
6,500 60 25 10, 5 with
recorded
agreement
between
abutting
property
owners
25 35
§ 245-19A
Two Family
(R-2)
10,890 80 25 10 feet 25 35
§ 245-20
Multiple
Family (R-3)
10,890 80 25 10 feet 25 45
§ 245-21
Business and
Commercial
(B-2)
0 0 0 Business and
Mixed Use,
unless
required by
Building
Code
25 45
§ 245-22
Business and
Industrial
(B-1)
0 0 0 10 if
provided
25 45
§ 245-26
Municipal
Campus
(MC)
0 0 0 0 0 45
§ 245-27.1 WATERFORD CODE § 245-27.2
211:574
Village of Waterford Zoning Code
Table 245-27.2 Basic Zoning Area Requirements
Minimum Yard/Setbacks from Property
Line
Max
Building
Height
Zoning
District
Area
(square
feet)
Lot Width
at Setback
(feet)
Front
(feet)
Each Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
(feet, to top
of roof)
§ 245-26.1
Institutional
(INST)
10,890 100 25 25 25 45
§ 245-27
Downtown
District (B-3)
0 0 Zero lot line
setback is
required for
new buildings
None, unless
required to
meet
Building
Code
0 45
If lot abuts
shoreline: in
any district
All shore
yards must be
at least 40
feet from
structure.
Setback
averaging may
apply in
residential
districts
B. These are the standard dimensions. See Article IV for permissible
adjustments.
C. The requirements in Planned Community Development Districts may be
adjusted during the approval process.
§ 245-27.2 TREES § 245-27.2
211:575

ARTICLE VI
Signs
[Added 9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 481; amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No.
489; 11-14-2011 by Ord. No. 582; 6-11-2012 by Ord. No. 589;
9-24-2012 by Ord. No. 593; 11-11-2013 by Ord. No. 610; 1-13-2014
by Ord. No. 612; 11-28-2016 by Ord. No. 643; 11-28-2016 by Ord.
No. 650; 1-14-2019 by Ord. No. 669]
§ 245-28. Findings; purpose and intent; interpretation.
A. Findings. Signs obstruct views, distract motorists, displace alternative
uses for land, and pose other problems that legitimately call for
regulation.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this Sign Article is to provide the legal
framework and minimum standards to safeguard life, property, and
public welfare by regulation and controlling the number, size, color,
quality of materials, construction, location, illumination, movement,
height, installation, condition, and maintenance of all signs to be
compatible with zoning regulations. These regulations ensure the
protection of property values, the character of the various
neighborhoods, the creation of a convenient, attractive, and
harmonious community, protection against destruction of or
encroachment on historic areas or signage, and encouraging economic
development. This article allows adequate communication through
signage while encouraging aesthetic quality in the design, location, size
and purpose of all signs. This article must be interpreted in a manner
consistent with the First Amendment guarantee of free speech. If any
provision of this article is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to
be invalid, such finding must not affect the validity of the provisions of
this article that can be given effect without the invalid provision.
C. Intent.
(1) This article recognizes the need for well-maintained and attractive
sign displays within the Village and the need for adequate business
identification, advertising and communication. Because of the
unique qualities of the Village of Waterford, which need to be
protected and enhanced, a high degree of control over the
construction materials of signs is deemed to be an important public
purpose.
(2) A sign placed on land or on a building for the purpose of
identification, protection or directing persons to a use conducted
therein must be deemed to be an integral but accessory and
subordinate part of the principal use of land or building. Therefore,
the intent of this article is to establish limitations on signs in order
to ensure they are appropriate to the land, building or use to which
they are appurtenant and are adequate for their intended purpose
while balancing the individual and community interests identified
in Subsection C(1) of this section.
§ 245-28 TREES § 245-28
211:577
(3) These regulations are intended to promote signs that are
compatible with the use of the property to which they are
appurtenant, landscape and architecture of surrounding buildings,
are legible and appropriate to the activity to which they pertain,
are not distracting to motorists, and are constructed and
maintained in a structurally sound and attractive condition.
D. Interpretation.
(1) This article authorizes the use of signs on public and private
property, provided the signs are:
(a) Compatible with the zoning district regulations.
(b) Where required, compatible with the approved Heritage
District Design Guidelines adopted in § 245-27 for the
Waterford Heritage Overlay District, and any other approved
guides and manuals.
(c) Designed, constructed, installed and maintained in such a
manner that they do not endanger public safety or traffic
safety.
(d) Legible, readable, visible and well designed for the
circumstances in which they are used.
(e) Respectful of the reasonable rights of the citizens and other
advertisers.
(f) Do not cover any major architectural detail.
(g) Are expressly permitted as being allowed by right or by permit
under this article, by specific requirements in another portion
of this chapter, or otherwise expressly allowed by the Plan
Commission, Village Board or Board of Appeals.
(2) These regulations do not regulate every form and instance of visual
communication that may be displayed anywhere within the
jurisdictional limits of the Village. Rather, they are intended to
regulate those forms and instances that are most likely to
meaningfully affect one or more of the purposes set forth above.
(3) These regulations do not entirely eliminate all of the harms that
may be created by the installation and display of signs. Rather, they
strike an appropriate balance that preserves ample channels of
communication by means of visual display while still reducing and
mitigating the extent of the harms caused by signs.
(4) These regulations are not intended to and do not apply to signs
erected, maintained or otherwise posted, owned or leased by this
state, the federal government or this Village. The inclusion of
"government" in describing some signs does not intend to subject
the government to regulation, but instead helps illuminate the type
§ 245-28 WATERFORD CODE § 245-28
211:578
§ 245-29. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning assigned to them in this section:
ORIGINAL ART DISPLAY — A hand-painted work of visual art that is either
affixed to or painted directly on the exterior wall of a structure with the
permission of the property owner. An original art display does not include:
mechanically produced or computer generated prints or images, including
but not limited to digitally printed vinyl; electrical or mechanical
components; or changing image art display. An original art display meeting
these requirements is not considered to be a sign.
SIGN — A name, identification, description, display or illustration, in any
medium, including sign face, words, letters, figures, numerals, phrases,
sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names, or trademarks, which
is affixed to, painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building,
or other surface (including the ground, poles, etc.), which directs attention
to, or is designed or intended to direct attention to the sign face or to an
object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, cause, or
business, used to communicate, which is visible from any public street or
highway, and includes searchlights and other lighted displays. Each display
surface of a sign is considered to be a sign.
SIGN AREA — The space enclosed within the extreme edges of the sign for
each sign face, not including the supporting structure; or, where attached
directly to a building wall or surface, the space within the outline enclosing
all the characters of the words, numbers, or design.
SIGN COPY — The message, advertising, and/or any other symbols on the
face of the sign.
SIGN DISPLAY AREA — The display area of a sign shall be measured as the
area, in square feet, of the smallest rectilinear polygon, with a maximum
of eight sides, that describes the portion of the sign which encloses all
lettering, wording, design, and symbols together with any background that,
through the use of illumination, color or other techniques, helps the sign
stand out from its surroundings. Where a sign has multiple display surfaces
and any two of these display surfaces are parallel and face in opposite
directions, only one of the parallel display surfaces is included when
calculating the display area. For an internally illuminated awning or
marquee sign, the display area shall be calculated as the height of the
awning or marquee multiplied by its width.
SIGN FACE — The entire area display surface area upon, against or through
which copy is placed.
SIGN, ABANDONED — Any sign, the use of which has been discontinued
to a period of 12 consecutive months, which sign advertises or identifies an
of sign that falls within the immunities of the government from
regulation.
§ 245-28 TREES § 245-29
211:579
activity that has been discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive months,
shall be considered abandoned.
SIGN, AWNING — A sign that is mounted or painted on, or attached to, an
awning, canopy, or marquee.
SIGN, BACKLIT CHANNEL LETTER — This letter combines the standard
front-lit letter along with the reverse/halo-lit letter. The sides of the letter
are aluminum, the faces are polycarbonate and the back of the sign is open
to reflect the LED or neon illumination off of the wall. (See appendix for
example.123)
SIGN, BULLETIN BOARD — A sign that allows changeable copy that directs
attention to buildings or activities that are located or to be located either on
or off the premises where the sign is located.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — A sign that does not advertise, but merely draws
attention to a business, development, or other building by indicating no
more than the direction and distance it is from the sign.
SIGN, ESTABLISHED GRADE OR IMMEDIATELY BELOW — The distance
from the bottom of the sign or other projection to the established grade
immediately below is measured from the elevation immediately adjacent to
the face of the building to which the sign or other projection is attached.
SIGN, EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED — A sign illuminated by one or more
light sources outside the sign cabinet.
SIGN, GROUND — Any sign placed upon a pole or other support
independent of any other structure, where the sign height does not exceed
10 feet.
SIGN, HALO OR CHANNEL LIT — Halo-lit letters or also known as reverse
channel-lit letters consist of aluminum faces and sides (returns) mounted
onto standoffs away from the wall which project either LED's or neon
illumination to the wall surface giving the sign a halo effect. This technique
is often considered to give the customer a distinguished or unique image.
(See appendix for example.)
SIGN, INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED — A sign illuminated by one or more
light sources enclosed entirely within the sign cabinet and not directly
visible from outside the sign.
SIGN, NEON — A sign with luminous gas-filled tubes formed into text,
symbols, or decorative elements and directly visible from outside the sign
cabinet.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES (BILLBOARD) — A sign that directs attention to
a building, commodity, activity, or service conducted, sold, or offered at
a location other than the premises on which the sign is located. No offpremises
sign may be erected without Plan Commission approval.
123. Said appendix is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 245-29 WATERFORD CODE § 245-29
211:580
SIGN, PERMANENT — A sign permanently attached to the land or a
structure by means of concrete, plaster, nails, bolts, screws or other
material, or painted on or etched into the exterior of a window.
SIGN, POLE — A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other
support so that the bottom of the sign is over 10 feet above grade.
SIGN, PORTABLE — A sign that is not permanently affixed to a building,
structure, or to the ground. Such a sign is sometimes mounted on wheels to
make it transportable.
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a
building for support and which projects more than 12 inches from that
building.
SIGN, ROOF — A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or that is
wholly dependent on a building for support and which projects above the
point of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with a gambrel,
gable, or hip roof, or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, paper,
cardboard, plastic, wood or other material and not permanently attached to
the land or a structure.
SIGN, WALL — A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or
structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure
for, or forms the background surface of the sign, and which does not project
more than 12 inches from that building or structure.
SIGN, WINDOW, EXTERIOR — Any outdoor sign painted, posted, displayed,
or etched in or on the surface of a window or a translucent or transparent
surface of a door.
SIGN, WINDOW, INDOOR — A sign that is applied or attached to the
interior of a window or located in such manner within a building that it can
readily be seen from the exterior of the building through a window.
§ 245-30. Design guidelines.
A. The Village recognizes the decision of the United States Supreme
Court, as outlined in Reed v. Town of Gilbert, 135 S.Ct. 2218 (2015). As
such, this section is intended to act as a set of suggestions to sign
producers and property owners on what types of signs the Village
would prefer to see in order to preserve the small town charm of the
community.
B. Signs are one of the most prominent visual elements of a street. Welldesigned
signs add interest and variety to building facades and help to
attract customers. In general, the sign is the best representation of the
business to the passing pedestrian or motorist. The design guidelines
shall be used as an important part of sign review and approval.
C. Before starting to design a sign, take a careful look at the building. Is
there an obvious space on the building where the sign would look
appropriate without covering architectural details? Some of the
§ 245-29 TREES § 245-30
211:581
§ 245-31. Signage in nonresidential districts; permits required.
Village's older buildings were designed with a horizontal "sign space"
stretching across the top of the storefront which should be used. If this
"sign space" does not exist perhaps, there is adequate wall area for a
wall sign with appropriate space for a projecting sign.
D. Take a look at neighboring buildings. Is there a predominant type of
sign or a size precedent? In designing a sign, it is important to have an
understanding not only of the building but also of the compatibility
within the neighborhood. The basis for decisions on sign type, size and
location should come from architectural concerns. The specific
definitions and regulations governing the various types of signs in this
section should be studied before actual design begins.
E. To achieve the objective of these guidelines for sign details include the
following:
(1) Simplicity. An effectively designed sign with bold, easily recognized
symbols and clear crisp lettering will identify a business or activity
efficiently and attractively, enhance the area in which it is located
and complement the general appearance of the street and Village.
(2) Color. Restraint should be exercised when selecting colors. On
most signs, no more than three colors should be used: one for
background, a contrasting color for lettering, and a third for
perhaps emphasis (such as for borders, motifs, or shading of letters
to give it a three-dimensional look). Colors should be chosen which
complement each other as well as the general tone of the building.
(3) Messages. Messages should be simple for rapid comprehension by
the public. Pictures, symbols, and logos can add individuality and
character to signs, in addition to making them easier to read.
(4) Materials. Sign materials shall be compatible with the surrounding
area. Sign materials shall be consistent with or at least complement
the original construction materials and architectural style of the
building facade on which they are to be displayed.
(5) Lettering. Lettering styles should complement the style and period
of the building on which they appear. Traditional block and
curvilinear styles, which are easy to read, are preferred. Generally,
different type styles should not be used on the same sign to avoid a
cluttered appearance.
F. In the Waterford Heritage Overlay District, the Signage Provisions of
the Heritage District Design Guidelines are mandatory where indicated
in that document.
A. In general. Signs are allowed in all nonresidential districts, subject to
the requirements in this article. All signs in nonresidential districts
require permits, except as set forth in Subsection H, below.
§ 245-30 WATERFORD CODE § 245-31
211:582
B. Determination of allowable signage.
(1) The area of each building's signage shall be the lineal feet of the
front of the building multiplied by the story factor below. A
basement shall not count as a story. See § 245-37 for the manner to
determine the linear front footage. No single projecting or ground
sign may exceed 24 square feet in area per side.
(2) The following table shall be used to calculate the area of allowable
signage. Measure the width of the building and use the proper
multiplier for the building width range to determine the allowable
square feet of signage permitted.
Building
Width Range
in Feet Multiplier
One-Story Two-Story Three-Story
0 0.750 0.830 0.900
5 0.750 0.830 0.900
10 0.750 0.830 0.900
15 0.750 0.830 0.900
20 0.750 0.830 0.900
25 0.750 0.830 0.900
30 0.750 0.830 0.900
35 0.721 0.798 0.865
40 0.711 0.787 0.853
45 0.701 0.776 0.842
50 0.692 0.765 0.830
55 0.682 0.754 0.818
60 0.672 0.743 0.807
65 0.663 0.733 0.795
70 0.653 0.722 0.783
75 0.643 0.711 0.772
80 0.633 0.700 0.760
85 0.624 0.689 0.748
90 0.614 0.678 0.737
95 0.604 0.668 0.725
100 0.594 0.657 0.713
105 0.585 0.646 0.702
110 0.575 0.635 0.690
115 0.565 0.624 0.678
§ 245-31 TREES § 245-31
211:583
Building
Width Range
in Feet Multiplier
One-Story Two-Story Three-Story
120 0.556 0.613 0.667
125 0.546 0.602 0.655
130 0.536 0.592 0.643
135 0.526 0.581 0.632
140 0.517 0.570 0.620
145 0.507 0.559 0.608
150 0.497 0.548 0.597
155 0.488 0.537 0.585
160 0.478 0.527 0.573
165 0.468 0.516 0.562
170 0.458 0.505 0.550
175 0.449 0.494 0.538
180 0.439 0.483 0.527
185 0.429 0.472 0.515
190 0.419 0.462 0.503
195 0.410 0.451 0.492
200 0.400 0.440 0.480
Over 200 0.390 0.429 0.468
(3) Window signs. All uses are allowed window signs, which may be
placed only on the inside of buildings and shall not exceed 25% of
the glass area of the windows fronting on a public street. Window
signs meeting this description shall not require a permit.
(4) Awning signage. All uses are allowed signage on awnings. Awning
signage may include logos, business names, symbols and wording
placed only on the flap. Awnings or canopies covering pedestrian or
vehicle access areas signs shall provide no less than eight feet
vertical clearance between the bottom of the sign and the ground
(finished surface), directly beneath the awning or canopy. Signage
on awnings shall not count towards total signage.
(5) Signage at the entrance of tenant spaces. One sign placed at the
entrance of the space for each separate tenant space in multitenant
buildings may be placed on the building and each directory
sign shall not exceed two square feet per side. In lieu of one
entrance directory sign for each separate tenant space, a single
wall sign may be permitted. The area of the wall sign shall be no
larger than the cumulative amount of the permitted separate
§ 245-31 WATERFORD CODE § 245-31
211:584
entrance directory signs. The "in lieu of" sign shall be in addition to
the sign areas allowed in Subsection B(2) above and shall conform
to all of the requirements of this section.
(6) Certain sandwich board signs. See § 245-33.
C. Total combination of signs. All covered uses may divide the total
permitted signage into any combination of the four types listed below,
not to exceed the total permitted area limits set forth in Subsection B(2)
above.
(1) Wall signs placed flat against the exterior walls of a building shall
not extend above the roofline. Wall signs shall not extend beyond
the ends of the wall to which they are attached.
(2) Projecting signs fastened to, suspended from or supported by
structures shall not extend more than six feet into the required
yard area, shall not extend into any public right-of-way, shall not
extend over any driveway and, shall be at least 10 feet from all side
lot lines. The projecting sign shall not be located at a point higher
than 75% of the wall measured from the top of the foundation
where it is located, except by approval of the Plan Commission.
(3) Ground signs shall not exceed eight feet in height. Ground signs
shall be located at least 10 feet from any street right-of-way and at
least 10 feet away from any side or rear lot line except as specified
in Subsection C(3)(a) below. Ground signs shall comply with the
traffic visibility requirements set forth in § 245-13H. All ground
signs shall include landscaping at the base of the sign.
(a) In the B-3 Downtown Business District, ground signs may be
located no closer than 10 feet from the face of the curb if the
existing building and/or terrain is not suitable for the setback
as specified above.
(b) All parcels shall be limited to one ground sign, regardless of
the number of businesses, buildings on the site or the number
of street frontages abutting the property.
(c) Vending machines. Vending machines without internal
illumination are permitted in business, commercial, and
industrial districts; internally illuminated vending machines
may be permitted with appropriate vegetative screening so
that they are not visible from the roadway.
D. Commercial center signage.
(1) A commercial center is defined as a multi-tenant, multi-building
commercial and retail development under common ownership or
management and located in the B-1 or B-2 Zoning District. The
shopping center may be permitted the following signage in addition
§ 245-31 TREES § 245-31
211:585
to the approved building signage as specified above and in this
section.
(2) Signs used for commercial centers shall be allowed as follows:
(a) One ground sign identifying the tenants may be permitted
along a state highway abutting a commercial center.
(b) The signs shall not exceed 72 square feet per side in total area
and may not exceed 12 feet in height. The location must be
approved by the Zoning Administrator prior to the issuance of
a sign permit.
(3) Business or tenant signage. Signage specified in Subsection C(1)
and (2), above, may be provided for each individual tenant business
in a commercial center. In a multi-tenant building, each business
shall be permitted signage up to 12 square feet per side. In a
single-tenant building the business shall be permitted signage up to
16 square feet per side on the interior of the shopping center.
(4) Additional on-premises signage. One additional ground sign on the
commercial center property may be permitted subject to the
following restrictions:
(a) The maximum size of the sign shall not exceed 36 square feet
per side.
(b) The location must be approved by the Zoning Administrator
prior to the issuance of a sign permit.
(c) The sign must be located at an entrance to the commercial
center on a different state road or local road than where the
sign in Subsection D(2)(a) and (b) above is located.
E. Sandwich board signage with permit. Sandwich board signs are
permitted subject to the following conditions:
(1) Entities may use sandwich board signs in front of their properties
in the B-1, B-2, B-3 Institutional and Municipal Campus Districts
provided that the sandwich board signs will not be located on any
sidewalk or bikeway if one is present or in any public right-of-way;
provided, however, that where there is a zero lot-line setback, the
sandwich board may be located on a sidewalk if it does not
interfere with pedestrian traffic.
(2) Sandwich board sign impact on total permitted signage.
(a) A sandwich board where the messages and content change on
a weekly basis shall not count towards the total signage
allowed under § 245-31.
(b) A sandwich board where the wording or image is unchanging
shall count towards the total signage allowed under § 245-31.
§ 245-31 WATERFORD CODE § 245-31
211:586
Any sandwich board permitted under this subsection shall also
comply with Subsection E(2)(c) through (g) below.
(c) The sandwich board sign must be located in front of the
property, and will not cause a hazard to traffic or adjoining
properties. These signs shall require a permit and shall not
exceed six square feet in area on one side or 12 square feet on
all sides.
(d) The sandwich board sign must be removed from its display
location whenever the permit holder is not open to the public.
Festivals, nonprofits, organizations and businesses under
contract with the Village may use sandwich board signs on
Village-owned property or other property in any district as
permitted.
(e) All sandwich board signs, regardless of location, shall conform
to the design guidelines set forth in the Waterford Heritage
District Design Guidelines, Signage, Section 5, Sandwich
Board Signs.124
F. Illuminated signs. Interior illuminated signs are not permitted in any
district. Halo-lit and channel-lit signs are permitted in Institutional,
Municipal Campus, B-1, B-2, and B-3 Districts, and are also permitted
in residential districts at the entrance to neighborhoods.
G. Changeable copy signs. Changeable copy signs, fixed or moveable, may
be permitted if approved by the Zoning Administrator. Price signs will
be considered permitted additional signage.
H. Signs in nonresidential districts where no permit is required. Except as
prohibited in § 245-39 of this chapter, the following signs are allowed in
nonresidential zoning districts without a permit, subject to the
following regulations:
(1) Temporary signs.
(a) Temporary signs are allowed per property, as follows:
[1] (Reserved)
[2] Each sign may not exceed 32 square feet in total area and
may not exceed 10 feet in height, except signs located in
the B-3, if affixed to the building, shall not exceed the roof
line. Signs located in the B-3, if affixed to the ground, shall
be no taller than eight feet in height.
[3] These signs shall not be located in any street right-of-way
or in front of any sidewalk.
[4] (Reserved)
124. Editor's Note: See § 245-27E.
§ 245-31 TREES § 245-31
211:587
[5] Only one sign shall be allowed on each street frontage per
lot.
(b) The temporary use of banners, balloons, streamers, pennants,
and other similar media in any district is allowed provided that
the media will not be located on any sidewalk or bikeway if one
is present or in any public right-of-way, except by permit of the
Zoning Administrator.
[1] This type of media shall be displayed for no more than 14
days.
[2] The media will not be located closer than 10 feet to an
adjacent property or driveway, and will not cause a hazard
to traffic or adjoining properties. This type of media shall
not exceed 24 square feet in area on one side or 48 square
feet on all sides.
(c) In all cases, when the temporary sign or media is placed by a
person other than the property owner or legal tenant of the
property, the person placing the sign or media must obtain
permission from the owner for the placement of the signs or
media.
(d) Failure to comply with standards. Any person that fails to
follow the standards set forth in this section shall be notified in
writing that all future temporary signage shall require a
regular sign permit and may be issued a citation for a violation
of this chapter as set forth in § 245-57 and Chapter 1, Article II
of this Code.
(2) Temporary construction area signage. Temporary signs on a
property during a period of construction may be placed on a
construction site without a permit, provided that:
(a) There shall be no more than one such sign located on the
premises;
(b) No sign shall exceed 32 square feet in area on one side or 64
square feet on all sides; and
(c) The sign shall be removed within 72 hours following the
issuance of an occupancy permit. Temporary signs allowed as
part of a development agreement shall be removed as specified
in that agreement.
(d) Notwithstanding the above, pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 66.1102(5), any person who is the owner, or other person in
lawful possession or control, of a construction site may install a
banner over the entire height and length of a fence
surrounding the construction site.
§ 245-31 WATERFORD CODE § 245-31
211:588
(3) Bulletin boards. Bulletin boards are not to exceed four square feet
in area on one side and located on the building.
(4) Signs cut into buildings. Signs and tablets when cut into any
masonry surface or when constructed of metal and affixed flat
against a structure will count towards total allowable signage, and
be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator as an architectural
feature and approved or denied based on total allowable signage.
(5) Official signs. Official signs, such as traffic control, parking
restrictions, welcome signs and related entrance signs, and public
notices when approved by the Zoning Administrator.
(6) Lot signs. Permanent directional signs located at the entrance and
exit of a driveway or street shall not exceed two square feet.
(7) Parking signs. Signs in the parking lot shall be mounted no less
than four feet from the ground and shall not exceed 24 inches high
by 30 inches wide.
(8) Flags. Property owners shall be permitted one flag per 25 feet of
frontage on a right-of-way up to a maximum of six flags and six flag
poles per premises. Each flag may be a maximum of 15 square feet
in area. Flag poles may be a maximum of 50 feet in height, but no
higher than the highest point of the nearest principal building's
roof on the premises. Flag poles must meet the minimum yard
setback requirements for a principal building or a minimum of 10
feet, whichever is more restrictive.
(9) Signs on external walls. One sign on an external wall is allowed per
nonresidential unit. The maximum allowable size for such sign is
four square feet. If it is over four square feet in size, the sign's area
shall be included in the total signage calculation. All signs must be
mounted on the building. Erasable blackboards or glass-enclosed
cases are acceptable.
(10) Election campaign periods. During an election campaign period, as
defined in Wis. Stats. § 12.04, there is no limit on the number or
square footage of signs allowed; provided, however, that such signs
shall not interfere with traffic or pedestrian safety and shall not be
placed in the vision clearance triangle. Said signs may be placed on
property zoned for any use and on property abutting that property
for which the owner or renter is responsible for the maintenance or
care. A sign having an electrical, mechanical or audio auxiliary
requires a permit, may not be located closer than 10 feet to an
adjacent property or driveway, may not cause a hazard to traffic or
adjoining properties, and may not exceed 24 square feet in area on
one side or 48 square feet on all sides.
(11) Original art display. An original art display is allowed without a
permit provided that it meets the following requirements:
§ 245-31 TREES § 245-31
211:589
§ 245-32. Residential district signage.
The following sign regulations apply to all residential districts, and the
signage requires permits, except as set forth in § 245-39.
(a) It is located on a side or rear of a building. An original art
display on the front of a building requires a conditional use
permit;
(b) It may not extend more into the building setback from the
plane of the wall upon which it is painted or to which it is
affixed;
(c) The total of all original art displays may be no more than 64
square feet in area per parcel, or as permitted by the Plan
Commission;
(d) (Reserved)
(e) May not be internally illuminated.
A. Size. Except as may otherwise be provided in this article, when a sign is
authorized on a property, the sign must not exceed two square feet in
area. Where attached dwellings exist on a property, the total square
footage must not exceed two square feet per dwelling unit.
B. Subdivision and residential development signs. For residential
developments (including subdivision identification signs), the maximum
size and number of signs that the owner or owners of the residential
development must be controlled according to the following:
(a) Residential developments four acres or less in area may have a sign
or signs with a total area of no more than 32 square feet.
(b) Residential developments over four acres but less than 40 acres in
area may a sign or signs that have a total area of no more than 48
square feet.
(c) Residential developments of 40 acres or more may have a sign or
signs with a total area of no more than 102 square feet.
C. Location. Permitted signs may be anywhere on the premises, except in a
required side yard or within 10 feet of a street right-of-way.
D. Height. The following maximum heights apply.
(1) If ground-mounted, the top must not be over four feet from the
ground, except temporary signs must not be over six feet from the
ground.
(2) If building-mounted, the sign must be flush-mounted and must not
project above the roofline.
§ 245-31 WATERFORD CODE § 245-32
211:590
E. Illumination. No internal illumination is allowed. If illumination is used,
it may not be blinking, fluctuating or moving. Light rays must shine only
on the face of the sign and on property within the premises.
F. The following signs are not allowed: portable signs, marquee signs,
digital billboard, and projecting signs.
G. Temporary Signs in Residential Districts that do not require permits.
(1) Temporary signs.
(a) Up to three temporary signs are allowed per street frontage, as
follows:
[1] Neither sign may exceed 12 square feet in area on one side
and 24 square feet in area on all sides.
[2] These signs shall not be located in any street right-of-way,
nor in front of any sidewalk.
[3] (Reserved)
(b) The temporary use of banners, balloons, streamers, pennants,
and other similar media in any district is allowed provided that
the media will not be located on any sidewalk or bikeway if one
is present or in any public right-of-way, except as approved by
the Zoning Administrator.
[1] This type of media shall be displayed for no more than 14
days.
[2] The media will not be located closer than 10 feet to an
adjacent property or driveway, and will not cause a hazard
to traffic or adjoining properties. This type of media shall
not exceed 12 square feet in area on one side or 24 square
feet on all sides.
(c) In all cases, when the temporary sign or media is placed by a
person other than the property owner or legal tenant of the
property, the person placing the sign or media must obtain
permission from the owner for the placement of the signs or
media.
(d) Failure to comply with standards. Any person that fails to
follow the standards set forth in this section shall be notified in
writing that all future temporary signage shall require a
regular sign permit and may be issued a citation for a violation
of this chapter as set forth in § 245-57 and Chapter 1, Article II
of this Code.
(2) Temporary construction area signage. Temporary signs on a
property during a period of construction may be placed on a
construction site without a permit, provided that:
§ 245-32 TREES § 245-32
211:591
(a) There shall be no more than one such sign located on the
premises;
(b) No sign shall exceed 32 square feet in area on one side or 64
square feet on all sides; and
(c) The sign shall be removed within 72 hours following the
issuance of an occupancy permit. Temporary signs allowed as
part of a development agreement shall be removed as specified
in that agreement.
(d) Notwithstanding the above, pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 66.1102(5), any person who is the owner, or other person in
lawful possession or control, of a construction site may install a
banner over the entire height and length of a fence
surrounding the construction site.
(3) Bulletin boards. Bulletin boards are not to exceed four square feet
in area on one side and located on the building.
(4) Signs cut into buildings. Signs and tablets when cut into any
masonry surface or when constructed of metal and affixed flat
against a building may not exceed two square feet in area. Signs
may be approved larger than two square feet by the Plan on the
basis of unique design considerations.
(5) Official signs. Official signs, such as traffic control, parking
restrictions, welcome signs and related entrance signs,
neighborhood watch signs, and public notices approved by the
Zoning Administrator.
(6) Lot signs. Permanent directional signs located at the entrance and
exit of a driveway or street shall not exceed two square feet.
(7) Parking signs. Signs in the parking lot shall be mounted no less
than four feet from the ground and shall not exceed 24 inches high
by 30 inches wide.
(8) Flags. Property owners shall be permitted one flag per 25 feet of
frontage on a right-of-way up to a maximum of three flags and three
flagpoles per premises. Each flag must be a maximum of 15 square
feet in area. Flagpoles must be a maximum of 50 feet in height, but
no higher than the highest point of the nearest principal building's
roof on the premises. Flagpoles must meet the minimum yard
setback requirements for a principal building or a minimum of 10
feet, whichever is more restrictive.
(9) Signs on external walls. No signs may be placed on an external
wall.
(10) Election campaign periods. During an election campaign period, as
defined in Wis. Stats. § 12.04, there is no limit on the number or
square footage of signs allowed; provided, however, that such signs
§ 245-32 WATERFORD CODE § 245-32
211:592
§ 245-33. Planned community development district signage.
Each planned community development district in the Village is covered
in its own separate section of Article VIII of this chapter. The specific
section lists the allowed residential and/or nonresidential uses within that
district. When the Zoning Administrator determines whether nonresidential
or residential sign regulations apply, the Zoning Administrator will first
determine whether the allowed uses listed in the particular PCDD for that
parcel are residential or nonresidential, and then apply the appropriate
regulation to the use on the parcel.
§ 245-34. Sign permit.
shall not interfere with traffic or pedestrian safety and shall not be
placed in the vision clearance triangle. Said signs may be placed on
property zoned for any use and on property abutting that property
for which the owner or renter is responsible for the maintenance or
care. A sign having an electrical or mechanical auxiliary requires
a permit, may not be located closer than 10 feet to an adjacent
property or driveway, may not cause a hazard to traffic or adjoining
properties, and may not exceed 12 square feet in area on one side
or 24 square feet on all sides. No sign may have an audio auxiliary
in a residential district.
(11) Original art display. Original art displays are allowed provided that
they meet the following requirements:
(a) Must not be placed on the front of a dwelling;
(b) Must not extend more than six inches from the plane of the
wall upon which it is painted or to which it is affixed;
(c) Must be no more than 24 square feet in size, per lot or parcel;
(d) Compensation must not be given or received for the display of
the original art or the right to place the original art on site; and
(e) May not be illuminated.
A. An application for a sign permit shall be made on a form provided by the
Zoning Administrator and shall contain or have attached thereto at
least the following information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. Location of
building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign is to be
attached or erected.
(2) Name of person, firm, corporation, or association erecting the sign.
(3) In cases where more than one business occupies a single building,
the assignment of on-building sign area to the various businesses
shall be at the discretion of the property owner. This allocation
shall be specified in the sign application.
§ 245-32 TREES § 245-34
211:593
§ 245-35. Construction standards.
(4) Written consent of the owner or lessee of the building, structure, or
land to which or upon which the sign is to be affixed.
(5) A scale drawing of such sign indicating the dimensions, the
materials to be used, the colors on the sign, the type of
illumination, if any, and the method of construction and
attachment. The drawing shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than
one-eighth inch equals one foot and shall be prepared, signed and
sealed by a registered professional engineer when required by the
Zoning Administrator.
(6) A scale drawing indicating the location and position of such sign in
relation to nearby buildings or structures. The drawing shall be at a
scale no smaller than one inch equals 50 feet.
(7) Copies of any other permits required.
(8) Signs requiring state approval shall provide a copy of such
approval with the sign permit application.
(9) Additional information may be required by the Zoning
Administrator or Plan Commission.
B. Sign permit applications shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator
who may approve or deny the application, in writing, within 20 working
days after submittal. A sign permit shall become invalid if work
authorized under the permit has not been completed within six months
of the date of issuance.
C. At the time of the filing of the application for a permit, the applicant
shall furnish to the Zoning Administrator the fee for the permit in
accordance with the current fee schedule set by the Village Board.
D. Waiver of some requirements. The Zoning Administrator may waive the
requirements for certain plans, specification, data, or drawings when
the application is to execute minor alterations or repairs to a sign,
provided that the proposed construction, alteration, or repair is
sufficiently described in the application for the permit.
E. The sign permit fee shall be established by the Village Board and set
forth in the Fee Schedule.
A. Sign materials. Signs should be constructed predominantly of natural
materials, such as rough cedar, pine or other types of wood, Stained
glass may also be used. Manufactured materials that give the
appearance of natural materials are also permitted. Signs with relief
are encouraged. Supporting members or braces of all signs shall be
constructed of approved materials. Halo-lit and channel-lit signs may be
constructed of any modern material that is substantially similar in
construction to the examples provided in the appendix.
§ 245-34 WATERFORD CODE § 245-35
211:594
§ 245-36. Color and lighting.
B. Covering architectural details. Signs shall not cover architectural
details such as, but not limited to, arches, sills, moldings, cornices and
transom windows. It may be required that existing signboards or sign
bands be used for placement of signs.
C. Construction standards. The applicant shall be responsible for
obtaining the necessary permits to comply with Village and state
building, electric and WisDOT codes.
D. Protection of the public. The temporary occupancy of a sidewalk or
street or other public property during construction, removal, repair,
alteration or maintenance of a sign is permitted provided the space
occupied is roped off, fenced off or otherwise isolated. The Zoning
Administrator shall be notified at least 24 hours in advance of such
proposed obstruction.
E. Sign location affecting egress. No sign or any part thereof, or sign
anchors, braces, or guide rods shall be attached, fastened, or anchored
to any fire escape, fire ladder, or standpipe, and no sign or any part of a
sign or any anchor, brace or guide rod shall be erected, put up, or
maintained so as to hinder or prevent ingress or egress through a door,
doorway, or window or so as to hinder or prevent the raising or placing
of ladders against a building by the Fire Department, as necessity may
require.
A. Colors that are of the neon or fluorescent families may be used in
window signage only, and may be hung on the inside surface of a
window. No more than 16 square feet of window neon or fluorescent
signage is permitted per structure. Neon and fluorescent signs are only
allowed in the B-1, B-2, and B-3 Districts.
B. Signs shall not resemble, imitate or approximate the shape, size, form
or color of traffic signs, signals or devices. Signs may be illuminated as
set forth herein, but nonflashing.
C. Signs in residential districts shall only be lit with halo or channel sign
lighting methods.
D. No sign shall be illuminated except as follows:
(1) Natural illumination or background illumination from street
lighting or parking lot lighting.
(2) Shielded spotlights designed to focus the light only on the sign.
(3) The maximum permitted illumination on the face shall not exceed
five footcandles.
(4) Searchlights may not be used in the Village without a permit. The
Plan Commission may permit the temporary use of a searchlight in
a nonresidential district, provided that the searchlight will not be
§ 245-35 TREES § 245-36
211:595
§ 245-37. Measuring signs.
located in any public right-of-way, will not be located closer than
20 feet to an adjacent property, and will not cause a hazard to
traffic or adjoining properties. Searchlight permits shall not be
granted for a period of more than five days in any six-month period.
If, however, representatives of federal, state or local government
agencies wish to operate a searchlight in the Village for official
business, no permit will be required.
(5) Channel- or halo-lit signs are allowed.
A. Area of sign. Sign area shall be calculated as follows:
(1) Standard sign. The area of a standard sign shall be calculated as
the sum of the area within the smallest regular rectangle that will
encompass all elements of the actual sign face, including any
writing, logos, representations, emblems, or any figures or similar
characters, together with any material forming an integral part of
the display or forming the backing surface or background on which
the message or symbols are displayed.
(2) Wall sign. For a sign painted on or applied to a building or to a
freestanding wall, the area shall be considered to include all
lettering, wording, and accompanying designs or symbols, together
with any background of a different color than the natural color or
finish material of the building or architectural wall. The
architectural wall shall be subject to Plan Commission approval of
the site and landscaping plan. The main supporting sign structure
(i.e., brackets, posts, foundation, etc.) shall not be included in the
area measurement.
(3) Letter signs. The gross surface area of a skeleton letter wall sign
consisting of individual letters and/or symbols shall be determined
by calculating the horizontal length of the combined areas of the
smallest rectangles which encompass each word, letter, figure and
emblem on the sign, multiplied by the vertical height of the outside
dimensions of the whole sign.
(4) Two-sided sign. When a sign has two or more faces, the area of all
faces shall be included in determining the area, except that where
two faces are placed back to back and the angle between the faces
measures 45° or less, the total sign area shall be computed by
measuring the square footage of a single face. When the angle
between sign faces measures greater than 45°, the total sign area
shall be computed by adding the square footage of each face.
B. Sign height. Maximum or minimum sign height shall be measured from
the ground surface adjacent to the center of the bottom of the structure
supporting the sign to the top of the sign surface being regulated.
§ 245-36 WATERFORD CODE § 245-37
211:596
§ 245-38. Maintenance of signs; abandoned signs.
C. Length of lineal building front foot. The length of the front wall of the
building adjacent and parallel or closely parallel to any abutting street
or public right-of-way. If the building is located on a corner lot then the
side of the building used for addressing purposes shall be deemed the
front of the building. If the front of the building is uneven then that
portion of the building that is adjacent and parallel to the abutting
street that is within 25 feet of the primary front wall shall be included in
the total length of the lineal building front foot.
A. Maintenance and repair. Every sign, including, but not limited to, those
signs for which permits are required, shall be maintained in safe,
presentable, and good structural condition at all times, including
replacement of defective parts, painting (except when a weathered or
natural surface is intended), repainting, cleaning, and other acts
required for the maintenance of such sign. Internally illuminated signs
shall not be allowed to be repaired, including changing the bulbs to
maintain the interior illumination. The Village will establish a grant
program to help existing internally illuminated signage owners to
replace their signs to bring them into conformity with the 2018 Code
update.
B. Compliance standards. The Zoning Administrator shall require
compliance with all standards of this section. If the sign is not kept in
good maintenance and repair in accordance with the standards outlined
in this section, the Zoning Administrator shall require its removal in
accordance with Subsection D of this section.
C. Abandoned signs. All signs or messages shall be removed by the owner
or lessee of the premises upon which an on-premises sign is located
when the business it advertises is no longer conducted or, for an offpremises
sign, when the lease payment and rental income are no longer
provided, unless there is evidence that the owner or agent is marketing
the property for sale or lease. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the
sign, the Zoning Administrator shall give the owner 30 days' written
notice to remove such sign. Upon failure of the owner or lessee to
comply with this notice, the Village may cause the sign to be removed
and all costs of such removal shall be collected as a special charge on
the next succeeding tax roll.
D. Deteriorated or dilapidated signs. The Zoning Administrator shall give
the owner or lessee of any premises on which a deteriorated or
dilapidated sign is located 60 days' written notice to repair any
deteriorated or dilapidated signs and remove such condition, without
enlarging or structurally altering such signs.
(1) If it is determined that such deteriorated or dilapidated signs
cannot be repaired without structurally altering or changing the
sign, then the owner or lessee of such sign shall obtain a permit
from the Zoning Administrator for such changes or alterations.
§ 245-37 TREES § 245-38
211:597
§ 245-39. Prohibited signs.
The following signs are prohibited in all districts:
(2) Upon failure of the owner or lessee to comply with the notice set
forth in Subsection C of this section, or in the event of the failure of
the owner or lessee to obtain a permit as set forth in § 245-34, the
Village may cause the sign to be removed and all costs of such
removal shall be collected as a special charge on the next
succeeding tax roll.
A. Abandoned signs. Any sign advertising or identifying a business or
organization which is either defunct or no longer located on the
premises. Exceptions may be granted to landmark signs, which may be
preserved and maintained even if they no longer pertain to the present
use of the premises.
B. Flashing, alternating, rotating or swinging signs or devices, whether
illuminated or not, visible from the right-of-way.
C. Floodlighted or reflection-illuminated signs where the light source is
positioned so that its light source is visible from a public right-of-way by
the vehicular traffic, or where the light source is visible from adjoining
property.
D. Internally illuminated signs, neon and back lighted signs other than
OPEN signs, except as indicated elsewhere in this chapter.
E. Flashing signs, signs with an intermittent or flashing light source, signs
containing moving parts, and signs containing reflective elements that
sparkle or twinkle in the sunlight.
F. Electronic message centers, variable message signs that utilize
computer-generated messages or some other electronic means of
changing copy, including displays using incandescent lamps, LEDs,
LCDs or a flipper matrix. Holographic signs which use a rotating LED or
LCD blade to display 3D graphics are not prohibited by this chapter
indoors.
G. Other prohibited signs:
(1) A sign that is a hazard or dangerous distraction to vehicular traffic
or a nuisance to adjoining residential property.
(2) A sign that resembles, imitates or approximates the shape, size,
form or color of a traffic sign, signal or device.
(3) A sign that is located to interfere with the visibility or effectiveness
of any official traffic sign or signal or with driver vision at the
access point of any intersection.
§ 245-38 WATERFORD CODE § 245-39
211:598
§ 245-40. Legal nonconforming signs.
(4) A sign that is erected, relocated or maintained to prevent free
ingress or egress from any door, window or fire escape, or is
attached to a standpipe, fire escape or utility pole.
(5) A sign that contains, includes, or is illuminated by flashing light or
by any light directed toward a neighboring residence, road, or
highway.
(6) A sign that contains, includes, or is composed of any conspicuous
animated part, except holographic signs.
(7) A sign that is painted on a rock or rocks, except in institutional
zoning districts.
(8) Inflatable devices or signs.
(9) A display that would be an original art display but does not have the
permission of the owner of the property on which it is located or is
graffiti.
(10)Off-premises signs larger than the maximum permitted square
footage per face.
(11) Signs taller than eight feet in height, except as permitted
elsewhere in this chapter.
(12) A "V" sign shall be prohibited unless the backs of both signs display
no letters or symbols and are landscaped to screen their backsides.
(13) Reflective lights.
(14) Mobile signs unless permitted as a temporary use.
(15)No sign shall be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended,
enlarged, converted or structurally altered in a Shoreland-Wetland,
Shoreland, or Floodplain District.
A. Notification of nonconformance. Upon determination that a sign is
nonconforming, the Zoning Administrator shall use reasonable efforts
to so notify, in writing, the user or owner of the property on which the
sign is located of the following:
(1) The sign's nonconformity.
(2) Whether the sign is eligible for characterization as a legal
nonconforming sign or is unlawful.
B. Signs eligible for characterization as legal nonconforming. Any sign
located within the Village limits, or located in an area annexed to the
Village hereafter, that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter
is eligible for characterization as a legal nonconforming sign and is
allowed, providing it also meets the following requirements:
§ 245-39 TREES § 245-40
211:599
§ 245-41. Historic signs.
(1) The sign was covered by a sign permit prior to the date of adoption
of the prior zoning ordinance, this article or amendment.
(2) No permit was required by the Village at the time the sign was
erected, and the sign was not changed or altered after the effective
date of this article or a prior zoning ordinance in a manner that
under this chapter would have caused a loss of nonconforming
status.
(3) An existing sign located closer than 10 feet to the street right-ofway
in the B-3 District shall not be deemed nonconforming solely
on that basis.
C. Loss of legal nonconforming status. A sign loses its legal nonconforming
status when any one of the following occurs:
(1) The sign is structurally altered in any way, except for normal
maintenance or repair, which tends to or makes the sign less in
compliance with the requirements of this section than it was before
alteration.
(2) The sign is damaged and requires repair.
(3) The replacement of a nonconforming sign with an identical sign is
not allowed.
D. Legal nonconforming sign maintenance and repair. Nothing in this
section shall relieve the owner or user of a legal nonconforming sign, or
the owner of the property in which the sign is located, from the
provisions of this section regarding safety, maintenance and repair of
the sign. All work, including repainting, requires a permit.
A. Signs of historic significance that make a contribution to the cultural, or
historic quality of the Village because of their unique construction
materials or unique design, unusual age, prominent location within the
Village, or unique craftsmanship from another period of time may be
exempted from any or all size, height, animation, lighting, or setback
requirements of the section, when the Zoning Administrator finds the
following conditions exist:
(1) The sign is of exemplary technology, craftsmanship, or design of
the period in which it was constructed; uses historic sign materials
(wood, metal, or paint applied directly to a building) and means of
illumination (neon or incandescent fixtures); and is not significantly
altered from its historic period. If the sign has been altered, it must
be restored to its historic function and appearance.
(2) The sign is integrated into the architecture of a period building.
§ 245-40 WATERFORD CODE § 245-41
211:600
§ 245-42. Compliance.
§ 245-43. through § 245-53. (Reserved)
B. A sign not meeting the criteria listed above may be considered if it
demonstrates extraordinary aesthetic quality, creativity or innovation in
design.
C. Historic signs are exempt from the requirements of § 245-40, Legal
nonconforming signs.
A. Review. Except as otherwise authorized, no sign requiring a permit
under this article and visible from a state or county highway, from any
Village street, from a private street, from a public parking lot, from a
private parking lot, from the water or from any adjacent property shall
be located, erected, moved, repainted with different colors,
reconstructed, extended, enlarged, or structurally altered, including
the placement of various components of the sign, until a permit has
been applied for, reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator
and a permit has been issued to the property owner or building
occupant.
B. Referral. The Zoning Administrator may refer sign permit applications
to the Plan Commission for architectural review if, in the
Administrator's judgment, the sign design is at odds with the
neighborhood in which it will be placed.
C. Signs located on a property or location with multiple buildings or
businesses under common or separate ownership shall not be exempt
from the requirements of this Code.
D. Additions to and alterations of existing signs and support structures
require a new permit.
§ 245-41 TREES § 245-43
211:601

ARTICLE VII
Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
§ 245-54. Board of Appeals. [Amended 10-10-2005 by Ord. No. 485;
12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 505; 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
A. How constituted: members, meetings and records.
(1) Members. The Board of Appeals shall consist of five residents
appointed by the Village President, subject to confirmation by the
Village Board, for three-year staggered terms. The members shall
serve for such compensation as shall be fixed from time to time by
the Village Board and shall be removable by the Village President
for cause upon written charges and after public hearing. The
Village President shall designate one of the members as
Chairperson. The Village President shall appoint two alternate
members for staggered three-year terms, in addition to the five
members above provided for, and annually shall designate one of
the alternate members as first alternate and the other as second
alternate. The first alternate shall act, with full power, only when a
member of the Board refuses to vote because of interest or is
absent. The second alternate shall so act only when the first
alternate so refuses or is absent or when more than one member of
the Board so refuses or is absent. Vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term of members, including alternate members, whose
terms become vacant. The Board of Appeals may employ a
secretary and other employees.
(2) Rules and meetings. The Board of Appeals shall use Robert's Rules
of Order for government and procedure. Meetings of the Board of
Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chair and at such other
times as the Board of Appeals may determine. The Chair or, in his
or her absence, the Acting Chair, may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the
public.
(3) Records. The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all
of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board of
Appeals and shall be a public record.
B. Powers of the Board of Appeals.
(1) The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which enable
the Village to hear and decide requests for permitted variation from
the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public
interest, where, owing to special factors, a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter would result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be
§ 245-54 TREES § 245-54
211:603
observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice
done, as provided for by Wis. Stats. 62.23(7)(e)7. The Board of
Appeals may reverse or affirm wholly or in part or may modify any
order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and
shall make such order, requirement, decision or determination as in
its opinion ought to be made in the premises and to that end shall
have all powers of the Zoning Administrator.
(2) The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
(a) To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from
the terms of the applicable chapters of this Code as will not be
contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the Code
will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so
that the spirit of the Codes shall be observed, public safety and
welfare secured, and substantial justice done.
[1] In every case where a variance from these regulations has
been granted by the Board of Appeals, the minutes of the
Board shall affirmatively show that an unnecessary
hardship or practical difficulty exists by the standards set
forth in this section.
[2] The records of the Board shall clearly show in what
particular and specific respect an unnecessary hardship or
practical difficulty would be created by the literal
application of such regulations.
(b) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector
or Electrical Inspector, except where prohibited by statute.
(c) To hear and decide special exceptions for which the terms of
this chapter require Board of Appeals determination. Such
special exceptions shall follow the requirements for conditional
use permits set forth in § 245-16, as noted in Wis. Stats. s.
62.23(7)(de)1.a.
(3) In addition to the foregoing, the Board of Appeals shall have the
following specific powers:
(a) To grant a permit for a temporary building for commerce or
industry in a residence district that is not covered under any
other provisions of this Code and that is incidental to the
residential development, such permit to be issued for a period
of not more than one year.
(b) To grant a permit for the extension of a district boundary for a
distance of not more than 35 feet only where the boundary of a
§ 245-54 WATERFORD CODE § 245-54
211:604
district divides a lot in a single ownership at the time of the
adoption of this chapter.
(c) To permit the change of a nonconforming use to another
nonconforming use of the same or higher classification. See
§ 245-10F.
(d) To interpret the provisions of the chapter in such a way as to
carry out the intent and purpose of the plan as shown on the
District Map accompanying and made a part of this chapter,
where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the
street layout on such map.
(e) To permit in appropriate cases, and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of the Code, a building or premises to be
erected or used for such public utility purposes in any location
which is reasonably necessary for the public convenience or
welfare.
(f) The Board of Appeals shall have the power to call on any other
Village department for assistance in the performance of its
duties, and it shall be the duty of such other departments to
render such assistance as may be reasonably required.
C. Appeal procedure.
(1) Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the
Village affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator,
Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Electrical Inspector.
Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by
the rules of the Board of Appeals, by filing with the Zoning
Administrator and with the Board of Appeals a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall
forthwith transmit to the Board of Appeals all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken. The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of appeals, give public notice and decide the same within a
reasonable time pursuant to the procedures set forth in this
section.
(2) Review and approval.
(a) All variance requests shall be subject to the review of the
Zoning Administrator. The Board of Appeals shall review and
act on all variance requests in accordance with the procedures
in this section.
(b) In cases where the Board of Appeals has the power to perform
other reviews, as set forth in Subsection D, the procedures set
forth herein shall be followed as closely as possible; provided,
§ 245-54 TREES § 245-54
211:605
however, that the information required shall be determined by
the type of request being made.
(3) Initiation of request. Proceedings for approval of a request to the
Board of Appeals shall be initiated by an application of the owner(s)
or the owner's authorized agent for the subject property.
(4) Application requirements. Applications shall contain the following:
(a) A map of the generalized location of the subject property in
relation to the Village as a whole.
(b) A map of the subject property (at a minimum scale of one inch
equals 800 feet) showing all lands for which the variance or
other determination is proposed and all other lands within 300
feet of the boundaries of the subject property, together with
the names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map
as the same appear on the current records of the Register of
Deeds. Said map shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the
subject property and its environs. All lot dimensions of the
subject property, a graphic scale, and a North arrow shall be
provided.
(c) A written description of the proposed variance or other
determination describing the type of specific requirements of
the variance or other determination proposed for the subject
property.
(d) A site plan of the subject property as proposed for development
or change. Said site plan shall conform to any and all the
requirements of § 245-56.6.
(e) Written justification for the requested variance or other
determination consisting of the reasons why the applicant
believes the proposed variance or other determination is
appropriate.
(5) Application certification. All applications for requested variances
shall be certified as complete by the Zoning Administrator a
minimum of two weeks prior to the initiation of this procedure. If
the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is not
complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this chapter, he or
she shall return a copy of the application to the applicant and
indicate incomplete or missing requirements.
(6) Review by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator
shall review and evaluate the application and prepare a written
report to be forwarded to the Zoning Board of Appeals for review
and action. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the
proposal may be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter or
the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Administrator shall note this
§ 245-54 WATERFORD CODE § 245-54
211:606
determination in the report. Through the written report, the Zoning
Administrator shall evaluate the following:
(a) Variances. In the case of a variance, whether exceptional or
extraordinary circumstances or special factors are present that
apply only to the subject property. The report shall clearly
indicate how the subject property contains factors that are not
present on other properties in the same zoning district. Area
variances may be granted if there are unusual circumstances
that apply to a lot or structure that don't apply to other
properties in the district; granting a variance would not
adversely impact the purposes of this Code; and strict
application of the Code provisions would result in exceptional
difficulties or hardship. Use variances may only be granted if
literal interpretation of the Code would leave the owner with
no reasonable use of the property. No variance may be granted
to increase the profitability of the property; because of
personal inconvenience; because of construction errors; for
personal economic gain; because of self-created hardships; or
if the present use of the property is nonconforming.
Specifically:
[1] The hardship or difficulty shall be peculiar to the subject
property and different from that of other properties and
not one which affects all properties similarly. Such a
hardship or difficulty shall have arisen because of the
unusual shape of the original acreage parcel; unusual
topography or elevation; or because the property was
created before the passage of the current, applicable
zoning regulations, and is not economically suitable for a
permitted use or will not accommodate a structure of
reasonable design for a permitted use if all area, yard,
green space, and setback requirements are observed.
[a] Loss of profit or pecuniary hardship shall not, in and of
itself, be grounds for a variance.
[b] Self-imposed hardship shall not be grounds for a
variance. Reductions resulting from the sale of
portions of a property reducing the remainder of said
property below buildable size or cutting off existing
access to a public right-of-way or deed restrictions
imposed by the owner's predecessor in title are
considered to be such self-imposed hardships.
[c] Violations by, or variances granted to, neighboring
properties shall not justify a variance.
[d] The alleged hardship shall not be one that would have
existed in the absence of a zoning ordinance; for
example, if a lot were unbuildable because of
§ 245-54 TREES § 245-54
211:607
topography in the absence of any or all setback
requirements.
[2] In what manner the factors identified above prohibit the
development of the subject property in a manner similar to
that of other properties under the same zoning district.
The report shall clearly indicate how the requested
variance is essential to make the subject property
developable so that property rights enjoyed by the owners
of similar properties can be enjoyed by the owners of the
subject property.
[3] Whether the granting of the proposed variance would be of
substantial detriment to adjacent properties. The report
shall clearly indicate how the proposed variance will have
no substantial impact on adjacent properties.
[4] Whether the granting of the proposed variance as depicted
on the required site plan would result in a substantial or
undue adverse impact on the character of the
neighborhood, environmental factors, traffic factors,
parking, public improvements, public property or rightsof-
way, or other matters affecting the public health, safety,
or general welfare, either as they now exist or as they may
in the future be developed as a result of the
implementation of the intent, provisions, and policies of
this chapter, the Comprehensive Plan, or any other plan,
program, map, or ordinance adopted or under
consideration pursuant to official notice by the Village or
other governmental agency having jurisdiction to guide
growth and development. The report shall clearly indicate
how the proposed variance will have no substantial impact
on such long-range planning matters.
[5] Whether the factors that present the reason for the
proposed variance have been created by the act of the
applicant or previous property owner or his agent (for
example: previous development decisions such as building
placement, floor plan or orientation, lot pattern, or
grading) after the effective date of this chapter. The report
shall clearly indicate that such factors existed prior to the
effective date of this chapter and were not created by
action of the applicant, a previous property owner, or his
agent.
[6] Whether the proposed variance involves the regulations of
Article X. The report shall clearly indicate that the
requested variance does not involve the provisions of this
article.
§ 245-54 WATERFORD CODE § 245-54
211:608
(b) Requests for other determinations by the Zoning Board of
Appeals. The Zoning Administrator shall review and provide
comments regarding the action appealed from or other request
for the exercise of the Board of Appeals' powers under
Subsection B. The Zoning Administrator shall transmit to the
Board of Appeals all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
D. Review, public hearing and determination by Zoning Board of Appeals.
(1) Within 30 days after filing of the complete application, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing.
(2) The Clerk shall publish a Class 2 notice of public hearing for the
requested variance or other application. Said notice shall contain a
description of the subject property and the proposed variance or
other determination requested. At least 10 days before said public
hearing, the Village shall mail a notice of the application to the
applicant; to the clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are
within 1,000 feet of any portion of the subject property; and to all
property owners within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject
property. Failure to mail said notice, provided that it is
unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this section.
(3) Area and use variance and unnecessary hardship.
(a) In this section, "area variance" means a modification to a
dimensional, physical, or locational requirement such as a
setback, frontage, height, bulk, or density restriction for a
structure, and "use variance" means an authorization by the
Board of Appeals for the use of land for a purpose that is
otherwise not allowed or is prohibited by the applicable zoning
provision.
(b) A property owner bears the burden of proving "unnecessary
hardship," as that term is used in this section, for an area
variance, by demonstrating that strict compliance with a
zoning ordinance would unreasonably prevent the property
owner from using the property owner's property for a
permitted purpose or would render conformity with this
chapter unnecessarily burdensome or, for a use variance, by
demonstrating that strict compliance with a zoning ordinance
would leave the property owner with no reasonable use of the
property in the absence of a variance. In all circumstances, a
property owner bears the burden of proving that the
unnecessary hardship is based on conditions unique to the
property, rather than considerations personal to the property
owner, and that the unnecessary hardship was not created by
the property owner.
(4) Within 30 days after the holding of the public hearing, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall make its findings pursuant to this section
§ 245-54 TREES § 245-54
211:609
and its determination regarding the application as a whole. The
Zoning Board of Appeals may request further information and/or
additional reports from the Zoning Administrator, another Village
department, and/or the applicant. The Zoning Board of Appeals
may take final action on said request for approval of the requested
variance or other determination at the time of its initial meeting or
said proceedings may be continued from time to time for further
consideration. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall make a written
report of its findings and determinations following its action. If a
quorum is present, a majority vote of the members present shall
be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from or to decide in favor of the applicant
on any matter on which it is required to pass or to effect any
variation in the requirements of this chapter. In exercising its
powers, the Board of Appeals may, in appropriate cases, establish
suitable conditions and safeguards in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this chapter.
E. Effect of denial. No application for a variance or other determination
which has been denied (either wholly or in part) shall be resubmitted
for a period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial, except
on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of factors found valid by
the Zoning Administrator.
F. Limited effect of a variance. Where the Zoning Board of Appeals has
granted a variance, such approval shall neither change the use
classification of the building or premises nor give it any status as a
nonconforming use other than that which it has as a result of the
variance. Granting of a variance shall be considered as unique to the
variance granted and shall not be construed as precedent for any other
proposed variance. The Board of Appeals may specify an expiration date
for the variance if that date relates to a specific date by which the
action authorized by the variance must be commenced or completed. If
the Board of Appeals does not specify such an expiration date, the
variance does not expire. The variance runs with the land.
G. Stay of proceedings. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e)5, an
application for a variance shall stay all legal proceedings furthering
enforcement of any provisions of this chapter from which the applicant
is requesting a variance, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to
the Zoning Board of Appeals after the request for the variance has been
filed that, by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in
his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order
which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by a court of
record on application, on notice to the Zoning Administrator, and on
due cause shown.
H. Variances and other actions in floodplain districts. For all variances,
appeals and boundary disputes in floodplain districts, the Board of
§ 245-54 WATERFORD CODE § 245-54
211:610
§ 245-55. Changes and amendments.
Appeals shall act pursuant to Chapter 256, specifically §§ 256-7C and
D.
I. Notice to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. The Zoning
Board of Appeals shall transmit a copy of each application for a
variance in the Floodplain or Shoreland-Wetland Overlay Zoning
District and a copy of all floodplain or shoreland-wetland appeals to the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) for review and
comment at least 10 days prior to any public hearing. Final action on
the application shall not be taken for 30 days or until the DNR has made
its recommendation, whichever comes first. A copy of all decisions
relating to variances to floodplain or shoreland-wetland regulations,
and a copy of all decisions on floodplain or shoreland-wetland appeals,
shall be transmitted to the DNR within 10 days of the date of such
decision.
J. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Appeals, or any
taxpayer or officer, department, board or bureau of the Village may,
within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the Board of
Appeals, but not thereafter, present to a court of competent jurisdiction
a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in
whole or in part, specifying the grounds of illegality, whereupon such
decision of the Board shall be subject to review as provided by law.
K. Fee. A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to § 245-56L.
A. The Village Board may, from time to time on its own motion or on
petition, amend; supplement or change the district boundaries or the
regulations herein or subsequently established whenever the public
necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice
requires such change. Before acting, the Village Board shall hold a
public hearing and shall give notice by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation at least once each week for two consecutive weeks.
The hearing shall not be held for at least seven days following the last
publication. The Clerk shall also give at least 10 days' notice to the
petitioner and to the clerk of any municipality within 1,000 feet of any
land to be affected by the proposed action. The hearing shall provide
opportunity for any person interested to be heard. [Amended
11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
B. In case of protest against such change duly signed and acknowledged
by the owners of 20% or more of the areas of land included in such
proposed amendment, supplement or change, or by the owners of 20%
or more of the area of the land immediately adjacent extending 100 feet
therefrom, or by the owners of 20% or more of the land directly
opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such
opposite land, such amendment, supplement or change shall not
become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of the
members of the Village Board.
§ 245-54 TREES § 245-55
211:611
C. The Village Board shall not permit changes to the floodland district
boundaries that are inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this
chapter; or in conflict with the applicable rules and regulations of the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
(1) Changes in the Urban Floodway District boundaries shall not be
permitted where the change will increase the flood stage elevation
in excess of one foot. Flood stage increases exceeding 0.1 foot
(three cm) in height shall not be permitted unless the petitioner has
made appropriate legal arrangements with all affected units of
government and all property owners affected by the stage increase.
Petitions for Urban Floodway District changes shall show the
effects of the change within the associated flood fringe utilizing the
equal degree of encroachment principle, and shall provide adjusted
water surface profiles and adjusted floodland limits to reflect the
increased flood elevations.
(2) No river or stream shall be altered or relocated until a floodland
zoning change has been applied for and granted.
(3) Removal of land from the floodland districts shall not be permitted
unless the land has been filled to an elevation at least two feet
above the elevation of the one-hundred-year recurrence interval
flood and further provided that such lands are contiguous to lands
lying outside of the floodlands.
(4) Amendment of unnumbered A Zones shall not be permitted unless
the petitioner provides the Village with engineering data showing
the flood profile, necessary river cross-sections, flow elevations and
any effect the establishment of a floodway/flood fringe will have on
flood stages. The effects shall be limited as set forth in this section.
If the unnumbered A Zone is less than five acres in area and where
the cost of the proposed development is estimated to be less than
$75,000, the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) will assist
the petitioner in determining the required flood elevations.
(5) A copy of all notices for amendments or rezoning in the floodland
districts shall be transmitted to the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources (DNR) and the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA). Amendments to the flood district boundaries or
regulations shall not become effective until approved by the DNR
and the FEMA. In the case of a floodland district boundary change,
an official letter of map amendment from the FEMA shall also be
required.
D. Any person who shall petition the Village Board to amend, supplement
or change the district boundaries or regulations herein or subsequently
established thereby requiring notice by publication and a hearing
thereon, shall pay to the Clerk at the time of submitting the petition and
prior to any publication or hearing thereon, a fee in an amount set by
§ 245-55 WATERFORD CODE § 245-55
211:612
the Village Board to defray the necessary costs and expenses of
publication and hearing, which shall be paid into the Village Treasury,
and no part thereof shall be returned to the applicant regardless of the
disposition of the petition. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467;
1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
E. Submission of supporting documentation for zoning amendment. Any
person who petitions the Village Board to zone or rezone any property
in the Village shall meet and confer with the Village Administrator
regarding the petition. The Village Administrator shall determine
whether the following documentation is required to support the petition
and may waive the submission of this documentation if more-detailed
information is required by another section of this Municipal Code. The
Village Administrator may require the submission of all or some of the
following documentation prior to submission of the petition to the
Village Board: [Added 6-23-2008 by Ord. No. 529]
(1) An accurate map of the area covered by the plan, at a scale of one
inch equals 100 feet, with contour lines at two-foot intervals.
(2) The pattern of public and private roads, driveways, walkways and
parking facilities and proposed design and construction standards.
(3) A detailed lot layout and subdivision plat, where required.
(4) The arrangement of building groups, other than single-family
detached residences.
(5) Floor plans and elevations or perspectives showing the
architectural treatment of all buildings other than single-family
detached residences.
(6) Statistical tabulations showing the apportionment of land uses, the
density of residential use, the ratio of apartments by bedroom
count, the percentage of ground cover by buildings, the floor area
ratio, and the parking ratio.
(7) A grading plan and storm drainage system.
(8) Plans for sanitary sewer and water systems.
(9) The location, type and design detail of all recreational or other
special amenities.
(10) The location and a description of any areas to be dedicated to the
public.
(11) Landscape plans, including a plant materials list.
(12) A proposed development schedule showing the overall phasing
anticipated, the starting and anticipated completion time for the
project, and the area of open space to be provided with each phase.
§ 245-55 TREES § 245-55
211:613
§ 245-56. Enforcement; permits; fees. [Amended 11-22-2004 by
Ord. No. 467; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 4-23-2007 by Ord. No.
511; 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 601; 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
(13) If the plan contemplates any portion of the project to be
implemented or subsequently owned by other than the petitioner,
sufficient information concerning such arrangements shall be
submitted to enable the Village to be assured that the development
will be carried out in complete compliance with the spirit and
intent of the approval granted.
(14) Agreements, bylaws, provisions or covenants which govern the
organizational structure, use, maintenance and continued
protection of the development and any of its common services,
common open areas or other facilities.
(15) Floodplain information necessary to determine compliance with
Chapter 256 of this Municipal Code.
(16) Any other plans, documents or schedules deemed necessary by the
Village for proper evaluation of the proposal.
A. Enforcement. The Zoning Administrator, with the aid of the Police
Department and Building Inspector, shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter, and shall have the powers and duties set forth in § 245-59.
B. Compliance required. No structure, land, development or water shall
hereafter be used and no structure or part thereof shall hereafter be
located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted
or structurally altered except in conformity with the regulations herein
specified for the district in which it is located.
C. Building permits and zoning permits. The use of the terms "building
permit" and "zoning permit" generally mean the required permits under
each applicable chapter of this Code. The term "building permit"
generally includes the building permits and occupancy permits
required under Chapter 98 and other applicable provisions of this Code.
The term "zoning permit" generally includes zoning use permits and
certificates of zoning compliance required under this chapter and the
Land Use Division of this Code.
(1) No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or structurally
altered until a building permit has been applied for in accordance
with Chapter 98, Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical
Code, and until a zoning use permit has been applied for and issued
in compliance with § 245-56.2 and the provisions of this chapter
regulating the use of the land, location of all buildings, setback
lines and all other zoning requirements as herein prescribed.
(2) No building permit for excavation for or erection of any building or
part of a building, or for repairs to or alterations of a building, shall
be issued until after a zoning use permit has been applied for and a
§ 245-55 WATERFORD CODE § 245-56
211:614
statement of its intended use has been filed by the applicant, and
the zoning use permit has been granted.
(3) No vacant land or building shall hereafter be occupied or used, and
no floodland shall be filled, excavated or developed; and no
conforming use shall be changed until a certificate of zoning
compliance has been issued by the Zoning Administrator pursuant
to § 245-56.8. Such certificate shall show that the structure,
premises or use is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Such certificate shall be applied for before the party occupies any
land or structure or there is a renewal or change in a
nonconforming use. Application for a certificate of occupancy in the
floodland districts shall include a certification by a registered
professional engineer or land surveyor that the floodland
regulations set forth in this chapter have been fully complied with.
D. Conditional use permits; Board of Appeals.
(1) No building, structure or development requiring a conditional use
permit as set forth in § 245-16 shall hereafter be erected,
developed, used, extended or structurally altered until a permit has
been issued by the Plan Commission after a public hearing properly
noticed as set forth in § 245-16.
(2) No building, structure or development requiring a determination
by the Board of Appeals shall hereafter be erected, developed,
used, extended or structurally altered until approval thereof is
issued by the Board of Appeals pursuant to the requirements set
forth in § 245-54.
(3) Due notice of the consideration of any floodland conditional use or
Board of Appeals application shall be transmitted to the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) for review and comment.
Final action on an application shall not be taken for 30 days or until
the DNR has made its recommendation, whichever comes first. A
copy of all decisions relating to floodland conditional uses shall be
transmitted to the DNR within 10 days of the effective date of such
decision.
E. Other permits.
(1) Temporary use permit. A zoning temporary use permit is required
for temporary uses and for the use of land for temporary structures
as provided in § 245-56.4 of this Municipal Code, which sets forth
the specific requirements for such permit. When a temporary use
permit has been issued, a certificate of occupancy for the
temporary use is not required.
(2) It is the responsibility of a permit applicant to secure all other
necessary permits required by any state, federal or local agency.
This includes, but is not limited to, a water use permit pursuant to
§ 245-56 TREES § 245-56
211:615
Wis. Stats. Ch. 30 or a wetland fill permit pursuant to Section 404
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
F. Continuance of existing uses. Nothing in the chapter shall prevent the
continuance of the present occupancy or lawful use of any existing
building, except as may be necessary for the safety of life and property.
G. Utilities. Except for public water supply and sanitary sewerage service
in floodplain districts, as set forth in Chapter 256, no separate permit
under this chapter shall be required for the necessary and customary
construction, reconstruction or maintenance of aboveground or
underground public utility neighborhood service lines and mechanical
appurtenances thereto; however, § 245-10B shall apply to the review of
the placement of said utility facilities. When a single site is being
developed, review of the placement of the utility facilities shall be
performed as part of the Zoning Administrator's review of a building
permit application or the Plan Commission's review of a precise
implementation plan. If utilities are being installed as part of a Planned
Community Development District general development plan or precise
implementation plan, the placement of the utility facilities shall be
performed as part of that review. See also § 235-23.1.
H. Applications. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, all applications
for permits required by this chapter shall contain a location sketch in
duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the location, actual shape and
dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the
lot of the proposed or existing building and accessory building, the lines
within which the building shall be erected, altered or moved, the
existing or intended use of each building or part of a building, the
number of families the building is intended to accommodate and such
other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots or
buildings as may be necessary to determine and provide for the
enforcement of this chapter.
I. Dimensions. All dimensions shown relating to the location and size of
the lot shall be based upon an actual survey, recorded plat, or other
map or drawing allowed by the Zoning Administrator. The lot and the
location of the building thereon shall be staked out on the ground
before construction is started.
J. Permit approval. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the
Zoning Administrator shall issue or refuse to issue a zoning use permit
or certificate of zoning compliance within a reasonable time after
receipt of a completed application therefor. No time limits begin to
accrue until the application is complete. Refusal to issue such a permit
shall be given in writing, with the reasons for such refusal.
K. Existing buildings. Upon written request from the owner, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue a zoning certificate of compliance for any
building or premises existing on December 13, 1982, or at the time of
the adoption of an applicable amendment to this chapter certifying,
§ 245-56 WATERFORD CODE § 245-56
211:616
§ 245-56.1. Appeals of Plan Commission decisions. [Added
11-11-2013 by Ord. No. 610]
§ 245-56.2. Zoning permits. [Added 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
after inspection, the extent and kind of use made of the building or
premises and whether or not such use conforms to the provisions of the
chapter.
L. Fees. Fees pertaining to petitions and applications required under this
chapter shall be established by action of the Village Board from time to
time. Such fees shall be paid to the Treasurer, who shall give a receipt
therefor, and shall be credited to the Village.
A. Appeals. Where no other appeal procedure is specifically set forth in a
section of this chapter, an appeal from a decision of the Plan
Commission shall be to the Village Board, upon the filing of a written
notice of appeal of said decision to be filed in the office of the Clerk of
the Village of Waterford not later than 30 days from the date of the
decision by the Plan Commission. Upon receipt of said notice of appeal,
the Village Clerk shall schedule the matter before the Village Board for
hearing and review, which shall be scheduled at any regularly
scheduled meeting of the Village Board. The applicant may request that
the matter be heard at a special meeting of the Village Board upon
payment of the cost therefor. The decision of the Village Board shall be
final, subject only to judicial review per Wisconsin Statutes.
B. In the event of such an appeal, the Plan Commission shall submit a
report to the Village Board, including the findings of fact and
conclusions of law that formed the basis of the Plan Commission's
decision. The Commission shall provide the appellant with a copy of the
report. The appellant may file an objection to the report, and interested
parties shall have the opportunity to present arguments supporting or
objecting to the Plan Commission's decision to the Village Board. The
Village Board shall determine whether the arguments shall be
presented orally or in writing, or both, and may determine whether
additional evidence may be presented.
C. The Village Board, after considering the Plan Commission's report and
any arguments presented, may uphold, modify or overturn the Plan
Commission's decision or may return the matter to the Plan
Commission for additional review.
D. Judicial review. A final action of the Village Board may be reviewed by
the Circuit Court for Racine County pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 68.13.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to specify the requirements and
procedures for the issuance of zoning use permits and zoning
certificates of compliance.
B. Zoning use permit.
§ 245-56 TREES § 245-56.2
211:617
(1) Applicability. Zoning use permits are generally issued by the
Zoning Administrator for certain projects, as specified below, in
order to verify compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A
zoning use permit is required from the Zoning Administrator in the
following instances:
(a) Before any structure is erected, affixed, moved, or structurally
altered to increase its floor area.
(b) Before any area of one acre or greater will be disturbed by
excavation, grading, filling, or other earthmoving activities
resulting in the loss or removal of protective ground cover or
vegetation.
(c) Before a land disturbing activity over more than 5,000 square
feet is to occur on slopes greater than 12%.
(d) Before any substantial alteration that would effect a change in
use of an existing site or structure.
(e) Before the commencement of any structural modification or
structural repair of an existing nonconforming structure or to a
structure housing a nonconforming use, and before any change
in the use of a nonconforming use.
(f) Before the establishment of a new land use, and before any
specific land use for which a stormwater management plan,
grading plan, and/or erosion control plan is required.
(g) Before any other land disturbing activity occurs where the
Zoning Administrator determines that high levels of erosion or
runoff are likely unless an erosion control plan or stormwater
management plan, or both, is developed.
(h) Any other instances that have been indicated in other parts of
this chapter.
(2) Review and approval. All zoning use permit requests shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Zoning Administrator,
unless as otherwise specified in this Code.
(3) Application requirements. Applications for zoning use permits shall
be made to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by the
Zoning Administrator and shall include the following information
where pertinent for proper review:
(a) Name and address of the applicant, owner of the site,
architect, professional engineer and contractor.
(b) Description of the subject site by lot, block, and recorded
subdivision or by metes and bounds; address of the subject
site; type of structure; existing and proposed operation or use
§ 245-56.2 WATERFORD CODE § 245-56.2
211:618
of the structure or site; number of employees; and the zoning
district within which the subject site lies.
(c) Plat of survey prepared by a land surveyor licensed in
Wisconsin showing the location, boundaries, dimensions, uses
and size of the following: subject site; existing and proposed
structures; existing and proposed easements; streets and other
public ways; off-street parking, loading areas, and driveways;
existing highway access restrictions; high water, channel
floodway, and floodplain boundaries; and existing and
proposed street, side, and rear yards. In addition, the plat of
survey shall show type, slope and boundaries of soils shown in
the Racine County Soils Survey prepared by the United States
Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation
Service. The Zoning Administrator may allow an alternate
drawing or sketch if appropriate.
(d) Additional information as may be required by the Plan
Commission or Zoning Administrator.
(e) Before any use for which a conditional use permit has been
granted under this chapter commences operation.
(4) Review by the Zoning Administrator. A zoning use permit shall be
granted or denied by the Zoning Administrator in writing within 30
days of the application, and the applicant shall post such permit in
a conspicuous place at the site. The permit shall expire within four
months unless work equal to 10% of the dollar amount of the
permit has been completed or within 18 months after the issuance
of the permit if the structure for which a permit was issued is not
75% completed as measured by the dollar amount of the permit.
The applicant shall reapply for a zoning use permit before
recommencing work on the structure. Any permit issued in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void.
(5) Fees. A fee in an amount set by the Village Board and set forth in
the Fee Schedule is required with the submittal of a zoning use
permit application. Zoning permit fees do not include and are in
addition to building permit fees established by the Building Code. A
double fee may be charged by the Zoning Administrator if work is
started before a permit is applied for and/or issued. Such double
fee shall not release the applicant from full compliance with this
chapter nor from prosecution for violation of this chapter.
C. Certificates of zoning compliance.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of a certificate of zoning compliance is to
provide regulations governing the review and approval of changes
prior to occupancy. This procedure is required to ensure completed
development complies with the zoning use permit, approved site
plan, and the requirements of this Code. A certificate of zoning
§ 245-56.2 TREES § 245-56.2
211:619
compliance is independent of any building permit or occupancy
permit issued by the Building Inspector.
(2) Applicability. Certificates of zoning compliance are required for any
of the following:
(a) Any occupancy or use for which a zoning use permit was
issued.
(b) Any change in the tenant of a nonconforming use. No change of
tenant in a nonconforming use for continuation of the
nonconforming use shall take place until a certificate of zoning
compliance has been issued by the Zoning Administrator.
(c) Any request for documentation that an existing use is a
conforming use, or for documentation of a nonconforming use.
(3) Review and approval. All certificates of zoning compliance are
subject to the review of and are issued by the Zoning Administrator
after verification of conformance to any permit issued and/or the
provisions of this Code.
(4) Issuance of certificate of zoning compliance.
(a) Every application for a zoning use permit shall also be deemed
to include an application for a certificate of compliance.
(b) Such certificate of compliance shall be issued within 10
working days after a written request for the same has been
made to the Zoning Administrator if the work covered in the
zoning use permit has been completed in conformity with the
provisions of this Code.
(c) If there are minor items missing, such as the installation of
required street trees, the Zoning Administrator shall require
the applicant to provide a cash deposit in the amount estimated
to complete the missing item, and if the work is not completed
within the time specified by the Zoning Administrator, the
Village shall complete the work with the funds deposited, and
in case that amount is deficient, shall place the difference on
the tax roll as a special charge. If the applicant completes the
work within the time specified, the Village shall refund the
amount of the cash deposit.
(5) Written application for a certificate of zoning compliance for the
use of for a use not requiring a zoning use permit shall be made to
the Zoning Administrator; if the use is in conformity with the
provisions of this Code, the certificate shall be issued within 10
working days after the complete application has been made.
(6) Every certificate of zoning compliance shall state that both the
building and the proposed or existing use of a building or land
substantially comply with all provisions of this chapter. A record of
§ 245-56.2 WATERFORD CODE § 245-56.2
211:620
§ 245-56.3. Conditional use permit procedures. [Added 8-13-2018
by Ord. No. 658]
See § 245-16.
§ 245-56.4. Temporary use permit procedures. [Added 8-13-2018 by
Ord. No. 658]
all certificates of zoning compliance shall be kept on file in the
office of the Zoning Administrator and copies shall be furnished on
request to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the
building or land affected.
(7) Termination of certificate of zoning compliance. It shall constitute a
violation of this chapter for any person or entity, either owner or
agent, to occupy a building or land in violation of this section
without having first obtained a certificate of zoning compliance.
Any certificate issued upon a false statement of any fact that is
material to the issuance thereof shall be void. Whenever the fact of
such false statement is established to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator, he or she shall forthwith revoke the certificate of
zoning compliance by written notice to be delivered to the holder of
the void permit upon the premises where the violation has occurred
or, if such holder is not found there, by mailing said notice of
revocation by letter, with delivery confirmation, to the holder's last
known address. Any person who proceeds thereafter with such use
without having obtained a new certificate of zoning compliance
shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter.
(8) Fee. A fee is required for this procedure. See § 245-56L.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations that
govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or
denial, of proposed temporary use permits.
B. Applicability. A temporary use permit may be granted to allow a use
that may not otherwise be allowed in the underlying district for a short
period of time, or to allow a use other than the permanent use identified
for the parcel upon which it lies.
C. Review and approval. All temporary use permit requests shall be
subject to the review of and are issued by the Zoning Administrator.
D. Application requirements. A temporary use permit is required for a
temporary use and/or a temporary structure. An application for a
temporary use permit be submitted to the Zoning Administrator prior to
the event and shall contain all of the following, at the discretion of the
Zoning Administrator:
(1) A map of the generalized location of the subject property in relation
to the Village as a whole.
§ 245-56.2 TREES § 245-56.4
211:621
(2) A map of the subject property in a form acceptable to the Zoning
Administrator showing all lands for which the temporary use is
proposed and all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of
the subject property. Said map shall clearly indicate the current
zoning of the subject property and its environs. All lot dimensions
of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a North arrow shall be
provided.
(3) A written description of the proposed temporary use describing the
type of activities, buildings, and structures proposed for the subject
property and their general locations. This information shall include
whether there will be amplified music and whether alcoholic
beverages will be served.
(4) Demonstration that the proposed temporary use meets all
temporary use requirements of this chapter (see Article X).
(5) The Zoning Administrator may also require a detailed site plan of
the use of the subject property.
(6) General standards. The Zoning Administrator may issue or deny a
temporary use permit, or may request additional information in
order to make a determination.
(a) Zoning Administrator review. The Zoning Administrator will
review an application for a temporary use permit and
determine:
[1] Whether the use is allowed in the zoning district. If it is not
allowed, the Zoning Administrator may deny the
application, or may seek the determination of the Village
Administrator in making a decision.
[2] If the use is allowed, the Zoning Administrator will
determine whether the proposed use will be served
adequately by streets, off-street or on-street parking,
police and fire protection, refuse disposal, and other public
facilities or if the applicant will provide adequately for
such facilities as well as provide for safe vehicular and
pedestrian access and egress to the site. If so, the Zoning
Administrator may issue the permit.
(b) Appeal to the Plan Commission. If the application is denied, the
applicant may appeal the denial to the Plan Commission. The
Plan Commission will review the application and the reason for
Zoning Administrator's denial, and determine:
[1] Whether the proposed use will cause undue traffic
congestion or draw significant amounts of traffic through
residential streets or upon residential property. Adequate
measures will be taken to provide ingress and egress so
designed as to minimize traffic congestion on the public
§ 245-56.4 WATERFORD CODE § 245-56.4
211:622
streets. If that cannot be accomplished, the Plan
Commission will deny the application.
[2] Whether the proposed temporary use will be in harmony
with the general and specific purposes for which this
chapter was enacted and for which the regulations of the
zoning district affected were established. Competition
with existing business in the Village shall not constitute a
reason for denial of the permit.
(c) Conditions.
[1] If the Zoning Administrator or the Plan Commission
approves a permit, they may impose such conditions and
limitations concerning use, location, maintenance,
screening, operation, hours of operation (except as may be
allowed by other federal, state, or Village requirements),
and other matters relating to the purposes and objectives
of this chapter upon the premises as the Zoning
Administrator or Commission deems necessary or
appropriate to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon
other property and improvements near the subject
property and upon public facilities and services, to protect
the public interest, and to secure compliance with the
standards and requirements specified in this chapter. Such
conditions shall be expressly set forth in the temporary use
permit.
[2] The Zoning Administrator or Plan Commission may require
the applicant to mail or deliver notice of the temporary use
to the neighboring property owners prior to the event. If
notice is required, the notice shall include the description
of the use, the location, the dates, the hours of operation,
the parking arrangements, whether food and/or alcohol
will be served, and a description of the type of noise,
amplification, and/or music expected. The applicant shall
provide a copy of the notice, proof that the notice was
mailed or delivered, and a list of the persons to whom it
was mailed or delivered prior to the temporary use.
[3] Violation of any condition, limitation or requirement for
notice shall be a violation of this chapter and shall
constitute grounds for revocation of the temporary use
permit.
(7) Effect of/on other permits.
(a) The amendment of a conditional use permit or precise
implementation plan is not required in order to obtain a
temporary use permit.
§ 245-56.4 TREES § 245-56.4
211:623
(b) The approval and issuance of a temporary use permit does not
amend a conditional use permit or precise implementation
plan.
(c) A temporary use permit is required even when no conditional
use permit or precise implementation plan is required under
the Zoning Regulations.
(d) When a special event permit is required under Chapter 188
and approved for the same use, no temporary use permit is
required.
(e) If the terms of a conditional use permit, precise
implementation plan, or variance existing on the date of the
adoption of this section include the use of the property for the
specific temporary uses covered in this section, no new
temporary use permit is required under this section. If the
CUP, PIP or variance does not cover the specific temporary use,
a temporary use permit is required.
E. Limitations on temporary use permits.
(1) Time limitations. No temporary use permit will be issued for a total
of more than 180 days in any one calendar year, except as may
otherwise be set forth in the specific regulations for the use or
structure set forth in § 245-118.
(2) Temporary use discontinuance. A temporary use permit shall be
deemed to authorize only the particular temporary use for which it
was issued. The permit will automatically expire and cease to be of
any force or effect if the use is discontinued.
(3) A temporary use permit is effective only for the dates listed in the
permit.
F. Amendments to temporary use permits. Temporary use permits may be
amended, varied, or altered only pursuant to the procedures and
subject to the standards and limitations provided in this section for the
original approval of a temporary use permit.
G. Review of temporary use permit. An existing permit may be reviewed by
the Village as follows:
(1) The Zoning Administrator may review a permit if the Zoning
Administrator becomes aware of any of the following:
(a) The temporary use has not continued in conformity with the
Village's conditions of approval of the permit or with any
subsequent amendments to the permit.
(b) Violations of other statutes, ordinances, or laws.
§ 245-56.4 WATERFORD CODE § 245-56.4
211:624
§ 245-56.5. Sign permit procedures. [Added 8-13-2018 by Ord. No.
658]
See § 245-30 for applicable requirements for sign permits.
§ 245-56.6. Site plan review and approval procedures. [Added
8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
(c) A change in the character of the surrounding area or in the
temporary use itself that has caused the temporary use to
become incompatible with the surrounding uses.
(2) The determination of a review of a granted temporary use permit
shall be made by the Zoning Administrator after due notice to the
property owner, occupant, or agent as indicated on the temporary
use permit as to the reason(s) for the review.
(3) Upon review of the temporary use permit, the Zoning
Administrator may: take no action, revise the temporary use
permit, specify additional conditions to be added to the temporary
use permit, or may terminate the temporary use permit. The
Zoning Administrator will report the review and action to the Plan
Commission.
(4) If the permit holder is found to be out of compliance with the terms
of the permit, or there has been a violation of statutes, ordinances
or other laws, the permit holder shall be charged the actual cost of
the review.
H. Standards applicable to all temporary uses. The following standards
shall apply to all temporary uses unless different standards are
provided for the specific use:
(1) Trash and debris. All trash and debris shall be removed or
contained daily.
(2) Written consent is required. Written consent from the owner, or
authorized agent, of the property shall be provided in the
application for the temporary use permit.
(3) Signage. All signage shall be according to the Village of Waterford
Sign Regulations.
(4) Removal of materials and equipment. All materials and equipment
shall be removed within three days of the end of the use.
I. Violation. Any temporary use found not to be in compliance with the
terms of this chapter shall be considered in violation of this chapter and
shall be subject to all applicable procedures and penalties.
J. Fee. A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to § 245-56L.
§ 245-56.4 TREES § 245-56.6
211:625
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to specify the requirements and
procedures for the review and approval of site plan applications. The
provisions of this section are designed to ensure that proposed land
uses and development activity comply with the requirements of this
chapter. Specifically, this section requires all new development activity
and redevelopment activity, including additions and significant
remodeling (i.e., building permits and zoning permits) to first obtain the
approval of site, building, landscaping, and operational plans by the
Plan Commission before the building, occupancy, and zoning permits
can be issued, except that infrastructure development activity
associated with an approved final plat of subdivision or certified survey
map, and infrastructure development activity associated with an
approved final development plan of a planned community development
district, is exempt from this requirement.
B. Applicability. All land uses listed in Article X are subject to site plan
review and approval except for the following:
(1) Single-family and two-family residential uses on individual lots in
any zoning district.
(2) Uses within a final development plan in a planned community
development district in accordance with the procedures of Article
VIII, provided that the final development plan provides a similar
level of detail and range of plans as a typical site plan submittal
required under this chapter.
(3) The use of an existing building for a new use when no structural
modifications or additions are made to the existing building and all
requirements for the new use are met.
(4) Temporary uses unless the Zoning Administrator requires the
submission of a site plan.
C. Review and approval. All site plans shall be subject to the review of the
Zoning Administrator. The Plan Commission shall review and act on the
site plan in accordance with the procedures in this section.
D. Initiation of request for site plan approval. Proceedings for approval of
a site plan shall be initiated by the owner of the subject property or his
or her legally authorized representative. The applicant shall meet with
the Zoning Administrator and other applicable Village staff for a preapplication
meeting to discuss preliminary concepts and plans for the
development. Guidance will be provided to the applicant on technical
requirements and procedures, and a timetable for project review may
be discussed.
E. Application for site plan review. A site plan application may be
considered complete if it contains all of the following, unless specific
application requirements are waived in writing by the Village
Administrator, Village Engineer, or the Zoning Administrator:
§ 245-56.6 WATERFORD CODE § 245-56.6
211:626
(1) Written description of the intended use describing in reasonable
detail the:
(a) Existing zoning district(s) and proposed zoning district(s), if
different.
(b) Current land uses present on the subject property.
(c) Land use designation(s) as depicted on the Land Use Map in
the Comprehensive Plan.
(d) Proposed land uses for the subject property (per Article X).
(e) Projected number of residents, employees, and daily
customers.
(f) Proposed amount of dwelling units, floor area, impervious
surface area, and landscape surface area and resulting site
density, floor area ratio, impervious surface area ratio, and
landscape surface ratio.
(g) Operational considerations relating to hours of operation,
projected normal and peak water usage, sanitary sewer or
septic loadings, and traffic generation.
(h) Operational considerations relating to potential nuisance
creation pertaining to street access, traffic visibility, parking,
loading, exterior storage, exterior lighting, vibration, noise, air
pollution, odor, electromagnetic radiation, glare and heat, fire
and explosion, toxic or noxious materials, waste materials,
drainage, and hazardous materials.
(i) Exterior building and fencing materials.
(j) Possible future expansion and related implications for
Subsection E(1)(a) through (i) above.
(k) Any other information pertinent to adequate understanding by
the Plan Commission of the intended use and its relation to
nearby properties.
(2) A small location map showing the subject property and illustrating
its relationship to the nearest street intersection.
(3) A property site plan map that includes:
(a) Title block that indicates the name, address, and phone/fax
number(s) of the current property owner and/or agent(s) (i.e.,
developer, architect, engineer, or planner) for the project.
(b) The date of the original plan and the latest date of revision to
the plat.
§ 245-56.6 TREES § 245-56.6
211:627
(c) A North arrow and a graphic scale (at a minimum scale of one
inch equals 100 feet).
(d) A legal description of the subject property.
(e) All property lines and existing and proposed right-of-way lines
with bearings and dimensions clearly labeled.
(f) All existing and proposed easement lines and dimensions with
a key provided and explained on the margins of the plan as to
ownership and purpose.
(g) All required building setback lines.
(h) All existing and proposed buildings, structures, and paved
areas, including building entrances, walks, drives, decks,
patios, fences, utility poles, drainage facilities, and walls.
(i) The location and dimension (cross section and entry throat) of
all access points onto public streets.
(j) The location and dimension of all on-site parking (and off-site
parking provisions if they are to be employed), including a
summary of the number of parking stalls provided versus
required by this chapter.
(k) The location and dimension of all loading and service areas on
the subject property and labels indicating the dimension of
such areas.
(l) The location of all outdoor storage areas and the design of all
screening devices.
(m) The location, type, height, size, and lighting of all signage on
the subject property.
(n) The location, height, design/type, illumination power and
orientation of all exterior lighting on the subject property,
including the clear demonstration of compliance with Article
XII.
(o) The location and type of any permanently protected green
space areas.
(p) The location of existing and proposed drainage facilities.
(q) In the legend, the following data for the subject property: lot
area, floor area, floor area ratio, impervious surface area,
impervious surface ratio, and building height.
(4) A detailed landscaping plan of the subject property, at the same
scale as the main plan, showing the location of all landscaping
areas and existing and proposed landscaping, landscaping points,
fencing, and berm options. The landscaping plan shall demonstrate
§ 245-56.6 WATERFORD CODE § 245-56.6
211:628
complete compliance with the requirements of Article XII. (Note:
The individual plant locations and species, fencing types and
heights, and berm heights must be provided.)
(5) A grading and erosion control plan, at the same scale as the main
plan, showing existing and proposed grades, including retention
walls and related devices, and erosion control measures per the
approval of the Village Engineer.
(6) Elevation drawings of proposed buildings or proposed remodeling
of existing buildings showing finished exterior treatment shall also
be submitted, with adequate labels provided to clearly depict
exterior materials, texture, color, and overall appearance.
Perspective renderings of the proposed project and/or photos of
similar structures may be submitted, but not in lieu of adequate
drawings showing the actual intended appearance of the buildings.
(7) A certified survey may be required by the Zoning Administrator in
instances where he determines compliance with setback
requirements may be difficult. The survey shall be prepared by a
professional land surveyor and shall depict property lines and
proposed buildings, structures, and paved areas.
(8) A detailed photometric plan that shows the impact of all exterior
light fixtures based on the proposed fixtures' pole heights and light
bulb needs, depicting resulting lighting levels across the entire
property to the property lines rounding to the nearest 0.10
footcandle, and depicting an illumination limit of 0.50 footcandle.
The 0.50 footcandle line cannot extend beyond the property line.
The plan must be in compliance with lighting performance
standards in Article XII.
(9) A development impact study is required for all forms of
development that require site plan approval. This requirement
shall apply for any development requiring a site plan, including
instances where no land division is proposed.
(10) A detailed site analysis shall be required for any lot or parcel
containing a protected natural resource as determined by Village
staff (see Subsection G below). These protected natural areas
include environmental corridors, floodplains, shoreland-wetlands,
woodlands, and steep slopes.
(11) Any additional information as requested by the Plan Commission.
F. Application certification. The Zoning Administer shall review the
application within 10 working days of receipt of the complete
application. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the application
is not complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this chapter, he
shall return a copy of the application to the applicant and indicate
incomplete or missing requirements.
§ 245-56.6 TREES § 245-56.6
211:629
G. Detailed site analysis. The detailed site analysis required by this article
is designed to provide the clear identification of permanently protected
green space areas on a site that is proposed for development. The
detailed survey work required to identify these areas accurately on a
map is not required prior to the initiation of development concept plans
for an area. A detailed site analysis shall be performed in conjunction
with required land division documents or development site plans for
any and all properties containing permanently protected natural
resource areas.
(1) The detailed site analysis shall be shown on a map with a minimum
scale of one inch equals 200 feet which depicts the subject property
and the location of all protected natural resource areas when
required by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR)
or the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission
(SWERPC). The detailed site analysis shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) Topographic information is not required for any property that
does not contain steep slopes. For such properties, topographic
information with a minimum contour interval of two feet is
required.
(b) All natural resource areas which require protection by the
DNR or SEWRPC shall be accurately outlined and clearly
labeled. Particular care as to clarity shall be taken in areas
where different resource types overlap with one another.
(c) All site disruption (including selective cutting) proposed to
occur within permanently protected natural resource areas
shall be limited to development pads. Development pads shall
be depicted on the detailed site analysis map, site plans
required for development permits, and the recorded plat of
subdivision or certified survey map.
(d) Beyond visible damage to natural resources, vegetation, soil,
and drainage patterns, site disruption activities shall not
compact soil covering tree roots or otherwise damage trees
beyond the area from which trees are to be removed. All nonnuisance
type trees with calipers exceeding three inches,
whose canopies are located adjacent to disturbed areas, which
are removed within a period of five years following site
disruption shall be replaced by the owner with a three-inch
caliper tree of the same type (canopy or understory).
(e) All mitigation areas related to the provisions of this chapter
shall be depicted on the detailed site map with notations
provided which describe the mitigation techniques employed.
(f) The proposed method of continued enforcement of the
protections required, including proposed easements,
§ 245-56.6 WATERFORD CODE § 245-56.6
211:630
covenants, association by-laws, or other means by which the
restrictions will be enforced without Village oversight.
(2) The detailed site analysis map shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator for initial review prior to, or concurrently with, the
submission of the preliminary plat of subdivision or the certified
survey map, or if the proposed development does not involve a land
division, then submittal is required as an attachment to a required
site plan. A concept plan of the proposed development may be
submitted prior to the submission of the detailed site analysis map;
however, in no way do comments regarding a concept plan indicate
the approval of the plan or the natural resource feature locations. A
detailed site analysis map prepared for the subject property that
has been previously approved by Village staff may be submitted for
any subsequent development activity on the site. However,
modifications to such a previously approved map will be required if
the analysis is no longer accurate for the subject property.
(3) Village staff shall review the submitted detailed site analysis map
for general compliance with the data sources listed under
Subsection G(3)(a) through (h) below. The Zoning Administrator
may provide the petitioner with a written evaluation of the
submitted detailed site analysis map which shall indicate the
acceptance by Village staff or the need for further analysis work,
discussion with the petitioner and/or staff-recognized experts, or a
joint site visit.
(a) Official Zoning Map.
(b) Applicable 1982 United States Geological Survey (USGS) 7.5
minute topographic maps for the Village of Waterford and its
environs.
(c) Aerial photos of the subject property.
(d) United States Geological Survey (USGS) Quads and other
sources of topographic information.
(e) Applicable FEMA and related floodplain maps.
(f) Applicable federal and state wetland inventory maps.
(g) The Village of Waterford Comprehensive Plan.
(h) Site visits.
(4) If necessary, as determined by Village staff, revised detailed site
analysis maps shall be prepared and submitted for review by
Village staff until a version is deemed acceptable. Staff review of
the detailed site analysis may be appealed as a matter of
interpretation (see § 245-54).
§ 245-56.6 TREES § 245-56.6
211:631
(5) Upon notification of acceptance by Village staff (or, in case of
appeal, by determination of the Zoning Board of Appeals), the
petitioner may proceed with the submittal of necessary
development documents.
(6) Information contained on the detailed site analysis map relating to
the boundaries of permanently protected green space areas
(including natural resource protection areas, other permanently
protected green space areas, and required mitigation areas) shall
be clearly depicted on any and all site plans required as a
precondition for application for any development permit (such as a
building permit) and on any proposed plat of subdivision or
certified survey map.
H. Site plan review by the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission, in its
consideration of a site plan, shall take into account the basic intent of
this chapter to ensure attractive, efficient, and appropriate
development of land in the community and to ensure that every
reasonable step has been taken to avoid depreciating effects on
surrounding property and the natural environment. The Plan
Commission may require such additional measures and/or
modifications as it deems necessary to accomplish this objective and
may withhold approval of the site plan until revisions depicting such
additional measures and/or modifications are submitted to the
satisfaction of the Plan Commission. Amended plans and conditions
applicable to the proposed use shall be made a part of the official
record, and development activity on the subject property may not
proceed until the revised application has been approved by the Plan
Commission. In its review of the site plan application, the Plan
Commission may make findings on each of the following criteria to
determine whether the submitted site plan shall be approved, approved
with modification, or denied:
(1) All standards of this chapter and other applicable Village, state,
and federal regulations are met.
(2) The public health and safety are not endangered.
(3) Adequate public facilities and utilities are provided.
(4) Adequate control of stormwater and erosion is provided and the
disruption of existing topography, drainage patterns, and
vegetative cover is minimized insofar as is practical.
(5) Appropriate traffic control and parking are provided.
(6) Appropriate landscaping and open space areas are provided.
(7) The appearance of structures maintains a consistency of design,
materials, colors, and arrangement with nearby properties of
similar use which complies with the general architectural
guidelines provided in Subsection H(7)(a) through (e) below:
§ 245-56.6 WATERFORD CODE § 245-56.6
211:632
(a) Exterior construction materials shall be consistent with
§ 98-22, Architectural control.
(b) Exterior building design or appearance shall not be of such
unorthodox or abnormal character in relation to its
surroundings as to be unsightly or offensive to generally
accepted taste and community standards.
(c) Exterior building design or appearance shall not be so identical
with nearby buildings so as to create excessive monotony or
drabness. A minimum of five basic home styles shall be
provided in each residential subdivision.
(d) Exterior building design or appearance shall not be
constructed or faced with an exterior material which is
aesthetically incompatible with other nearby buildings or
which presents an unattractive appearance to the public and to
surrounding properties.
(e) Exterior building, sign, and lighting design or appearance shall
not be sited on the property in a manner which would
unnecessarily destroy or substantially damage the natural
beauty of the area.
I. Initiation of land use or development activity. Except with the written
permission of the Zoning Administrator, absolutely no land use or
development activity, including site clearing, grubbing, or grading,
shall occur on the subject property prior to the approval of the required
site plan. Any such activity prior to such approval shall be a violation of
this chapter and shall be subject to all applicable enforcement
mechanisms and penalties.
J. Modification of an approved site plan. Any and all variation between
development and/or land use activity on the subject property and the
approved site plan is a violation of this chapter. An approved site plan
shall be revised and approved via the procedures of this section so as to
clearly and completely depict any and all proposed modifications to the
previously approved site plan, prior to the initiation of said
modifications.
K. Sunset clause. If all buildings on an approved site plan are not fully
developed within two years of final Plan Commission approval, then the
approval shall expire, and no additional site plan development shall be
permitted on undeveloped portions of the subject property. The Plan
Commission may extend this period, as requested by the applicant,
through the site review process.
L. Fee. A fee is required for this procedure. See § 245-56L.
§ 245-56.6 TREES § 245-56.7
211:633
§ 245-56.7. Board of Appeals review and approval procedures.
[Added 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
See § 245-54.
§ 245-57. Violations and penalties.
§ 245-58. Annexations. [Amended 3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 375;
4-9-2012 by Ord. No. 585; 7-22-2013 by Ord. No. 608]
All territory annexed to the Village on or after the date of passage of this
section shall be permanently or temporarily zoned at the time of annexation.
If the land is temporarily zoned, the Plan Commission shall evaluate and
recommend a permanent classification to the Village Board within one
year. Annexations containing floodlands shall be placed in the appropriate
floodplain district.
§ 245-59. Zoning Administrator. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No.
489; 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
A. Any building or structure hereafter erected, moved or structurally
altered or any use hereafter established in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an unlawful building,
structure or use. The Building Inspector or Zoning Administrator shall
promptly report all such violations to the Village Attorney, who shall
bring action to enjoin the erections, moving or structural alteration of
such building or the establishment of such use or to cause such
building, structure or use to be vacated or removed.
B. Any person who violates, disobeys, neglects, omits or refuses to comply
with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
chapter may also be required, upon conviction, to forfeit not less than
$25 nor more than $500 for each offense, together with the costs of
prosecution; and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of
prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the County Jail of Racine County
until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not to exceed 30 days for
each violation. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
C. Every structure, fill or development placed or maintained on floodland
in violation of this chapter is a public nuisance and the creation thereof
may be enjoined and maintenance thereof may be abated by action at
suit of the state, Village or any citizen of the state or Village.
A. The office of Zoning Administrator in and for the Village is hereby
created and shall be filled by appointment by the President of the
Village by and with the approval of the Village Board. The Zoning
Administrator shall hold office for two years or as may be determined by
contract unless sooner removed by the Village Administrator. The
Zoning Administrator shall receive as compensation an amount as set
from time to time by the Village Board. In the absence of the Zoning
§ 245-56.7 WATERFORD CODE § 245-59
211:634
Administrator, the Village Administrator shall serve as the Zoning
Administrator.
B. The general duty of the Zoning Administrator is to interpret and
administer this chapter, as well as certain other Village of Waterford
ordinances as indicated within those ordinances. With respect to this
chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall have the following specific
duties and responsibilities:
(1) Make available to the public, to the fullest extent possible, all
reports and documents concerning the Village's Comprehensive
Plan and ordinances. In addition, information in the form of
reports, bulletins, maps, and engineering data shall be readily
available and widely distributed. The Village Board may set fees
necessary to recover the cost of providing information to the
public.
(2) Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including
but not limited to all maps, amendments, conditional uses,
temporary uses, sign permits, site plans, zoning permits, variances,
appeals, interpretations, and applications therefor.
(3) Receive, file, and forward all applications for all procedures
governed by this chapter to the designated official bodies.
(4) Determine that all zoning permits, building permits, sign permits,
and site plans (and their constituent plans) comply with all
provisions of this chapter.
(5) Make interpretations regarding the provisions of this chapter.
(6) Grant minor variations from the dimensional (setback, height and
area) requirements of this chapter, up to a maximum variation of
5% for setbacks and height limitations and up to a maximum
variation of 5% or 1,000 square feet for area requirements
(whichever is less), so long as the spirit and intent of this chapter
are preserved.
(7) Grant extensions of time to complete work required under this
chapter where necessary.
(8) Investigate all complaints made relating to the location of
structures and the use of structures, lands, and waters. The Zoning
Administrator shall give notice of all violations of this chapter to
the owner, resident, agent, or occupant of the premises and report
uncorrected violations to the Village Attorney in a manner specified
by the Attorney.
(9) Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, waters, and land to
determine compliance with all provisions of this chapter. The
Zoning Administrator must be permitted access to premises and
structures during reasonable hours to make inspections as deemed
§ 245-59 TREES § 245-59
211:635
§ 245-60. Severability and nonliability.
necessary by him to ensure compliance with this chapter. If the
Zoning Administrator is refused entry after presentation of his
identification, he may procure a special inspection warrant in
accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0119(2). Where useful, the Zoning
Administrator, or his agent, may set marks on bridges or buildings
or other markers which show the depth of the regional flood or may
set marks delineating the boundaries of wetlands.
(10) Institute, in the name of the Village of Waterford, any appropriate
actions or proceedings against a violator of this chapter, as
provided by law.
(11) Prohibit the use or erection of any structure, land, or water until he
has inspected and approved such use or erection.
(12) Request assistance and cooperation from the Police Department,
the Department of Public Works, the Village Administrator, and the
Village Attorney as deemed necessary.
A. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
B. If any application of this chapter to a particular structure, land, or
water is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such judgment shall not be applicable to any other
structure, land or water not specifically included in such judgment.
C. The Village does not guarantee, warrant or represent that only those
areas designated as floodlands will be subject to periodic inundation
and hereby asserts that there is no liability on the part of the Village
Board, its agencies or employees for any flood damages, sanitation
problems or structural damages that may occur as a result of reliance
upon and conformance with this chapter.
§ 245-59 WATERFORD CODE § 245-60
211:636
ARTICLE VIII
Planned Community Development Districts
§ 245-61. Intent and purpose.
The intent of this article is to encourage and promote improved
environmental design in the development of land by allowing greater
freedom and flexibility than is possible under the precise and rigid
requirements of conventional zoning districts, through the use of objective
standards establishing goals and criteria for judgment rather than the
application of fixed formulas. To this intent it allows diversification in the
uses permitted and variation in the relationship of uses, structures, open
spaces and heights of structures in developments conceived and
implemented as comprehensive and cohesive unified projects, while still
requiring substantial compliance to the general plan for community
development. It is further intended to encourage more imaginative site
planning, to assist in achieving more rational and economic development
with relationship to public services, to permit optimum development of
land and to encourage and facilitate the conservation of open land and
other natural features such as woods, streams, wetlands, etc., as integral
components of a balanced ecology.
§ 245-62. Minimum planned community development area.
To qualify for consideration as a planned community development, the site
shall be of sufficient size in relation to the proposed uses to justify the
application of the special regulations as set forth in this article and shall be
under the single or unified ownership of the applicant.
§ 245-63. Permitted uses.
In a planned community development, the following uses may be permitted,
subject to the standards as hereinafter set forth; provided, however, that
no use shall be permitted except in conformity with a specific and precise
development plan pursuant to the procedural and regulatory provisions as
hereinafter set forth: any use permitted by right in any of the other districts
of this chapter.
§ 245-64. Standards.
A. General. As a basis for determining the acceptability of a planned
development proposal, specific consideration shall be given as to
whether or not it is consistent with the spirit and intent of the purposes
of this article; has been prepared with competent professional advice
and guidance in terms of planning, architecture and engineering; and
produces significant benefits in terms of improved environmental
design.
B. Height and area. Specific lot size, density, open space, building
location, height, size, floor area, yard, parking and other such
requirements shall be based upon determination as to their
§ 245-61 TREES § 245-64
211:637
appropriateness to the uses or structures as they relate to the total
environmental concept of the planned development and consistent with
the criteria set forth in this chapter and with those generally accepted
basic standards necessary to ensure the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare.
C. Parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in accordance
with applicable regulations set forth in § 245-15 and other applicable
provisions of this chapter. This requirement may be waived by the Plan
Commission and/or Village Board in commercial and/or industrial
developments or commercial and/or industrial sections of mixed
developments on a site-by-site basis during the review and approval
process. [Amended 12-3-2001 by Ord. No. 419]
D. Design standards. Engineering and subdivision design standards
relative to street type, location and width, sidewalks, street lighting,
storm drainage, lot arrangement or other elements of site design shall
be based upon determination as the appropriate standards necessary to
effectively implement the specific function in the specific situation, and
as it relates to the total plan concept; and consistent with the necessity
for compatibility with the existing pattern in areas peripheral to the
development. In no case shall minimal construction standards be less
than those necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. To
this intent, the specific provisions of Chapter 235, Subdivision of Land,
of the Village may be waived where deemed appropriate in the case of a
planned community development.
E. Intensity and character of land use. In a planned community
development, the suitability of the type and character of uses proposed
and their intensity and arrangement on the site shall be based upon the
following standards:
(1) Compatibility to the physical nature of the site, with particular
concern for conservation of natural features such as tree growth,
streams, wetlands, geological features, natural resources, etc.; for
suitability of soils for the uses proposed; for preservation of open
space, and for careful shaping of terrain to minimize scarring,
ensure suitable drainage and for preservation of natural terrain
wherever appropriate.
(2) Achievement of an attractive environment appropriate to the uses
proposed and compatible with existing development in the
surrounding area and with official development plans for the area,
with particular concern for preservation of ecologic and economic
balance.
(3) Capacity to be effectively serviced without creating a demand for
schools, sanitary sewer, water, stormwater drainage, recreational
areas highways or other public services substantially in conflict
with that anticipated by the appropriate jurisdictional plans for
§ 245-64 WATERFORD CODE § 245-64
211:638
such services or which could not be provided without adverse effect
upon the jurisdictional area involved.
(4) Adequate provision for the practical functioning of the
development in terms of circulation, parking, emergency services,
mail and delivery service, street maintenance and utility service.
(5) Adequate provision for appropriate sites for schools, parks,
highways and other public facilities serving the proposed
development.
F. Provision for common open space, park or other amenity area.
(1) In a planned community development, consideration shall be given
to the preservation of open space and other natural features such
as woods, streams, wetlands, etc., as common open space, parkland
or other amenity area serving the recreational and aesthetic needs
of the people in the development, the need created for such area by
the development and the suitability or potential of the area for such
use.
(2) Such areas may include landscaped or naturalistic grounds, water
bodies or specific recreational activity facilities and shall be of such
size, shape, character and location as makes them a practical
recreational amenity to the residents of the development or a
contribution to the environmental quality of the development.
(3) Adequate provision shall be made for the establishment,
permanent preservation and maintenance of such common "open
space" parkland or amenity areas either by private reservation or
dedication to the public:
(a) Dedication shall not be mandatory, but where public ownership
is desired by the Village, reservation for such purpose may be
required by the Village.
(b) In the case of private open space reservation, the open area to
be reserved shall be protected against building development
by conveying to the Village as part of the conditions for project
approval an open space easement over such open areas
restricting the area against any future building or use except
as is consistent with that of providing landscaped open space
for the aesthetic and recreational benefit of the development.
Buildings or uses or recreational, cultural or other purposes
compatible with the open space objective may be permitted
only where specifically authorized as part of the development
plan or subsequently with the express approval of the Plan
Commission following approval of building, site and
operational plans.
(c) The care and maintenance of private open space reservations
or amenity areas shall be assured by establishment of
§ 245-64 TREES § 245-64
211:639
§ 245-65. Procedure.
The procedure for rezoning to a planned community development district
shall be as required for any other zoning district change under this chapter,
except that in addition thereto, the rezoning may only be considered in
conjunction with a development plan and shall be subject to the following
additional requirements:
appropriate management organization for the project. The
manner of assuring maintenance and assessing such cost to
individual properties shall be determined prior to the approval
of the final project plans and shall be included in the conditions
of approval and in the title to each property.
(d) Ownership and tax liability of private open space reservation
or amenity areas shall be established in a manner acceptable
to the Village and made a part of the conditions of the plan
approval.
G. Economic feasibility and impact. To minimize the possibility of adverse
effect resulting from failure to implement an approved project or from
the economic impact of its development upon the community, the
proponents of a planned development shall provide satisfactory
evidence of their economic feasibility to finance the project and that the
economic prosperity of the area or the values of surrounding properties
would not be adversely affected as compared to the impact of
development which might reasonably have been anticipated under the
zoning in effect at the time the planned development was proposed.
H. Implementation schedule. The proponents of a planned community
development district shall submit a reasonable schedule for the
implementation of the development to the satisfaction of the Village
Board, including suitable provisions for assurance that each phase
could be brought to completion in a manner which would not result in
adverse effect upon the community as a result of termination at that
point.
I. Enforceability. Such requirements as are made a part of an approved
Precise Implementation Plan shall be, along with the plan itself,
construed to be enforced as a part of this chapter.125
A. Preapplication conference. Prior to the submittal of a formal application
for approval of a planned community development, the applicant shall
meet with the Plan Commission for an informal discussion of the
proposed development in order to provide the basis for proper
submittal and processing.
B. Application.
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 245-64 WATERFORD CODE § 245-65
211:640
(1) The submittal for approval of a planned community development
shall be in the form of a General Development Plan and a Precise
Implementation Plan. The application may be for a preliminary
approval of a General Development Plan, followed by the submittal,
in whole or part, of final detail plans for approval as a Precise
Implementation Plan or for a combined General Development and
Precise Implementation Plan for all or part of the General
Development Plan.
(2) Thirteen copies of the application for a General Development Plan;
a General Development Plan with a Precise Implementation Plan or
a Precise Implementation Plan shall be submitted to the Clerk, who
shall transmit it directly to the Plan Commission for processing.
[Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467126]
C. General Development Plan. The application for approval of a General
Development Plan is intended to provide sufficient definition of the
proposed development to make possible a determination as to its basic
acceptability in terms of its character; its use pattern; its intensity of
use; its economic, environmental and service impact; and such other
factors as would be pertinent to such basic decision prior to the
preparation of detailed engineering, architectural and landscape
architectural plans. Specifically, such submittal shall include the
following:
(1) A statement describing the general character of the intended
development.
(2) A legal description and an accurate map of the project area,
including its relationship to surrounding properties and existing
topography and key features.
(3) A site plan of the proposed development prepared by a competent
professional site planner at a minimum scale of one inch equals 200
feet showing at least the following information in sufficient detail to
make possible the evaluation of the criteria for approval:
(a) The pattern of proposed land use, including shape, size and
arrangement of proposed use areas, density and environmental
character and the relationship to surrounding uses.
(b) The pattern of public and private streets, pedestrian ways and
parking areas proposed and the relationship to existing
streets.
(c) The location, size and character of recreational and open space
areas designated for private reservation or reserved or
dedicated for public uses such as school, park, greenway, etc.,
or of any other special amenity to be provided.
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 245-65 TREES § 245-65
211:641
(d) A utility feasibility study showing the general system of sewer,
water and storm drainage.
(e) A general analysis of the impact of the development upon
traffic facilities.
(4) Appropriate statistical data on the size of the development, ratio of
various land uses, percentages of multifamily units by number of
bedrooms, economic analysis of the development, expected staging
and any other plans or data pertinent to proper evaluation of the
proposal.
(5) General outline of intended organizational structure related to
property owners' association, deed restrictions and private
provision of common services.
(6) Any additional information requested by the Plan Commission as
being necessary for adequate evaluation of the concept plan.
D. Referral and hearing.
(1) Within 60 days after completion of the filing of the petition for
approval of a General Development Plan, the Plan Commission
shall forward the petition to the Village Board with a
recommendation that the plan be approved as submitted, approved
with modifications or disapproved. Such report shall include
findings of fact specifying the reasons for the Plan Commission's
recommendation.
(2) Upon receipt of the Plan Commission's recommendation, the
Village Board shall determine whether or not to initiate a proposed
zoning change to permit the proposed planned community
development district and to schedule the required public hearing. If
the Board fails to initiate such a change within 30 days, the
petitioner may file a petition directly with the Clerk as provided by
law. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 467]
E. Village Board action. Within 30 days following receipt of the report of
the Plan Commission, the Village Board shall approve the
recommendation, approve the recommendation with modifications,
disapprove the recommendation or refer the matter back to the Plan
Commission for further consideration. In the case of approval or
approval with modification, the Village Board shall adopt an ordinance
establishing the planned community development district and
approving the General Development Plan and therein may impose such
conditions as it deems necessary to ensure that the development
conforms to such plan. Such approval of a General Development Plan
shall establish the basic right of use for the area in conformity with the
plan as approved, but shall be conditioned upon approval of a Precise
Implementation Plan, and shall not make permissible any of the uses as
proposed until a Precise Implementation Plan is submitted and
approved for all or a portion of the General Development Plan.
§ 245-65 WATERFORD CODE § 245-65
211:642
F. Precise Implementation Plan. A Precise Implementation Plan for
implementation of all or a part of a proposed planned community
development district may be submitted concurrently with a General
Development Plan or within a reasonable period of time as determined
by the Village Board. If a Precise Implementation Plan, which the
Village Board determines to be a reasonable phase of the total plan, has
not been submitted within such time, the Village Board may revoke the
approval of the General Development Plan. The Precise Implementation
Plan shall present in greater detail the information given approximately
in the General Development Plan and include sufficient detail to show
substantial conformity to the General Development Plan. The Precise
Implementation Plan shall include the following detailed construction
and engineering plans and related detailed documents and schedules:
(1) An accurate map of the area covered by the plan, including the
relationship to the total General Development Plan, at scale of one
inch equals 100 feet with contour lines at two-foot intervals.
(2) The pattern of public and private roads, driveways, walkways and
parking facilities and proposed design and construction standards.
(3) Detailed lot layout and subdivision plat where required.
(4) The arrangement of building groups, other than single-family
detached residences.
(5) Floor plans and elevations or perspectives showing the
architectural treatment of all buildings other than single-family
detached residences.
(6) Statistical tabulations showing the apportionment of land uses, the
density of residential use, the ratio of apartments by bedroom
count, the percentage of ground cover by buildings, the floor area
ratio and the parking ratio.
(7) Grading plan and storm drainage system.
(8) Engineering plans for sanitary sewer and water system.
(9) The location, type and design detail of all recreational or other
special amenities.
(10) Location and description of any areas to be dedicated to the public.
(11) Landscape plans, including plant materials list.
(12) Proposed development schedule showing the overall phasing
anticipated, the relationship of the proposed Precise
Implementation Plan to the total schedule, the starting and
anticipated completion time for the phase covered by the Precise
Implementation Plan and the area of open space to be provided
with each phase.
§ 245-65 TREES § 245-65
211:643
(13) Proposed financing plan, including any change in ownership
interest involved.
(14) If the plan contemplates any portion of the project to be
implemented or subsequently owned by other than the petitioner,
sufficient information concerning such arrangements shall be
submitted to enable the Village to be assured that the development
will be carried out in complete compliance with the spirit and
intent of the approval granted.
(15) Analysis of the economic impact of the development upon the
community.
(16) Agreements, bylaws, provisions or covenants which govern the
organizational structure, use, maintenance and continued
protection of the planned community development and any of its
common services, common open areas or other facilities.
(17) Any other plans, documents or schedules deemed necessary by the
Village for proper evaluation of the proposal.
G. Public hearing. If the Precise Implementation Plan conforms
substantially to the General Development Plan as approved, no public
hearing shall be required, though the Plan Commission may hold
informal hearings if it so desires. A Precise Implementation Plan
submitted for approval shall be deemed to conform substantially to the
General Development Plan approved, provided any modification
therein, including any modification in location, design and number of
buildings, roadways and utilities, does not change the concept or intent
of the preliminary plan approved; increase the gross residential density
or intensity of use by more than 10%, reduce the area set aside for
common open space by more than 10%, or in any case below that
required for a minimum; increase by more than 10% the floor area for
nonresidential use, or increase by more than 5% the total ground area
covered by buildings or structures.
H. Plan Commission action. Within 30 days following the submittal of
petition, the Plan Commission shall take action to approve the Precise
Implementation Plan as submitted, approve subject to specified
modifications or conditions, or deny approval.
I. Recording. In the event of approval of the Precise Implementation Plan,
the building, site and operational plans for the development, as
approved, as well as all other commitments and contractual
agreements which the Village offered or required with regard to project
value, character and other factors pertinent to an assurance that the
proposed development will be carried out basically as presented in the
official submittal plans, shall be recorded by the developer within a
reasonable period of time as determined by the Village Board in the
Racine County Register of Deeds Office. This shall be accomplished
prior to the issuance of any building permit.
§ 245-65 WATERFORD CODE § 245-65
211:644
§ 245-66. Foxwood Isle Planned Community Development District.
J. Changes. If the Precise Implementation Plan submitted does not
conform substantially to the General Development Plan previously
approved, or if the applicant desires to amend substantially a
Development Plan previously approved in General or Precise form, the
changes therein or amendments thereto may be approved only by
following the procedure for original approval. No changes in the
Precise Implementation Plan approved hereunder shall be considered
to waive any of the covenants or agreements limiting the use of land,
buildings, structures and improvements within the planned community
development unless specifically so stated.
K. Extension or revocation. If no substantial construction has begun in the
planned community development within two years after the approval by
the Village Board of a Precise Implementation Plan, the plan shall be
subject to revocation upon written notice to applicant from the Village
Board. The Village Board may grant extensions of such period. In the
event of revocation hereunder, an appropriate instrument of revocation
shall be filed in the Racine County Register of Deeds office.
L. Additions. Land contiguous to an existing planned community
development may be added to such planned community development,
provided such land is made a part of the original development plan in all
respects prior to its incorporation into such plan by an amendment of
the Development Plan as provided in Subsection J.
A. Permitted uses: a total of 80 condominium dwelling units, including offstreet
parking, recreational areas and other accessory uses as
designated on Exhibit "A" to Ordinance No. 194, on file in the Village
Clerk's office, and adopted herein by reference. The above permitted
uses shall be the only permitted uses allowed in the Foxwood Isle
Planned Community Development District. [Amended 11-22-2004 by
Ord. No. 467]
B. Special uses. No special uses shall be permitted in the Foxwood Isle
Planned Community Development District.
C. Dwelling standards.
(1) Size of dwelling units. Each dwelling unit contained within the
development shall have a minimum floor area of not less than 973
square feet. Such minimum floor area shall include utility rooms
but excludes cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways,
garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during
periods of unit habitation.
(2) Number of bedrooms per dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit shall
have two bedrooms. No unit shall have three or more bedrooms.
(3) Number of bathrooms. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a
minimum of one full bathroom.
§ 245-65 TREES § 245-66
211:645
(4) Number of dwelling units per building. A maximum of 12 dwelling
units shall be allowed within one structure.
(5) Refuse facilities. Solid waste collection containers shall be
provided prior to occupancy. The precise location of the central
solid waste collection points shall be approved as a part of the final
site plan for each stage of development. Collection from within
each individual building and transportation to central solid waste
collection points shall be the responsibility of the owner. Solid
wastes shall be stored in containers designed to be mechanically
handled by collection vehicles. The type and design of container
shall be as approved by the Director of Public Works.
D. Building standards.
(1) Height. The height of the building shall be limited to two stories
and shall not exceed 35 feet.
(2) Enclosed parking. A total of 80 one-stall row-type garages shall be
constructed.
E. Off-street automobile parking facilities.
(1) Parking stalls. A total of 160 parking stalls shall be provided. Such
number of parking stalls includes the garages and open stalls.
(2) Parking lot and drive standards. All parking lots and driveways
shall be constructed with either Portland cement concrete or
asphaltic concrete over an approved subbase.
F. Electric and telephone service. All electric and telephone service wires
or cables shall be installed underground within the boundaries of the
development.
G. Detailed site grading plan. A detailed site grading plan shall be
submitted to the Village for approval showing proposed finished grades
of buildings, parking areas and landscape areas on the site and showing
proposed site drainage plan. Elevation on such site grading plan shall
be based on the Village datum and be approved by the Village prior to
construction.
H. Development improvements.
(1) Sanitary sewer service shall be extended to provide service to the
proposed living units, all at developer's expense.
(2) Water main extension shall be extended to provide water service to
the proposed living units, all at developer's expense.
I. Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting of walkways, access drives and offstreet
parking shall be provided by the developer.
J. Landscaping. There shall be a minimum of $400 per dwelling unit
expended for landscaping. Such funds shall be used only for initial
§ 245-66 WATERFORD CODE § 245-66
211:646
§ 245-67. Harbor Heights Planned Community Development
District.
planting of evergreens, deciduous trees and shrubs. Shade trees and
decorative ornamental trees along with varying sizes and types of
shrubbery shall be used to highlight the buildings, drives, parking
lots and walkways. Foundation plantings shall be used to surround
the buildings and parking areas shall be screened from adjoining
properties.
K. Easements. Public or private easements for sanitary sewer, storm
sewer, water mains, gas mains, telephone or electric wires and cables
or other public or private utilities shall be granted where required in
accordance with detailed utility system plans, approved by the Village
Engineer. Easements shall be granted to gain access to the lift station.
Public easements shall be maintained free and clear of natural
plantings exceeding six feet in height, accessory outdoor
appurtenances or permanent outdoor recreational facilities.
L. Private street and drive maintenance. Private off-street parking areas,
walks and access drives shall be maintained by the owner so as to
provide safe access at all times.
M. Condominium declaration. Prior to the issuance of building occupancy
permits, a condominium declaration shall be submitted to the Village
Board for approval. Such declaration shall be approved by the Village
Board and be recorded prior to the issuance of a building occupancy
permit. The following items shall be included to the satisfaction of the
Village Board in such condominium declaration:
(1) That a common maintenance authority shall be established to
maintain the commonly owned land and facilities.
(2) That all dwelling units shall be maintained in condominium
ownership.
N. Termination of planned community development district. If
construction of structures within the Foxwood Isle Planned Community
Development District has not commenced on or before December 31,
1983, this section shall be null and void without further action by the
Plan Commission or the Village Board, and all development in the
Foxwood Isle Planned Community Development District shall be
governed by the remainder of this section. The zoning district in effect
prior to the creation of the Foxwood Isle Planned Community
Development District shall be reinstated if unit construction has not
commenced on or before December 31, 1984. The criteria to be used in
determining if construction has commenced shall be that the building
foundations of two structures have been completed and capped.
§ 245-66 TREES § 245-67
211:647
A. Permitted uses: a total of 135 mobile homes, including off-street
parking, recreational area, other accessory uses and the sale of mobile
homes.
B. Special uses. No special uses except mobile home sales shall be
permitted in the Harbor Heights Planned Community Development
District.
C. Mobile home standards.
(1) Size of mobile homes. Each mobile home contained within the
development shall have a minimum floor area of not less than 900
square feet. Such minimum floor area shall include utility rooms,
but exclude open porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces
that are not used frequently or during periods of unit habitation.
(2) Number of bedrooms per mobile home unit. Each mobile home unit
shall have at least two bedrooms.
(3) Number of bathrooms. Each mobile home unit shall be provided
with a minimum of one full bathroom.
(4) Number of mobile homes per site. Only one mobile home unit shall
be allowed per home site.
(5) Refuse facilities. Solid waste collection containers shall be as
approved by the Director of Public Works.
D. Building standards.
(1) Height. The height of the building shall be limited to one story and
shall not exceed 20 feet.
(2) Enclosed parking. Enclosed parking will be allowed on each site.
Parking spaces in a ratio of two for each home site shall be
provided.
(3) Minimum standards. Each unit shall meet the following minimum
criteria:
(a) All units shall have pitched roofs covered with asphalt shingles
or other nonreflective materials.
(b) Units shall have house-type siding.
(c) All units shall be skirted within 30 days of installation, weather
permitting.
(d) Units shall have concrete front approaches or treated wood
decks.
(e) Landscaping shall be completed within one year of installation
of individual units.
§ 245-67 WATERFORD CODE § 245-67
211:648
(f) Each unit shall provide a minimum of 900 square feet of living
area.
(g) All units shall be newly constructed.
(h) All units shall have a minimum basic width of at least 14 feet
and a minimum overall width of 18 feet for a minimum of 50%
of the length. The fifty-percent requirement may be waived if
the expanded area is at least 30 feet long.
(i) Units may be provided with tool sheds or garages, provided
same meet Village Building Code127 and Plan Commission
requirements.
E. Parking lot and drive standards. All parking lots and driveways shall be
constructed with either Portland cement concrete or asphaltic concrete
over an approved subbase.
F. Electric and telephone service. All electric and telephone service wires
or cables shall be installed underground within the boundaries of the
development.
G. Detailed site grading. A detailed site grading plan shall be submitted to
the Village for approval showing proposed finished grades on the site
and showing the proposed site drainage plan. Elevation on such site
grading plan shall be based on the Village datum and be approved by
the Village prior to construction.
H. Development improvement.
(1) Sanitary sewer service shall be extended to provide service to the
proposed sites, all at the developer's expense.
(2) Water main extension shall be extended to provide water service to
the proposed sites, all at the developer's expense.
I. Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting of walkways, access drives and offstreet
parking shall be provided by the developer.
J. Landscaping. There shall be an average of $400 per site expended for
landscaping. Such funds shall be used only for initial planting of
evergreens, deciduous trees and shrubs. Shade trees and decorative
ornamental trees along with varying sizes and types of shrubbery shall
be used to highlight the buildings, drives, parking lots and walkways.
K. Easements. Public or private easements for sanitary sewer, storm
sewer, water mains, gas mains, telephone or electric wires and cables
or other public or private utilities shall be granted where required in
accordance with detailed utility system plans approved by the Village
Engineer. Easements for access for police and fire protection shall be
granted to the Village.
127. Editor's Note: See Ch. 98, Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical Codes.
§ 245-67 TREES § 245-67
211:649
L. Private street and drive maintenance. Private off-street parking areas,
walks and access drives shall be maintained by the owner so as to
provide safe access at all times.
M. Development agreement. A development agreement has been executed
between the Village and developer, the terms and conditions of which
are made a part hereof for the purpose of enforcement.
N. Lot and yard regulations.
(1) Area. Minimum lot or site area shall be 6,000 square feet.
(2) Width. Minimum lot or site width shall be 50 feet.
(3) Floor area ratio: not to exceed 0.4.
(4) Clearances. The unit shall be so located on a site that there shall be
at least a twenty-foot clearance between basic units. No unit shall
be located closer than 10 feet to any building within the park or to
any property line of the park. No unit shall be located closer than
25 feet to the right-of-way line of a highway or 10 feet to the rightof-
way line of a public street or internal private street system of the
park or such other distance as may be established by statute,
ordinance or local regulation.
O. Accessory buildings and uses. Accessory buildings and uses may be
allowed if approved as an integral part of the development.
P. Licensing and license fee.128
(1) The Village shall grant to the developer a one-year license to
operate under the terms and conditions of this section, Wisconsin
Statutes and the applicable Wisconsin Administrative Code. The
annual license fee shall be based upon the rate set by the Village
Board and shall be payable upon issuance thereof.
(2) The Village shall collect a fee from developer in an amount set by
the Village Board for each transfer of a license.
(3) Monthly mobile home fees shall be assessed and collected pursuant
to Wis. Stat. § 66.0435(3), which statute is made a part hereof and
fully incorporated herein by reference.
Q. Termination of planned community development district. If
construction of structures within the Harbor Heights Planned
Community Development District has not commenced on or before
December 31, 1988, this section shall be null and void without further
action by the Plan Commission or the Village Board. The criteria to be
used in determining if construction has commenced shall be that two
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 245-67 WATERFORD CODE § 245-67
211:650
§ 245-68. Country Club Villas at Rivermoor Planned Community
Development District.
mobile homes have been placed on the site and connected to sanitary
sewer and water services.
A. Permitted uses. A total of 90 condominium dwelling units, including offstreet
parking, recreational areas, clubhouse building with gazebo,
three eight-family buildings and other accessory uses as designated in
Exhibits A and B to Ordinance No. 264, on file in the Village Clerk's
office, adopted herein by reference; Exhibit A being the final site plan
for the development and Exhibit B being the planned unit development
agreement, each of which shall be recorded in the office of the Register
of Deeds for Racine County, excluding the reference exhibits which will
remain on file at the Village. The above permitted uses shall be the only
permitted uses allowed in the Country Club Villas at Rivermoor Planned
Community Development District. The planned unit development
agreement and final site plan, otherwise known as Exhibits B and A
herein, reference four phases of development. [Amended 11-22-2004
by Ord. No. 467]
B. Special uses. No special uses shall be permitted in the Country Club
Villas at Rivermoor Planned Community Development District.
C. Dwelling standards.
(1) Site of dwelling units. Each of the condominium dwelling units
contained within the development shall have a minimum floor area
of not less than 1,400 square feet. Such minimum floor area shall
include utility rooms, but exclude cellars, basements, open
porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used
frequently or during periods of unit habitation.
(2) Number of bedrooms per dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit shall
have not less than two and not more than three bedrooms.
(3) Number of bathrooms. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum of
one full bathroom.
(4) Number of dwelling units per building. A maximum of five dwelling
units shall be allowed within one structure, except for the three
eight-family buildings, each of which shall contain eight dwelling
units.
(5) Garbage collection. The Village shall provide curbside garbage
collection for all single-family attached condominium dwelling
units in the development. Each individual owner shall be
responsible for meeting all requirements for garbage collection as
from time to time promulgated by the Village.
D. Building standards.
§ 245-67 TREES § 245-68
211:651
(1) Height. The height of the 90 condominium units shall not exceed 24
feet. Each unit may consist of one or two stories, but each unit shall
contain a majority of its square footage upon the ground level of the
structure in which it is contained. The height of the eight-family
buildings shall not exceed 35 feet.
(2) Enclosed parking. Each condominium unit located in the
development shall have an attached two-car garage.
E. Off-street automobile parking facilities. All parking lots and driveways
shall be constructed with either Portland cement concrete or asphaltic
concrete over an approved subbase.
F. Electric and telephone service. All electric and telephone service wires
or cables, including cable television services, shall be installed
underground within the boundaries of the development.
G. Detailed site grading plan. A detailed site grading plan shall be
submitted to the Village for approval showing proposed finished grades
of buildings, parking areas and landscape areas on the site and showing
proposed site drainage plan. Elevation on such site grading plan shall
be based on the Village datum and be approved by the Village prior to
construction.
H. Development improvements. All improvements required within the
planned unit development agreement, herein referred to as Exhibit
B,129 shall be installed at the developer's expense and pursuant to the
terms of that agreement.
I. Landscaping. The developer shall provide the Village with a landscape
plan and detailed material list and shall implement such a plan after
approval by the Village.
J. Easements.
(1) In all areas where public utilities are located outside of the Village
rights-of-way as dedicated pursuant to the planned unit
development agreement, developer shall provide the Village with
easements in dimensions in accordance with the planned unit
development agreement, such easements shall be maintained free
and clear of natural plantings exceeding six feet in height,
accessory outdoor appurtenances or permanent outdoor
recreational facilities.
(2) The developer shall grant to the village easements over and across
the private roads in the development for the purposes of providing
public services, including, but not limited to, fire, rescue, police
protection and garbage collection. These easements shall be 30
feet in width, with the easement center line corresponding to the
center line of the pavement of the private roadway. In every
129. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the Village offices.
§ 245-68 WATERFORD CODE § 245-68
211:652
instance, the easement to be provided shall require that no
obstruction be allowed within the thirty-foot width, no lighting
or other utility poles be erected within the easement area, the
association be responsible for removing snow accumulations from
the easement area and no parking of vehicles be allowed within the
easement area.
(a) The Village shall tow any vehicles and similarly remove any
other types of personal property which are located within the
easement area after giving a notice of such encroachment at
least six hours prior to the removal of the property causing the
encroachment. This notice shall be given by written citation
placed upon the vehicle or other encroaching property.
(b) In the event that the Village must remove personal property
from the easement area pursuant to Subsection J(2)(a) hereof,
the property shall be impounded by the Village until payment
of the costs and forfeiture for such violation have been paid.
The Village shall seek payment from the owner of the property
seized, and after reasonable efforts have been made to obtain
such payment, then the Village may proceed for payment
against the condominium association. In no event shall the
Village be required to commence legal action against the
owner of the property seized prior to seeking collection from
the association.
(c) In each instance where it becomes necessary for the Village to
remove personal property from the easement area pursuant to
Subsection J(2)(a) and (b) hereof, the penalty shall be equal to
the actual costs incurred by the Village for the removal of the
property, its impoundment and the collection of the costs above
defined, including actual attorney's fees and costs, plus $25 to
defray administrative expenses in enforcement of this
subsection.
K. Private street and drive maintenance. Private off-street parking areas,
walks and access roads and drives shall be maintained by the owner so
as to provide safe access at all times to all areas of the development.
L. Condominium declaration. At the time of recording the final site plans
for the development and recording of the planned unit development
agreement and prior to commencement of any construction upon the
property subject hereof, the owner shall submit to the Village a
declaration of condominium for approval. Such declaration shall be
approved by the Village Board and be recorded at the office of the
Register of Deeds for Racine County prior to the commencement of
construction of the improvements as herein defined. The following
items shall be included to the satisfaction of the Village in such
condominium declaration:
§ 245-68 TREES § 245-68
211:653
§ 245-69. Marina Shores Planned Community Development District.
(1) That a common maintenance authority shall be established to
maintain in commonly owned land and facilities.
(2) That all dwelling units shall be maintained in condominium
ownership.
M. Termination of planned community development district. If
construction of structures within the Country Club Villas at Rivermoor
Planned Community Development District has not commenced on or
before December 31, 1992, this section shall be null and void without
further action by the Plan Commission or the Village Board and all
development in the Country Club villas at Rivermoor Planned
Community Development District shall be governed by the remainder of
this section. the zoning district in effect prior to the creation of the
Country Club Villas at Rivermoor Planned Community Development
District shall be reinstated if unit construction has not commenced on
or before December 31, 1992. The criteria to be used in determining if
construction has commenced shall be that the building foundations of
two structures have been completed and capped.
N. Exhibits made a part of this section. The exhibits identified hereinabove
as "A" and "B," being the final site plan and the planned unit
development agreement respectively, each are incorporated into this
section by and through this specific reference, and each of the terms
and conditions of the agreement and plan shall be enforceable as an
element of this chapter and subject to its provisions for penalties and
other legal action as is provided by this chapter.
A. Permitted uses. The district shall consist of three separate parcels of
land numbered Lots 1, 2 and 4 Marina Shores Subdivision.
(1) Lot 1 shall consist of a commercial/business structure of 3,000
square feet in floor area on the first level and two residential units
on the second level, with the remainder of the parcel containing the
necessary parking areas, open areas, garage areas and landscape.
[Amended 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 565]
(2) Lot 2 shall consist of a commercial/business structure containing
not more than 6,000 square feet of area on the ground level,
residential and/or commercial uses on the second level, and the
remainder of the parcel shall consist of open areas, parking,
landscaped areas and areas within the wetland and, therefore,
undisturbed except as may be approved by the Village to gain
access to the water. [Amended 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 565]
(3) Lot 4 shall consist of a commercial/business structure with no more
than 6,000 square fee on the ground level of the structure and
containing six residential units on the second floor of the structure,
with the remainder of the parcel to be parking areas, garage areas,
§ 245-68 WATERFORD CODE § 245-69
211:654
§ 245-70. Park Place Town Homes Condominium Planned
Community Development District. [Added 7-22-1996 by Ord. No.
339]
open areas and landscaping. Access to Lot 4 shall be from Marina
Court, and no access to this parcel shall be from Milwaukee Street.
(4) Development of each of these lots within the Planned Development
District shall be pursuant to a final site development plan and
agreement, each of which shall be submitted to the Village for
approval and recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds as
applicable. The above shall be the only permitted uses allowed in
Marina Shore Planned Community Development District.
B. Special uses. No special uses shall be permitted in the Marina Shores
Planned Community Development District.
C. Final site development agreement and site development plan. Prior to
development of any of the parcels located within the Marina Shores
Planned Community Development District, a final site development
agreement shall be submitted to and approved by the Village Planning
Board, which site development plan shall establish dwelling standards
for the residential units, number of bedrooms per dwelling unit, number
of bathrooms per dwelling units and such plan shall also provide
building standards and parking restrictions. The site development plan
further shall address the plans for electric and telephone service, a
detailed site grading plan, landscaping plans and the placement of
easements upon the parcel subjected to the site plan.
A. Permitted uses. A total of 22 condominium dwelling units, including offstreet
parking, recreational areas, and other accessory uses as
designated in Exhibits A and B to Ordinance No. 339, on file in the
Village Clerk's office, adopted herein by reference; Exhibit A being the
final site plan for the development and Exhibit B being the planned unit
development agreement, each of which shall be recorded in the office of
the Register of Deeds for Racine County, exhibits which will remain on
file at the Village. The above permitted uses shall be the only permitted
uses allowed in the Park Place Town Homes Condominium Planned
Community Development District. All development with this district
shall occur during one phase of development.130
B. Special uses. No special uses shall be permitted in the Park Place Town
Homes Condominium Planned Community Development District.
C. Dwelling standards.
(1) Site of dwelling units. Each of the condominium dwelling units
contained within the development shall have a minimum floor area
of not less than 1,200 square feet. Such minimum floor area shall
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 245-69 TREES § 245-70
211:655
include utility rooms, but exclude cellars, basements, open porches
breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently
or during periods of unit habitation.
(2) Number of bedrooms per dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit shall
have not less than two and not more than three bedrooms.
(3) Number of bathrooms. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum of
one full bathroom.
(4) Number of dwelling units per building. A maximum of two dwelling
units shall be allowed within one structure.
(5) Garbage collection. The Village shall provide curbside garbage
collection for all units in the development. Each individual owner
shall be responsible for meeting all the requirements for garbage
collection as from time to time promulgated by the Village.
D. Enclosed parking. Each condominium unit located in the development
shall have an attached two-car garage.
E. Off-street automobile parking facilities. Driveways shall be constructed
with either Portland cement concrete or asphaltic concrete over an
approved subbase.
F. Electric and telephone service. All electric and telephone service wires
or cables, including cable television services, shall be installed
underground within the boundaries of the development.
G. Detailed site grading plan. A detailed site grading plan shall be
submitted to the Village for approval showing proposed finished grades
of buildings, parking areas and landscape areas on the site and showing
proposed site drainage plan. Elevation on such site grading plan shall
be based on the Village datum and be approved by the Village prior to
construction.
H. Development improvements. All improvements required within the
planned unit development agreement, herein referred to as "Exhibit
B,"131 shall be installed at the developer's expense and pursuant to the
terms of that agreement.
I. Landscaping. The developer shall provide the Village with a landscape
plan and detailed material list and shall implement such a plan after
approval by the Village.
J. Easements.
(1) In all areas where public utilities are located outside of the Village
rights-of-way as dedicated pursuant to the planned unit
development agreement, the developer shall provide the Village
with easements in dimensions in accordance with the planned unit
131. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the Village offices.
§ 245-70 WATERFORD CODE § 245-70
211:656
development agreement; such easements shall be maintained free
and clear of natural planting exceeding six feet in height, accessory
outdoor appurtenances or permanent outdoor recreational
facilities.
(2) The developer shall grant to the Village easements over and across
the private roads in the development for the purposes of providing
public services, including but not limited to fire, rescue, police
protection and garbage collection. These easements shall be 30
feet in width with the easement center line corresponding to the
center line of the pavement of the private roadway. In every
instance, the easement to be provided shall require that no
obstruction be allowed within the 30 feet of width, no lighting or
other utility poles be erected within the easement area, and the
association be responsible for removing snow accumulations from
the easement area, and no parking of vehicles be allowed within
the easement area.
(a) The Village shall tow any vehicles and similarly remove any
other types of personal property which are located within the
easement area after giving notice of such encroachment at
least six hours prior to the removal of the property causing the
encroachment. This notice shall be given by written citation
placed upon the vehicle or other encroaching property.
(b) In the event that the Village must remove personal property
from the easement area pursuant to Subsection J(2)(a) hereof,
the property shall be impounded by the Village until payment
of the costs and forfeiture for such violation have been paid.
The Village shall seek payment from the owner of the property
seized, and after reasonable efforts have been made to obtain
such payment, then the Village may proceed for payment
against the condominium association. In no event shall the
Village be required to commence legal action against the
owner of the property seized prior to seeking collection from
the association.
(c) In each instance where it becomes necessary for the Village to
remove personal property from the easement area pursuant to
Subsection J(2)(a) and (b) hereof, the penalty shall be equal to
the actual costs incurred by the Village for the removal of the
property, its impoundment and the collection of the costs above
defined, including actual attorney's fees and costs, plus $25 to
defray administrative expenses in enforcement of this
subsection.
K. Private street and drive maintenance. Private off-street parking areas,
walks and access roads and drives shall be maintained by the owner so
as to provide safe access at all times to all areas of development.
§ 245-70 TREES § 245-70
211:657
§ 245-71. Mulberry Downs Condominium Planned Community
Development District. [Added 10-13-1997 by Ord. No. 358]
L. Condominium declaration. At the time of recording the final site plans
for the development and recording of the planned unit development
agreement and prior to commencement of any construction upon the
property subject hereof, the owner shall submit to the Village a
declaration of condominium for approval. Such declaration shall be
approved by the Village Board and be recorded at the office of the
Register of Deeds for Racine County prior to the commencement of
construction of the improvements as herein defined. The following
items shall be included to the satisfaction of the Village in such
condominium declaration:
(1) That a common maintenance authority shall be established to
maintain the commonly owned land and facilities.
(2) That all dwelling units shall be maintained in condominium
ownership.
M. Termination of planned community development district. If
construction of structures within Park Place Town Homes Condominium
Planned Community Development District has not commenced on or
before August 31, 1997, this section shall be null and void without
further action by the Plan Commission or the Village Board and all
development in the Park Place Town Homes Condominium Planned
Community Development District shall be governed by the remainder of
this section. The zoning district in effect prior to the creation of the
Park Place Town Homes Condominium Planned Community
Development District shall be reinstated if unit construction has not
commenced on or before August 31, 1997. The criteria to be used in
determining if construction has commenced shall be that the building
foundations of two structures have been completed and capped.
N. Exhibits made a part of this section. The exhibits identified hereinabove
as "A" and "B," being the final site plan and the planned unit
development agreement respectively, each are incorporated into this
section by and through this specific reference, and each of the terms
and conditions of the agreement and the plan shall be enforceable as an
element of this chapter and subject to the provisions for penalties and
other legal action as is provided by this chapter.
A. Permitted uses: a total of 30 structures, each containing four residential
living units with related improvements, including off-street parking,
recreational areas, easement areas for public utilities and stormwater
drainage installations, and related accessory uses as contained upon
the General Development Plan and Precise Implementation Plans as
from time to time submitted and which remain on file at the Village of
Waterford. The above permitted uses shall be the only permitted uses
allowed at Mulberry Down Condominium Planned Community
Development District.
§ 245-70 WATERFORD CODE § 245-71
211:658
B. Special uses. No special uses shall be permitted in the Mulberry Downs
Condominium Planned Community Development District.
C. Dwelling standards.
(1) Each of the condominium dwelling units contained within the
development shall have a minimum floor area of not less than 1,200
square feet. Such minimum floor area shall include utility rooms
but excludes cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways,
garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during
periods of unit habitation.
(2) Number of bedrooms per dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit shall
not have less than two and not more than four bedrooms.
(3) Number of bathrooms. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum of
one full bathroom.
(4) Number of dwelling units per building. A maximum of four dwelling
units shall be allowed within one structure.
(5) Garbage collection. The Village shall provide curbside garbage
collection for all condominium dwelling units in the development.
Each individual owner shall be responsible for meeting all
requirements for garbage collection as from time to time
promulgated by the Village.132
D. Building standards.
(1) Enclosed parking. Each condominium unit located in the
development shall have an attached two-car garage.
E. Off-street automobile parking facilities. All parking lots and driveways
shall be constructed with Portland cement concrete or asphaltic
concrete over an approved subbase.
F. Electric and telephone service. All electric and telephone service wires
or cables, including cable television services, shall be installed
underground within the boundaries of the development.
G. Detailed site grading plan. A detailed site grading plan shall be
submitted to the Village for approval showing proposed finished grades
for buildings, parking areas and landscape areas on the site and
showing proposed site drainage plans. Elevation of such site grading
plans shall be based on the Village datum and be approved by the
Village prior to construction.
H. Development improvements. All improvements required within the
planned unit development agreement shall be installed at the
developer's expense and pursuant to the terms of that agreement.
132. Editor's Note: See Ch. 186, Solid Waste.
§ 245-71 TREES § 245-71
211:659
I. Landscaping. The developer shall provide the Village with a landscape
plan as a part of the precise implementation plan for each phase of
construction and a detailed material list and shall implement such a
plan after approval by the Village.
J. Easements.
(1) In all areas where public utilities are located outside of the Village
rights-of-way, the developer shall provide the Village with
easements and dimensions in accordance with the planned unit
developer agreement, such easements shall be maintained free and
clear of natural plantings, accessory outdoor appurtenances or
permanent outdoor recreation facilities, shall be kept free of
parked vehicles, so as to allow open and free access to emergency
vehicles as may be from time to time required.
(2) The developer shall grant to the Village easements over and across
the private roads in the development, together with additional area
over and across the apron abutting the private roadways for
purposes of providing public services, including, but not limited to,
fire, rescue, police protection and garbage collection. These
easements shall be 30 feet in width, with the easement center line
corresponding to the center line of the pavement of the private
roadway. In every instance, the easement to be provided shall
require that no obstruction be allowed within the thirty-foot width,
no lighting or other utility poles be erected within the easement
area, the association to be responsible for removing snow
accumulations from the easement area, and no parking of vehicles
be allowed within the easement area.
(a) The Village shall have the right to tow any vehicles and
similarly remove any other types of personal property which
are located within the easement area after giving a notice of
such encroachment at least six hours prior to the removal of
the property causing the encroachment. This notice shall be
given by written citation placed upon the vehicle or other
encroaching property.
(b) In the event the Village must remove personal property from
the easement area pursuant to Subsection J(2)(a) hereof, the
property shall be impounded by the Village until payment of
the costs and forfeiture for such violation have been paid. The
Village shall seek payment from the owner of the property
seized, and after reasonable efforts have been made to obtain
such payment, the Village may proceed for payment against
the condominium association. In no event shall the Village be
required to commence legal action against the owner of the
property seized prior to seeking collection from the
association.
§ 245-71 WATERFORD CODE § 245-71
211:660
§ 245-72. Cornerstone Crossing Planned Community Development
District. [Added 5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 379]
(c) In each instance where it becomes necessary for the Village to
remove personal property from the easement area pursuant to
Subsection J(2)(a) and (b) hereof, the penalty shall be equal to
the actual costs incurred by the Village for the removal of the
property, its impoundment and the collection of the costs above
defined, including actual attorney's fees and costs, plus $25 to
defray administrative expenses in enforcement of this
subsection.
K. Private street and drive maintenance. Private off-street parking areas,
walks and access roads should be maintained by the owner so as to
provide safe access at all times to all areas of the development.
L. Condominium declaration. At the time of recording the final site plans
for the development and recording of the planned community
development agreement and prior to commencement of any
construction upon the property hereof, the owner shall submit to the
Village a declaration of condominium for approval. Such declaration
shall be approved by the Village Board and recorded at the office of the
Register of Deeds for Racine County prior to the commencement of
construction of the improvements as herein defined. The following
items shall be included to the satisfaction of the Village in such
condominium declaration:
(1) That a common maintenance authority shall be established to
maintain the commonly owned land and facilities.
(2) That all dwelling units shall be maintained in condominium
ownership.
M. Termination of planned community development district. If
construction of structures within the Mulberry Downs Condominium
Planned Community Development District has not commenced on or
before December 31, 1998, this section shall be null and void without
further action by the Plan Commission or the Village Board and all
development in the Mulberry Downs Condominium Planned Community
Development District shall be governed by the remainder of this
section. The zoning district in effect prior to the creation of the
Mulberry Downs Condominium Planned Community Development
District shall be reinstated if unit construction is not commenced on or
before December 31, 1998. The criteria to be used in determining if
construction has commenced shall be that the building foundations of
two structures have been completed and capped.
N. Rezoning effected by passage of this amendment. The property subject
of this planned community development district is legally described as
follows: Outlot 6, of Fairview Estates Valley, a recorded subdivision
located in the Village of Waterford, Racine County, Wisconsin.
§ 245-71 TREES § 245-72
211:661
A. Permitted uses: recreational use, and commercial structures as
provided in Village of Waterford Municipal Code § 245-21A, except
those listed below, including off-street parking, common green space
areas, and easement areas for public utilities and stormwater drainage
installations as contained in the developer's agreement and deed
restrictions, together with the necessary support and green space
areas, all as to be provided for upon the Precise Implementation Plans
as from time to time submitted and which will remain on file with the
Village of Waterford. The permitted uses identified in this subsection
shall be the only permitted uses allowed in Cornerstone Crossing
Commercial Planned Community Development District.
(1) Uses not permitted:
(a) No residential use shall be allowed;
(b) No tavern shall be allowed unless it is a nationally or regionally
franchised tavern and restaurant combination;
(c) No service or filling station shall be allowed unless its primary
business is the service of automobiles and not tractor-trailers;
(d) No temporary structures shall be allowed, but signs, billboards
and other outdoor advertising structures shall be permitted
pursuant to the provisions of Article VI of this chapter;133
(e) No light manufacturing, fabricating or assembling businesses
shall be allowed;
(f) No trucking company or motor freight company shall be
allowed;
(g) No uses similar in character to a permitted use, or for the
manufacture or treatment of products incidental to a permitted
use, or accessory to a permitted use, shall be allowed without a
conditional use permit.
(2) Park land and woodland preservation. No use other than
recreational shall be permitted in the area dedicated to park land
as identified in the developer's agreement. The woodland abutting
the park land shall be preserved as required in the developer's
agreement.
B. Special uses. No special uses shall be permitted in the Cornerstone
Crossing Commercial Planned Community Development District.
C. Garbage collection. Garbage collection shall be provided to the
commercial users within the district based upon the standards and
regulations of the Village at the time of construction of any such
commercial structure.134
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 245-72 WATERFORD CODE § 245-72
211:662
D. Building standards. Each structure constructed within the district shall
be constructed to Building Code135 requirements as contained within
this Code and within the Administrative Code of the State of Wisconsin
where applicable. Further, each building shall be supported by an
adequate number of parking spaces as required by this Code, and
further provided that, should the Plan Commission of the Village of
Waterford determine additional parking spaces are required based
upon the intended use, such requirements may be imposed by the Plan
Commission for uses within this district.
E. Off-street automobile parking facilities. All parking areas within this
district shall be constructed with either Portland cement concrete or
asphaltic concrete over an approved subbase, to depths for each
application as established by the Village Engineer prior to construction,
giving consideration to the anticipated traffic flow and nature of
vehicles to be serviced by said facilities.
F. Electric and telephone service. All electric and telephone service wires
or cables, including cable television services, shall be installed
underground within the boundaries of the development.
G. Detailed site grading plan. A detailed site grading plan shall be
submitted to the Village for approval showing proposed finished grades
for all buildings, parking areas, and landscape areas on site and
showing proposed site drainage plans. Elevation of such site grading
plans shall be based on the Village datum and be approved by the
Village prior to construction.
H. Developer's agreement.
(1) The developer, owner, and the Village of Waterford shall enter into
a written developer's agreement, which may be amended in writing
as from time to time required, to address the installation of all
improvements to the site prior to the issuance of building permits,
for the installation of sewer mains, water mains, stormwater
conduits, sewers, detention and retention pond areas, easement
accesses, and ingress and egress easement rights for the public,
which agreement and any subsequent amendments shall be
approved by the Village of Waterford Plan Commission, Village
Board, Village Engineer, and Village Attorney, and which shall
further contain provisions for financial guarantees for such public
improvements, either by letter of credit in a form approved by the
Village Attorney, or in the form of payment and performance bonds,
again in a form approved by the Village Attorney, and in amounts
not less than 115% of the Village Engineer's estimate of the cost of
such improvements. All sanitary sewer, water, and stormwater
infrastructure must be installed and accepted prior to the issuance
of any building permits for development within any area included in
134. Editor's Note: See Ch. 186, Solid Waste.
135. Editor's Note: See Ch. 98, Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical Code.
§ 245-72 TREES § 245-72
211:663
any precise implementation plan. Building permits may thereafter
be issued upon the placement of first lift of asphalt, with second
lifts of asphalt to be applied within one year of the first lift, but
no later than October 1 of the year following the first lift, or
sooner upon demand by the Village Engineer. All improvements
required within the planned unit development shall be installed
at the developer's expense and pursuant to the terms of the
developer's agreement(s) above referenced.
(2) In addition to the developer's responsibilities for bonding the costs
anticipated in the construction and installation of public utility
infrastructure and roadways, the developer shall also be
responsible, as part of any agreement entered for such
development, for the deposit of amounts of money necessary to
cover the costs, fees and expenses which are related to the review,
professional (legal and engineering), technical, inspection and
administrative work performed on by or on behalf of the Village in
pursuance of such proposed development. This shall include legal
fees incurred in the preparation of the legal documents leading to
any rezoning ordinance, including this section, and any agreements
reached for precise implementation plans submitted pursuant to
this section, together with all such time expended in the oversight
of such development by the Village Attorney, and the review by the
Village Engineer of all plans submitted, and inspection of such
installations, together with time spent in oversight by the Village
Engineer of such development, along with other costs and fees as
set forth in the developer's agreement(s). Such cash deposits shall
be made pursuant to policies established from time to time by the
Village of Waterford and specific language included in developer's
agreement(s) as from time to time entered.
I. Landscaping. The developer shall provide the Village with a landscape
plan as part of the Precise Implementation Plan for each phase of
construction and a detailed material list, and shall implement such plan
after approval by the Village.
J. Easements.
(1) In all areas where public utilities are located outside of the Village
rights-of-way, the developer shall provide the Village with
easements and dimensions in accordance with the developer's
agreement, such easements shall be maintained free and clear of
natural plantings, accessory outdoor appurtenances or permanent
outdoor recreation facilities and shall be kept free of parked
vehicles, so as to allow open and free access to emergency vehicles
as may be from time to time required.
(2) The developer shall grant to the Village easements over and across
the private roads in the development, together with additional
easements over and across the aprons abutting the private
roadways for purposes of providing public services, including, but
§ 245-72 WATERFORD CODE § 245-72
211:664
not limited to, fire, rescue, police protection and garbage
collection. These easements shall be 40 feet in width, with the
easement center line corresponding to the center line of the
pavement of the private roadway. In every instance, easements to
be provided shall require that no obstruction be allowed within the
forty-foot width, no lighting or other utility poles be erected within
the easement area, the owner or association to be responsible for
removing snow accumulations from the easement area, and no
parking of vehicles be allowed within the easement area.
(a) The Village shall have the right to tow any vehicles and
similarly remove any other types of personal property which
are located within the easement area after giving a notice of
such encroachment at least six hours prior to the removal of
the property causing the encroachment. This notice shall be
given by written citation placed upon the vehicle or other
encroaching property.
(b) In the event the Village must remove personal property from
the easement area pursuant to Subsection J(2)(a) hereof, the
property shall be impounded by the Village until payment of
the costs and forfeiture for such violation have been paid. The
Village shall seek payment from the owner of the property
seized, and after reasonable efforts have been made to obtain
such payment, the Village may proceed for payment against
the property owner or association. In no event shall the Village
be required to commence legal action against the owner of the
property seized prior to seeking collection from owner of the
development or the association.
(c) In each instance where it becomes necessary for the Village to
remove personal property from the easement area pursuant to
Subsection J(2)(a) and (b) hereof, the penalty shall be equal to
the actual costs incurred by the Village for the removal of the
property, its impoundment and the collection of the costs above
defined, including actual attorney's fees and costs, plus $25 to
defray administrative expenses in enforcement of this
subsection.
K. Private street and drive maintenance. Private off-street parking areas,
walks, and access roads shall be maintained by the owner so as to
provide safe access at all time to all areas of the development.
L. Termination of Cornerstone Crossing Commercial Planned Community
Development District. If no Precise Implementation Plan has been
approved by the Village Board within 12 months of the execution of the
developer's agreement, or if substantial construction has not begun
within 12 months of the approval of a Precise Implementation Plan for a
phase of the development, the Cornerstone Crossing Commercial
Planned Community Development District shall be terminated, and
there shall be a stay on the development of the property, and the Plan
§ 245-72 TREES § 245-72
211:665
§ 245-73. Annecy Park Condominiums at Waterford Landing
Planned Community Development District. [Added 6-12-2000 by
Ord. No. 399]
Commission and the Village Board shall have 150 days during which
no plats, general development plans, or precise implementation plans
shall be submitted for approval wherein the Village may act to rezone
the property. The criteria to be used in determining if substantial
construction has commenced shall be that the building foundations of
two structures have been completed and capped.
M. Rezoning effected by passage of this amendment. The property subject
of this planned community development district is legally described as
follows: the entirety of Cornerstone Crossing, a recorded planned
community development district located in the Village of Waterford,
Racine County, Wisconsin, as originally described in Ordinance Nos.
378 and 379, and amended in Ordinance No. 395, on file in the office of
the Village Clerk. [Amended 6-14-2000 by Ord. No. 395136]
A. Permitted uses: a total of 23 structures, each containing two, three, or
four residential living units with related improvements, including offstreet
parking, common green space areas, recreational areas,
easement areas for public utilities and stormwater drainage
installations as contained in the developer's agreement and deed
restrictions, and related accessory uses, all as contained in the General
Development Plan and Precise Implementation Plans as from time to
time submitted and which will remain on file with the Village of
Waterford. The permitted uses identified in this subsection shall be the
only permitted uses allowed in Annecy Park Condominiums at
Waterford Landing Planned Community Development District. No use,
other than recreational, shall be permitted in the area dedicated to the
walking path as identified in the developer's agreement.
B. Special uses. No special uses shall be permitted in the Annecy Park
Condominiums at Waterford Landing Planned Community Development
District.
C. Dwelling standards.
(1) Each of the condominium dwelling units within the development
shall have a minimum floor area of not less than 1,400 square feet.
Such minimum floor area shall include utility rooms but shall
exclude cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages
and other spaces that are not used frequently or during periods of
unit habitation.
(2) Number of bedrooms per dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit shall
have two bedrooms.
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 245-72 WATERFORD CODE § 245-73
211:666
(3) Number of bathrooms. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum of
one full bathroom.
(4) Number of dwelling units per building. A maximum of four dwelling
units shall be allowed within one structure.
D. Garbage collection. The Village shall provide curbside garbage
collection for all condominium dwelling units in the development. Each
individual owner shall be responsible for meeting all requirements for
garbage collection as from time to time promulgated by the Village.137
E. Building standards.
(1) Each structure constructed within the district shall be constructed
to Building Code requirements as contained within this Code138 and
within the Administrative Code of the State of Wisconsin where
applicable.
(2) Enclosed parking. Each condominium unit located in the
development shall have an attached two-car garage.
F. Automobile parking and parking facilities.
(1) All parking areas within this district shall be constructed with
either Portland cement concrete or asphaltic concrete over an
approved subbase, to depths for each application as established by
the Village Engineer prior to construction.
(2) Parking shall be limited to driveway approaches and marked
parking stalls within the district. No parking shall be permitted in
or on any other area.
G. Electric and telephone service. All electric and telephone service wires
or cables, including cable television services, shall be installed
underground within the boundaries of the development.
H. Detailed site grading plan. A detailed site grading plan shall be
submitted to the Village for approval showing proposed finished grades
for all buildings, parking areas, and landscape areas on site and
showing proposed site drainage plans. Elevation of such site grading
plans shall be based on the Village datum and be approved by the
Village prior to construction.
I. Developer's agreement.
(1) The developer, owner, and the Village of Waterford shall enter into
a written developer's agreement, which may be amended in writing
as from time to time required, to address the installation of all
improvements to the site prior to the issuance of building permits,
for the installation of sewer mains, water mains, stormwater
137. Editor's Note: See Ch. 186, Solid Waste.
138. Editor's Note: See Ch. 98, Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical Codes.
§ 245-73 TREES § 245-73
211:667
conduits, sewers, detention and retention pond areas, easement
accesses, and walkway, ingress and egress easement rights for the
public, which agreement and any subsequent amendments shall
be approved by the Village of Waterford Plan Commission, Village
Board, Village Engineer, and Village Attorney, and which shall
further contain provisions for financial guarantees for such public
improvements, either by letter of credit in a form approved by
the Village Attorney, or in the form of payment and performance
bonds, again in a form approved by the Village Attorney, and in
amounts not less than 115% of the Village Engineer's estimate
of the cost of such improvements. All sanitary sewer, water and
stormwater infrastructure, the gravel base for streets adjacent to
the site, and the site grading of the areas contiguous to and for the
benefit of the building for which the permit is being sought must
be completed and approved by the Village prior to the issuance
of any building permits for development within any area included
in any Precise Implementation Plan, with the following exception:
upon application to, and approval by, the Plan Commission and
the Village Board, the developer may obtain a building permit for
one four-family building at the southwest corner of the Annecy
Park Condominiums at Waterford Landing Planned Community
Development District prior to the installation and approval of the
above infrastructure, but only if a graveled emergency service
vehicle access to the site is provided. Occupancy permits may be
issued only upon the completion of the improvements required in
the developer's agreement, including the placement of the first
lift of asphalt. The second lift of asphalt shall be applied within
one year of the first lift, but no later than October 1 of the year
following the first lift, or sooner upon demand by the Village
Engineer. All improvements required within the planned unit
development shall be installed at the developer's expense and
pursuant to the terms of the developer's agreement(s) above
referenced.
(2) In addition to the developer's responsibilities for bonding the costs
anticipated in the construction and installation of public utility
infrastructure and roadways, the developer shall also be
responsible, as part of any agreement entered for such
development, for the deposit of amounts of money necessary to
cover the costs, fees and expenses which are related to the review,
professional (legal and engineering), technical, inspection and
administrative work performed on by or on behalf of the Village in
pursuance of such proposed development. This shall include legal
fees incurred in the preparation of the legal documents leading to
any rezoning ordinance, including this section, and any agreements
reached for precise implementation plans submitted pursuant to
this section, together with all such time expended in the oversight
of such development by the Village Attorney, and the review by the
Village Engineer of all plans submitted, and inspection of such
installations, together with time spent in oversight by the Village
§ 245-73 WATERFORD CODE § 245-73
211:668
Engineer of such development, along with other costs and fees as
set forth in the developer's agreement(s). Such cash deposits shall
be made pursuant to policies established from time to time by the
Village of Waterford and specific language included in developer's
agreement(s) as from time to time entered.
J. Landscaping. The developer shall provide the Village with a landscape
plan as part of the Precise Implementation Plan for each phase of
construction and a detailed material list, and shall implement such plan
after approval by the Village.
K. Easements.
(1) In all areas where public utilities are located outside of the Village
rights-of-way, the developer shall provide the Village with
easements and dimensions in accordance with the developer's
agreement, such easements shall be maintained free and clear of
natural plantings, accessory outdoor appurtenances or permanent
outdoor recreation facilities and shall be kept free of parked
vehicles, so as to allow open and free access to emergency and
utility vehicles as may be from time to time required.
(2) The developer shall grant to the Village easements over and across
the private roads in the development, together with additional
easements over and across the aprons abutting the private
roadways for purposes of providing public services, including, but
not limited to, fire, rescue, police protection and garbage
collection. These easements shall be 30 feet in width, with the
easement center line corresponding to the center line of the
pavement of the private roadway. In every instance, easements to
be provided shall require that no obstruction be allowed within the
thirty-foot width, no lighting or other utility poles be erected within
the easement area, the owner or association to be responsible for
removing snow accumulations from the easement area, and no
parking of vehicles be allowed within the easement area.
(a) The Village shall have the right to tow any vehicles and
similarly remove any other types of personal property which
are located within the easement area after giving a notice of
such encroachment at least six hours prior to the removal of
the property causing the encroachment. This notice shall be
given by written citation placed upon the vehicle or other
encroaching property.
(b) In the event the Village must remove personal property from
the easement area pursuant to Subsection K(2)(a) hereof, the
property shall be impounded by the Village until payment of
the costs and forfeiture for such violation have been paid. The
Village shall seek payment from the owner of the property
seized, and after reasonable efforts have been made to obtain
such payment, the Village may proceed for payment against
§ 245-73 TREES § 245-73
211:669
the property owner or association. In no event shall the Village
be required to commence legal action against the owner of the
property seized prior to seeking collection from owner of the
development or the association.
(c) In each instance where it becomes necessary for the Village to
remove personal property from the easement area pursuant to
Subsection K(2)(a) and (b) hereof, the penalty shall be equal to
the actual costs incurred by the Village for the removal of the
property, its impoundment and the collection of the costs above
defined, including actual attorney's fees and costs, plus $25 to
defray administrative expenses in enforcement of this
subsection.
L. Private street and drive maintenance. Private off-street parking areas,
walks, and access roads shall be maintained by the owner so as to
provide safe access at all times to all areas of the development.
M. Condominium declaration. At the time of recording the final site plans
for the development and recording of the developer's agreement and
prior to commencement of any construction upon the property hereof,
the owner shall submit to the Village a Declaration of Condominium for
review and approval by the Village Attorney. Such declaration shall be
recorded at the office of the Register of Deeds for Racine County prior
to the commencement of construction of the improvements as herein
defined. The following items shall be included to the satisfaction of the
Village Attorney in such condominium declaration:
(1) That a common maintenance authority shall be established to
maintain the commonly owned land and facilities.
(2) That all dwelling units shall be maintained in condominium
ownership.
N. Termination of Annecy Park Condominiums at Waterford Landing
Planned Community Development District. If no Precise
Implementation Plan has been approved by the Village Board within 12
months of the execution of the developer's agreement, or if substantial
construction has not begun within 12 months of the approval of a
Precise Implementation Plan for a phase of the development, the
Annecy Park Condominiums at Waterford Landing Planned Community
Development District shall be terminated and this section shall be null
and void without further action by the Plan Commission or the Village
Board and all development in the Annecy Park Condominiums at
Waterford Landing Planned Community Development District shall be
governed by the remainder of this section. The zoning district in effect
prior to the creation of the Annecy Park Condominiums at Waterford
Landing Planned Community Development District shall be reinstated if
unit construction is not commenced on or before July 31, 2001. The
criteria to be used in determining if substantial construction has
§ 245-73 WATERFORD CODE § 245-73
211:670
§ 245-74. Waterford Centre Business/Industrial Planned Community
Development District. [Added 6-14-2000 by Ord. No. 396; amended
5-13-2002 by Ord. No. 421; 6-28-2004 by Ord. No. 456]
commenced shall be that the building foundation of one structure has
been completed and capped.
O. Rezoning effected by passage of this amendment. The property subject
of this Planned Community Development District is legally described as
set forth in Exhibit A attached hereto. Prior to enactment of this
ordinance said real estate described in Exhibit A maintained a zoning
classification of Single Family Residence District, and, upon passage of
this Planned Community Development District ordinance all real estate
above is removed from said single-family residence district and is, in all
respects, subjected to the Planned Community Development District
zoning rules and regulations of the Village of Waterford Municipal Code
and the specific terms and conditions of this subsection.
P. Exhibits made a part of this section. The exhibits herein identified and
referred to as Exhibit A (the legal description), the developer's
agreement, and the final site plan each are incorporated into this
section by and through this specific reference, and shall be kept on file
in the office of the Village Clerk and incorporated herein as though fully
set forth, and each of the terms and conditions of the legal description,
the developer's agreement and the plan shall be enforceable as an
element of this chapter and subject to the provisions for penalties and
other legal action as provided by this chapter. [Amended 11-22-2004
by Ord. No. 467]
A. Permitted uses: recreational use, and commercial and industrial
structures as provided in Village of Waterford Municipal Code
§§ 245-21A and 245-22A and this section, except those listed in
Subsection B below, including off-street parking, common green space
areas, and easement areas for public utilities and stormwater drainage
installations as contained in the developer's agreement and deed
restrictions, together with the necessary support and green space
areas, all as to be provided for upon the Precise Implementation Plans
as from time to time submitted and which will remain on file with the
Village of Waterford. The permitted uses identified in this subsection
shall be permitted uses allowed in Waterford Centre Commercial/
Industrial Planned Community Development District, and within the
district, the land shall be zoned as business or industrial as reflected on
Exhibit B attached hereto and incorporated herein,139 as follows:
(1) In the areas zoned business:
(a) Administrative, business and professional offices;
(b) Retail, bank, finance company, and insurance company offices.
139. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the Village offices.
§ 245-73 TREES § 245-74
211:671
(c) Restaurants.
(d) Data processing centers, consumer credit agencies, credit
reporting and collecting agencies, and advertising agencies.
(e) Day-care facilities.
(f) Medical or dental clinics.
(g) Private noncommercial clubs or lodges.
(h) Barbershops or beauty shops.
(i) Medical or dental laboratories.
(j) Travel agencies.
(k) Telephone answering services, database services or copy
services.
(l) Recreational vehicle and/or motorcycle sales, display or
repairs; provided, however, that any repairs must be
performed indoors and screened accordingly for loading dock
and shipping areas.
(m) Offices with associated warehousing; provided, however, that
all activities must be performed indoors and screened
accordingly for loading dock and shipping areas and that no
loading dock or shipping area will face other properties or the
street rights-of-way.
(n) Any other accessory uses generally associated with the
permitted uses.
(o) Municipal wells, water treatment plants and sewer lift stations
and related buildings and structures.
(p) A maximum of five acres of one location will be permitted for
live/work condominiums [See Subsection D(3).]
(q) Any other use that is permitted in the Business and
Commercial District as provided in the Village of Waterford
Municipal Code § 245-21A in effect on the date of this section,
and as hereafter from time to time amended, except as
provided in Subsection B. [Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No.
658]
(2) In the areas zoned industrial:
(a) National or regional or corporate or divisional headquarters
facilities.
(b) Facilities to provide service activities, including but not limited
to warehousing, storage, distribution, research and data
processing, which are directly related to and used in
§ 245-74 WATERFORD CODE § 245-74
211:672
conjunction with facilities identified in Subsection A(2)(a)
above.
(c) Commercial hotels, motels, and recreational facilities.
(d) Manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packing, packaging
and assembly of products, provided that the machinery,
equipment, raw materials, inventory and other elements of
said activities are wholly enclosed within a building, the
exterior appearance of which is similar to that of an office
building, for any products of agriculture, forestry, mining or
manufacture, even though such products may require further
treatment before delivery to the ultimate consumer.
(e) Laboratories and facilities for research and/or development
activities relating to the production of products described in
Subsection A(2)(d), regardless of whether the user of the
facilities is also engaged in the production of one or more of
those products.
(f) Production or assembly of computer, photographic, medical,
optical and similar products and equipment.
(g) Indoor storage for wholesale trans-shipment, future use, or
safekeeping of materials; excluding mini-warehouses as
provided in Subsection B(8).
(h) Administrative, business and professional offices.
(i) Data processing centers, consumer credit agencies, credit
reporting and collecting agencies, and advertising agencies.
(j) Medical and dental clinics.
(k) Medical and dental laboratories.
(l) Municipal wells, water treatment plants and sewer lift stations
and related buildings and structures.
(m) Any use that is allowed in the areas zoned for business in this
district.
(n) Any other use that is permitted in the Industrial District as
provided in the Village of Waterford Municipal Code § 245-22A,
in effect on the date of this section, and as hereafter amended
from time to time, except as provided in Subsection B.
B. Uses not permitted:
(1) No residential use shall be allowed except live/work condominiums
as provided in Subsection D(3) and referenced in Exhibit B:140
140. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the Village offices.
§ 245-74 TREES § 245-74
211:673
(2) No tavern shall be allowed unless it is a nationally or regionally
franchised tavern and restaurant combination (this restriction shall
not apply in cases where the sale of alcoholic beverages is ancillary
to another commercial recreational facility use).
(3) No service, filling station or auto repair shop shall be allowed
unless its primary business is the service of automobiles and not
tractor-trailers; and the use conforms with the wellhead protection
requirements of the DNR.
(4) No temporary structures or billboards shall be allowed, but signs
other than billboards, and other outdoor advertising structures
shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Article VI of this
chapter.141
(5) No trucking company or motor freight company shall be allowed;
(6) No heavy manufacturing uses shall be allowed, such as acid,
ammonia, bleach or soap manufacture; ammunition manufacture;
explosives or fireworks manufacture or storage; asphalt, coal and
coal tar or coke manufacture; distillation of bones; cement, lime,
gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacture; fat rendering; garbage,
rubbish, offal or dead animal reduction or dumping; gelatin, glue or
size manufacture; manufacture, refinement or storage of
inflammable gases or liquids; overground tank farms;
slaughterhouses; stockyards; or smelting facilities;
(7) No automobile wrecking yard, junkyard, or salvage yard shall be
allowed.
(8) No mini-warehousing uses shall be allowed.
(9) No adult bookstores and adult-only video stores.
(10) No tattoo and/or body-piercing establishments.
(11) Any other use that is prohibited in the Business and Commercial
District as provided in the Village of Waterford Municipal Code
§ 245-21A, or in the Business and Industrial District as provided in
§ 245-22A in effect on the date of this section, and as hereafter
amended from time to time. [Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No.
658]
C. Park land and woodland preservation. No use other than recreational or
stormwater detention shall be permitted in the area dedicated to
conservation easements except as set forth in Section 6.08 of
Declaration of Protective Covenants for WesTerra Business Campus
dated June 18, 2004.
D. Special uses, limitation on permitted uses.
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 245-74 WATERFORD CODE § 245-74
211:674
(1) The uses permitted by this section may be further limited in
accordance with any wellhead protection ordinance that is duly
enacted by the Village Board.
(2) Whereas the district is substantially coextensive with the
boundaries of Tax Increment District No. 2 of the Village of
Waterford ("TID No. 2"), so long as TID No. 2 is in existence, no taxexempt
ownership or use shall be permitted within said TID No. 2
(expect for those parcels designated as "Well Sites or Lift Station"
on the attached Land Use Map142), and the land and all buildings
and improvements on the land located within said TID No 2 shall be
owned and used in such a way as to be fully assessable and taxable
for real estate tax and special assessment purposes.
(3) In the area zoned business and designated "Live/Work
Condominiums" on the attached Land Use Map, in addition to the
uses permitted in business-zoned areas as established in this
section, up to 30 dwelling units containing tenant/user spaces
suitable both as a workplace and a dwelling unit may be
constructed, used and occupied as a special permitted use,
provided that the following conditions are met prior to the approval
of a Precise Implementation Plan for the development of said live/
work condominiums:
(a) At the time a Precise Implementation Plan is presented for the
live/work condominiums for approval by the Plan Commission,
a separate developer's agreement and covenants for the live/
work condominiums will be presented for approval by the Plan
Commission and Village Board.
(b) The services and amenities available to residents in said live/
work condominiums shall be oriented towards office and
business applications, and, within the bounds of the law, shall
be structured to appeal to adult residents/occupants.
(c) Impact fees for parks, library, fire protection, and local and
regional utilities and as may be adopted in the future, shall be
imposed on each constructed dwelling unit in the live/work
condominium project.
(d) At the time a Precise Implementation Plan is presented for the
live/work condominiums for approval by the Plan Commission,
the developer will have the rental restriction language
prepared for approval by the Plan Commission. The developer
will produce evidence that said language regarding the rental
restriction has been recorded as a deed restriction before the
first building permit for the live/work condominium is issued.
(e) The permitted work activity in a live/work condominium shall
be any office or business application conducted only within the
142. Editor's Note: The Land Use Map is on file in the Village offices.
§ 245-74 TREES § 245-74
211:675
enclosed area of the unit. A gainful occupation conducted by
the resident and up to one nonresident employee; provided
that no article is sold or offered for sale on the premises
except such as is produced by such occupation; and provided,
further, that no more than 50% of the area of the live/work
condominium is used for work activities. Permitted work
activities shall also include "professional office" uses as defined
in § 245-9.
(f) No work activity shall be permitted nor shall any live/work
condominium be established that contains those uses that, by
virtue of size, intensity, number of employees or the nature of
the operation, have the potential to create significant impacts
by reason of dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gases, odor,
smoke, traffic, vibration or other impacts, or would be
hazardous by way of materials, process, product or wastes,
including, but not limited to; auto service/repair, vehicle sales
or leasing, adult businesses, marine engine repair/refueling
facilities, animal kennels/grooming/pet shops, veterinary
offices/hospitals, outdoor storage as a primary use,
dismantling facilities/scrap yards, storage of flammable liquids
or hazardous material, welding, machining, or any open flame
work, or any other uses as determined by the Village not to be
compatible with residential activities.
E. Garbage collection. Garbage collection shall be provided to the users
with the district based upon the standards and regulations of the
Village.143
F. Submission of precise implementation plans. In addition to the plans
and related detailed documents and schedules required in Subsection
§ 245-65F, additional plans, drawings, diagrams and documents
required for application plans, as set forth in Section 4 of the
Declaration of Protective Covenants for WesTerra Business Campus
dated June 18, 2004 shall be submitted to the Plan Commission as part
of a Precise Implementation Plan.
G. Site restrictions and building standards. Site restrictions and building
standards as set forth in Section 5 of the Declaration of Protective
Covenants for WesTerra Business Campus dated June 18, 2004, shall be
incorporated herein by this reference. Any amendments or changes to
said protective covenants dated June 18, 2004, shall require approval
by the Village. In as much as this provision of the protective covenants
permit the land owner to issue a written waiver or variance relating to
said protective covenants, the Village may, but shall not be required to,
review and approve any such waiver or variance as one aspect of its
approval of a Precise Implementation Plan, and any such approval shall
not constitute a waiver or variance with respect to this section.
143. Editor's Note: See Ch. 186, Solid Waste.
§ 245-74 WATERFORD CODE § 245-74
211:676
H. Off-street automobile parking facilities. All parking areas within this
district shall be constructed with either cement concrete or asphaltic
concrete over an approved subbase, to depths for each application as
established by the Village Engineer prior to construction, giving
consideration to the anticipated traffic flow and nature of vehicles to be
serviced by said facilities.
I. Electric and telephone service. All electric and telephone service wires
or cables, including cable television services, shall be installed
underground within the boundaries of the development.
J. Developer's agreement. The developer, owner, Community
Development Authority and Village of Waterford shall enter into written
developer's agreements pursuant to § 235-19D of the Municipal Code.
Separate agreements shall be required for the live/work condominiums,
and for the area located north of Highway 164 and west of the WE
Energies right-of-way, and for the balance of the site.
K. Landscaping and screening standards. Landscaping and screening
standards as set forth in Sections 6 and 7 of the Declaration of
Protective Covenants for WesTerra Business Campus dated June 18,
2004, shall be incorporated herein by this reference. Any amendments
or changes to said protective covenants dated June 18, 2004, shall
require approval by the Village. In as much as these provisions of the
protective covenants permit the land owner to issue a written waiver or
variance relating to said protective covenants, the Village may, but shall
not be required to, review and approve any such waiver or variance as
one aspect of its approval of a Precise Implementation Plan, and any
such approval shall not constitute a waiver or variance with respect to
this section.
L. Easements.
(1) In all areas where public utilities are located outside of the public
rights-of-way, the developer shall provide the Village with
easements, such easements shall be maintained free and clear of
natural plantings, accessory outdoor appurtenances or permanent
outdoor recreation facilities and shall be kept free of parked
vehicles, so as to allow open and free access to emergency vehicles
as may be from time to time required.
(2) The developer shall grant to the Village easements over and across
the private roads in the development, together with additional
easements over and across the aprons abutting the private
roadways for purposes of providing public services, including, but
not limited to, fire, rescue, police protection and garbage/recycling
collection. The private roads shall be a minimum of twenty-six-footwide
paved roadway, with a rolled face curb and gutter design, with
a thirty-foot-wide easement, with the easement center line
corresponding to the center line of the pavement of the private
roadway. In every instance, easements to be provided shall require
§ 245-74 TREES § 245-74
211:677
§ 245-75. Waterford Hotel Partners Commercial Planned
Community Development District. [Added 12-10-2001 by Ord. No.
417]
that no obstruction be allowed within the thirty-foot width, no
lighting or other utility poles be erected within the easement area,
the owner or association to be responsible for removing snow
accumulations from the paved portion of the easement area, and no
parking of vehicles be allowed within the easement area.
(a) The Village shall have the right to tow any vehicles and
similarly remove any other types of personal property which
are located within the easement area after giving notice of
such encroachment. This notice shall be given by written
citation placed upon the vehicle or other encroaching property.
(b) In the event the Village must remove personal property from
the easement area pursuant to Subsection L(2)(a) hereof, the
property shall be impounded by the Village until payment of
the costs and forfeiture for such violation have been paid. The
Village shall seek payment from the owner of the property
seized, and after reasonable efforts have been made to obtain
such payment, the Village may proceed for payment against
the property owner or association. In no event shall the Village
be required to commence legal action against the owner of the
property seized prior to seeking collection from the owner of
the development or the parcel.
(c) In each instance where it becomes necessary for the Village to
remove personal property from the easement area pursuant to
Subsection L(2)(a) and (b) hereof, the penalty shall be
impoundment and the collection of the costs above defined,
including actual attorney's fees and costs, plus $25 to defray
administrative expenses in enforcement of this subsection.
M. Private streets and drive maintenance. Private off-street parking areas,
walks, and access roads shall be maintained by the owner so as to
provide safe access at all times to all areas of the development.
N. Effect. The legal description of the district shall be that attached hereto
as Exhibit A. The Land Use Map for the district is attached hereto as
Exhibit B.144
A. Permitted use: commercial structures as provided in Village of
Waterford Municipal Code § 245-21A(19) and this section, except those
listed below, including off-street parking and easement areas for public
utilities and stormwater drainage installations as contained in the
General Development Plan and deed restrictions, together with the
necessary support and green space areas, all as to be provided for upon
144. Editor's Note: Exhibits A and B are on file in the Village offices.
§ 245-74 WATERFORD CODE § 245-75
211:678
the Precise Implementation Plan to be submitted and which will remain
on file with the Village of Waterford. The permitted use identified in
this subsection shall be the only permitted use allowed in the Waterford
Hotel Partners Commercial Planned Community Development District.
B. Uses not permitted.
(1) No residential use shall be allowed.
(2) No temporary structures shall be allowed, but signs, billboards and
other outdoor advertising structures shall be permitted pursuant to
the provisions of Article VI of this chapter.145
(3) No uses similar in character to the permitted use, or accessory to
the permitted use, shall be allowed without a conditional use
permit.
C. Green space preservation. No use other than recreational and
landscaping shall be permitted in the area dedicated to green space as
finally approved in the Precise Implementation Plan.
D. Special uses. No special uses shall be permitted in the Waterford Hotel
Partners Commercial Planned Community Development District.
E. Garbage collection. Garbage collection shall be provided to the
commercial users within the district based upon the standards and
regulations of the Village at the time of construction of any such
commercial structure. See Chapter 186, Solid Waste, Article I, of this
Code.
F. Building standards. Each structure constructed within the district shall
be constructed to Building Code requirements as contained within this
Code146 and within the Administrative Code of the State of Wisconsin
where applicable.
G. Off-street automobile parking facilities.
(1) The Waterford Hotel Partners Commercial Planned Unit
Development shall be exempt from the requirements of § 245-64C
of this Code upon the fulfillment of the following conditions:
(a) The number and size of parking spaces ultimately approved as
part of the Precise Implementation Plan for this development
shall be maintained for the life of the development; and
(b) The developer shall enter into a long-term lease providing
spaces for overflow parking on a commercial property in the
vicinity of the development, which lease shall run with the
land, shall be in recordable form, and shall be recorded.
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
146. Editor's Note: See Ch. 98, Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical Codes.
§ 245-75 TREES § 245-75
211:679
(2) All parking areas within this district shall be constructed with
either Portland cement concrete or asphaltic concrete over an
approved subbase, to depths for each application as established by
the Village Engineer prior to construction, giving consideration to
the anticipated traffic flow and nature of vehicles to be serviced by
said facilities.
H. Electric and telephone service. All electric and telephone service wires
or cables, including cable television services, shall be installed
underground within the boundaries of the development.
I. Detailed site grading plan. A detailed site grading plan shall be
submitted to the Village for approval showing proposed finished grades
for all buildings, parking areas, and landscape areas on site and
showing proposed site drainage plans. Elevation of such site grading
plans shall be based on the Village datum and be approved by the
Village prior to construction.
J. Developer's guarantees. The developer shall be responsible for the
deposit of the amounts of money necessary to cover the costs, fees and
expenses which are related to the review, professional (legal and
engineering), technical, inspection and administrative work performed
on by or on behalf of the Village in pursuance of such proposed
development. This shall include legal fees incurred in the preparation of
the legal documents leading to any rezoning ordinance, including this
section, and any agreements reached for precise implementation plans
submitted pursuant to this section, together with all such time
expended in the oversight of such development by the Village Attorney,
and the review by the Village Engineer of all plans submitted, and
inspection of such installations, together with time spent in oversight
by the Village Engineer of such development. Such cash deposits shall
be made pursuant to policies established from time to time by the
Village of Waterford.
K. Sidewalks, landscaping and fence.
(1) The developer shall construct four-foot-wide concrete sidewalks to
a permanent line and grade, pursuant to § 235-21 of this Municipal
Code, in the public rights-of-way along the southerly and easterly
property lines of the development. No occupancy permit shall be
granted prior to the completion of the required sidewalks.
(2) The developer shall provide the Village with a landscape plan as
part of the Precise Implementation Plan for each phase of
construction and a detailed material list, and shall implement and
maintain such plan after approval by the Village.
(3) The developer shall build and maintain a privacy fence and/or
privacy fence-retaining wall combination at least eight feet in
height which shall run along the westerly property line of the
development pursuant to the site plan. The fence shall be
maintained for the life of the zoning district.
§ 245-75 WATERFORD CODE § 245-75
211:680
L. Easements. The developer shall grant to the Village easements over and
across the private roads and off-street parking areas in the
development, together with additional easements over and across the
aprons abutting the private roadways for purposes of providing public
services, including, but not limited to, fire, rescue, police protection and
garbage collection. In every instance, easements to be provided shall
require that no obstruction be allowed within its width, no lighting or
other utility poles be erected within the easement area, the owner to be
responsible for removing snow accumulations from the easement area,
and no parking of vehicles be allowed within the easement area.
(1) The Village shall have the right to tow any vehicles and similarly
remove any other types of personal property which are located
within the easement area after giving a notice of such
encroachment at least six hours prior to the removal of the
property causing the encroachment. This notice shall be given by
written citation placed upon the vehicle or other encroaching
property.
(2) In the event the Village must remove personal property from the
easement area pursuant to Subsection L(1) hereof, the property
shall be impounded by the Village until payment of the costs and
forfeiture for such violation have been paid. The Village shall seek
payment from the owner of the property seized, and after
reasonable efforts have been made to obtain such payment, the
Village may proceed for payment against the property owner or
association. In no event shall the Village be required to commence
legal action against the owner of the property seized prior to
seeking collection from owner of the development.
(3) In each instance where it becomes necessary for the Village to
remove personal property from the easement area pursuant to
Subsection L(1) and (2) hereof, the penalty shall be equal to the
actual costs incurred by the Village for the removal of the property,
its impoundment and the collection of the costs above defined,
including actual attorney's fees and costs, plus $25 to defray
administrative expenses in enforcement of this subsection.
M. Private street and drive maintenance. Private off-street parking areas,
walks, and access roads shall be maintained by the owner so as to
provide safe access at all times to all times to all areas of the
development.
N. Termination of Waterford Hotel Partners Commercial Planned
Community Development District. If no Precise Implementation Plan
has been approved by the Village Board within 12 months of the
execution of the developer's agreement, or if substantial construction
has not begun within 12 months of the approval of a Precise
Implementation Plan for a phase of the development, the Waterford
Hotel Partners Commercial Planned Community Development District
shall be terminated, and there shall be a stay on the development of the
§ 245-75 TREES § 245-75
211:681
§ 245-76. (Reserved)147
§ 245-77. Trailview Planned Community Development District.
[Added 1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 470]
property, and the Plan Commission and the Village Board shall have
150 days during which no plats, General Development Plans, or Precise
Implementation Plans shall be submitted for approval wherein the
Village may act to rezone the property. The criteria to be used in
determining if substantial construction has commenced shall be that
the building foundation of the structure has been completed and
capped.
O. Rezoning effected by passage of this amendment. The property subject
of this planned community development district is legally described as
follows: Parcel 3 of Certified Survey Map No. 1720, recorded in Volume
5 of Certified Survey Maps of Racine County, on pages 256-261 as
Document No. 1481697, located in the Village of Waterford, Racine
County, Wisconsin.
A. Permitted and conditional uses.
(1) The permitted uses in this mixed use planned community
development district shall be:
(a) Multiple-family residences as set forth in § 245-20 of this
chapter, but said multiple-family residential use shall be
limited to senior housing (assisted living and apartments) and
residential condominiums; provided, however, that said
restriction shall not apply on the land included in Tracts A and
B shown on the General Development Plan; and [Amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 649]
(b) Business uses as set forth in § 245-21 of this chapter.
(c) Improvements related to the permitted uses, including offstreet
parking, on-street parking as permitted herein, common
green space areas, recreational areas, easement areas for
public utilities and stormwater drainage installations as
contained in the developer's agreement and deed restrictions,
and related accessory uses, all as contained in the General
Development Plan and Precise Implementation Plans as from
time to time submitted and which will remain on file with the
Village of Waterford.
(2) The permitted uses identified in this subsection shall be the only
permitted uses allowed in Trailview Planned Community
Development District.
147. Editor's Note: Former § 245-76, Fairview Marketplace Planned Community Development
District, added 5-24-2004 by Ord. No. 453, as amended, was repealed 6-25-2007 by Ord.
No. 516.
§ 245-75 WATERFORD CODE § 245-77
211:682
(3) Conditional uses. [Added 1-12-2009 by Ord. No. 536148]
(a) The conditional uses permitted in this mixed-use planned
community development district shall be light manufacturing,
light industrial and related uses allowed in the Business and
Industrial District as provided in § 245-22A, when those uses
are of a limited nature and size and where relative proximity to
other uses requires restrictive regulation, and do not include
those listed in Subsection A(3)(d) below. Residential uses
otherwise prohibited by § 245-22A shall be considered
permitted uses only to the extent allowed in § 245-77A(1)(a).
[Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
(b) The Plan Commission, in approving or disapproving proposed
locations for conditional uses under this subsection, shall give
due consideration to the character and suitability for
development in the neighborhood in which any such use is
proposed to be located and shall also base its decision on such
evidence as may be presented to the Plan Commission
regarding the attributes of the proposed use, such as increased
traffic on the public streets, heavy vehicular traffic, and the
emission of noise, smoke, dust or dirt, odorous or noxious
gases, and the like that would be detrimental to the character
and suitability of the district.
(c) Improvements related to the conditional uses, including offstreet
parking, on-street parking as permitted herein, common
green space areas, recreational areas, easement areas for
public utilities and stormwater drainage installations as
contained in the developer’s agreement and deed restrictions,
and related accessory uses, all as contained in the General
Development Plan and Precise Implementation Plans as from
time to time submitted and which will remain on file with the
Village of Waterford. The conditional uses identified in this
subsection shall be the only conditional uses allowed in
Trailview Planned Community Development District.
(d) Conditional uses not permitted:
[1] No trucking company or motor freight company shall be
allowed;
[2] No heavy manufacturing uses shall be allowed, such as
acid, ammonia, bleach or soap manufacture; ammunition
manufacture; explosives or fireworks manufacture or
storage; asphalt, coal and coal tar or coke manufacture;
distillation of bones; cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of
paris manufacture; fat rendering; garbage, rubbish, offal
or dead animal reduction or dumping; gelatin, glue or size
148. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also amended the title of § 245-77A from "Pemitted uses" to
"Permitted and conditional uses."
§ 245-77 TREES § 245-77
211:683
manufacture; manufacture, refinement or storage of
inflammable gases or liquids; overground tank farms;
slaughterhouses; stockyards; or smelting facilities;
[3] No automobile wrecking yard, junkyard, or salvage yard
shall be allowed.
[4] No mini-warehousing uses shall be allowed.
[5] No adult establishments, adult bookstores or adult-only
video stores.
[6] No tattoo and/or body-piercing establishments.
[7] Any other use that is prohibited in the Business and
Industrial District as provided in § 245-22A in effect on the
date of this section, and as hereafter amended from time
to time is prohibited in this district. [Amended
8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
B. Special uses not allowed; limitation on allowed uses. [Amended
1-12-2009 by Ord. No. 536]
(1) No special uses as set forth in § 245-10I shall be allowed in the
Trailview Planned Community Development District.
(2) Whereas the Trailview Planned Community Development District
lies for the most part within the amended boundaries of Tax
Increment District No. 2 of the Village of Waterford ("TID No. 2"),
so long as TID No. 2 is in existence, no tax-exempt ownership or use
shall be permitted within this district (except for those parcels or
areas of the district excluded from TID No. 2 as wetlands), and the
land and all of the buildings and improvements on the land shall be
owned and used in such a way as to be fully assessable and taxable
for real estate tax and special assessment purposes, unless a
payment in lieu of taxes (PILOT) is made by the owner and user as
set forth in the developer's agreement. Those outlots held in
undivided ownership by the parcel owners of the development and
taxed to said parcel owners shall not be considered tax exempt
hereunder.
C. Building standards. Each structure constructed within the district shall
be constructed to Building Code requirements as contained within this
Code149 and within the Administrative Code of the State of Wisconsin
where applicable. Modification of the building height, size of living
area, lot area per family and yard requirements found in § 245-20 of this
Municipal Code may be allowed by the Plan Commission when the use
of the building is a permitted use herein.
149. Editor's Note: See Ch. .98, Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical Codes.
§ 245-77 WATERFORD CODE § 245-77
211:684
D. Garbage collection. Garbage collection shall be provided to the users
within the district based upon the standards and regulations of the
Village as may be amended from time to time. See Chapter 186, Solid
Waste, Article I, of this Code. The Village shall provide curbside
garbage collection for all condominium dwelling units in the
development. Each individual owner shall be responsible for meeting all
requirements for garbage collection as from time to time promulgated
by the Village.
E. Automobile parking and parking facilities.
(1) All parking areas within this district shall be constructed with
either Portland cement concrete or asphaltic concrete over an
approved subbase, to depths for each application as established by
the Village Engineer prior to construction.
(2) Parking shall be allowed on public streets within the development
unless specifically restricted by the Village pursuant to Chapter
207, Traffic and Parking, of the Village of Waterford Municipal
Code. In all other areas of the development, parking shall be
limited to driveway approaches and marked parking stalls within
the district. No parking shall be permitted in or on any other area.
F. Electric and telephone service. All electric and telephone service wires
or cables, including cable television services, shall be installed
underground within the boundaries of the development.
G. Detailed site grading plan. A detailed site grading plan shall be
submitted to the Village for approval showing proposed finished grades
for all buildings, parking areas, and landscape areas on site and
showing proposed site drainage plans. Elevation of such site grading
plans shall be based on the Village datum and be approved by the
Village prior to construction.
H. Developer's agreement. The developer, owner, Village of Waterford
Community Development Authority and the Village of Waterford shall
enter into a written developer's agreement, which may be amended in
writing as from time to time required, to address the installation of all
improvements to the site and financial guarantees by the developer
pursuant to § 235-19D of this Municipal Code, or by the Village
pursuant to the Tax Increment Financing Project Plan for the Boundary
and Project Plan Amendment to Tax Incremental Financing District No.
2 (hereinafter "Project Plan Amendment"), along with the issuance of
building and occupancy permits. Despite the requirements of § 235-19D
of this Municipal Code, the Village may make public improvements to
the development if those improvements are made pursuant to the
Project Plan Amendment. The agreement and any subsequent
amendments shall be approved by the Village of Waterford Plan
Commission, Village of Waterford Community Development Authority,
Village Board, Village Engineer, and Village Attorney.
§ 245-77 TREES § 245-77
211:685
I. Landscaping. The developer shall provide the Village with a landscape
plan as part of the Precise Implementation Plan for each phase of
construction and a detailed material list, and shall implement such plan
after approval by the Village.
J. Easements.
(1) In all areas where public utilities are located outside of the Village
rights-of-way, the developer shall provide the Village with
easements in dimensions in accordance with the developer's
agreement. Except as noted herein, such easements shall be
maintained free and clear of natural plantings, accessory outdoor
appurtenances (mailboxes, however, shall be allowed) or
permanent outdoor recreation facilities and shall be kept free of
parked vehicles, so as to allow open and free access to emergency
and utility vehicles as may be from time to time required. In areas
where utility or future public right-of-way easements (except
stormwater easements) are granted to the Village, a landowner
may install landscaping pursuant to a plan that excludes trees and
is approved by the Plan Commission and the Village of Waterford
Department of Public Works; however, that landscaping shall be
installed at the developer's or landowner's expense, and in the
event that the landscaping is removed or damaged by the Village
pursuant to its rights under the easement, the developer or
landowner shall be responsible for all costs related to removal and/
or restoration of said landscaping.
(2) The developer shall grant to the Village easements over and across
the private roads in the development, together with additional
easements over and across the aprons abutting the private
roadways for purposes of providing public services, including, but
not limited to, fire, rescue, police protection and, where applicable,
garbage collection. These easements shall be 32 feet in width, with
the easement center line corresponding to the center line of the
pavement of the private roadway. In every instance, easements to
be provided shall require that no obstruction be allowed within the
thirty-two-foot width, no lighting or other utility poles (except
mailboxes) be erected within the easement area, the owner or
association to be responsible for removing snow accumulations
from the easement area, and no parking of vehicles be allowed
within the easement area.
(a) The Village shall have the right to tow any vehicles and
similarly remove any other types of personal property which
are located within the easement area after giving a notice of
such encroachment at least six hours prior to the removal of
the property causing the encroachment. This notice shall be
given by written citation placed upon the vehicle or other
encroaching property.
§ 245-77 WATERFORD CODE § 245-77
211:686
(b) In the event the Village must remove personal property from
the easement area pursuant to Subsection J(2)(a) hereof, the
property shall be impounded by the Village until payment of
the costs and forfeiture for such violation have been paid. The
Village shall seek payment from the owner of the property
seized, and after reasonable efforts have been made to obtain
such payment, the Village may proceed for payment against
the property owner or association. In no event shall the Village
be required to commence legal action against the owner of the
property seized prior to seeking collection from the owner of
the development or the association.
(c) In each instance where it becomes necessary for the Village to
remove personal property from the easement area pursuant to
Subsection J(2)(a) and (b) hereof, the penalty shall be equal to
the actual costs incurred by the Village for the removal of the
property, its impoundment and the collection of the costs above
defined, including actual attorney's fees and costs, plus $25 to
defray administrative expenses in enforcement of this
subsection.
K. Private street and drive maintenance. Private off-street parking areas,
walks, and access roads shall be maintained by the owner so as to
provide safe access at all times to all areas of the development.
L. Condominium declaration. At the time of recording the final site plans
for the condominium phase of the development and prior to
commencement of any construction upon the property thereof, the
owner shall submit to the Village a Declaration of Condominium for
review and approval by the Village Attorney. Such declaration shall be
recorded at the office of the Register of Deeds for Racine County prior
to the sale of or issuance of an occupancy permit for the condominium
improvements. The following items shall be included to the satisfaction
of the Village Attorney in such condominium declaration:
(1) That a common maintenance authority shall be established to
maintain the commonly owned land and facilities.
(2) That all dwelling units shall be maintained in condominium
ownership.
M. Termination of Trailview Planned Community Development District. If
no Precise Implementation Plan has been approved by the Village Board
within 18 months of the execution of the developer's agreement, or no
Precise Implementation Plan for a subsequent phase of the
development is submitted by the developer within 36 months of the
execution of the developer's agreement, or if substantial construction
has not begun within 12 months of the approval of a Precise
Implementation Plan for a phase of the development, the Trailview
Planned Community Development District, there shall be a stay on the
development of the property, and the Village Board shall have 150 days
§ 245-77 TREES § 245-77
211:687
§ 245-78. Fairview Station Planned Community Development
Business District. [Added 5-24-2004 by Ord. No. 454]
during which no plats or certified survey maps shall be submitted for
approval wherein the Village may act to rezone the property.
N. Rezoning effected by passage of this amendment. The property subject
of this planned community development district is legally described as
set forth in Exhibit A attached hereto.150 Prior to enactment of this
section, said real estate described in Exhibit A maintained zoning
classifications of Industrial, Business or Single Family Residence
District, and, upon passage of this planned community development
district section, all real estate above is removed from said previous
districts and is, in all respects, subjected to the planned community
development district zoning rules and regulations of the Village of
Waterford Municipal Code and the specific terms and conditions of this
section.
O. Exhibits made a part of this section. The exhibits herein identified and
referred to as Exhibit A (the legal description), the developer's
agreement, and the General Development Plan each are incorporated
into this section by and through this specific reference, and shall be
kept on file with the Village of Waterford and incorporated herein as
though fully set forth, and each of the terms and conditions of the legal
description, the developer's agreement and the plan shall be
enforceable as an element of this chapter and subject to the provisions
for penalties and other legal action as provided by this chapter.
P. Recording. Except as provided in Subsection L, no building permit for
construction in a particular phase of the development shall be granted
until the recording of those documents referenced herein which are
indicated as subject of recordation in the Register of Deeds Office for
Racine County, Wisconsin for that phase of the development.
A. Permitted uses: business structures and multiple-family residence
structures as provided in Village of Waterford Municipal Code
§§ 245-20A and 245-21A and this section, except those listed below,
including off-street parking and easement areas for public utilities and
stormwater drainage installations as contained in the General
Development Plan and deed restrictions, together with the necessary
support and green space areas, all as to be provided for upon several
Precise Implementation Plans to be submitted and which will remain on
file with the Village of Waterford. The permitted uses identified in this
subsection shall be the only permitted uses allowed in the Fairview
Station Planned Community Development Business District. [Amended
1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 1-26-2015 by Ord. No. 623]
B. Uses not permitted.
150. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Village offices.
§ 245-77 WATERFORD CODE § 245-78
211:688
(1) No tavern shall be allowed unless it is a nationally or regionally
franchised tavern and restaurant combination; however, this
restriction shall not apply in cases where the sale of alcoholic
beverages is ancillary to another commercial recreational facility
use.
(2) No temporary structures shall be allowed, but signs, billboards and
other outdoor advertising structures shall be permitted pursuant to
the provisions of Article VI of this chapter.151
(3) No light manufacturing, fabricating or assembling businesses shall
be allowed.
(4) No trucking company or motor freight company shall be allowed.
(5) No uses similar in character to a permitted use, or for the
manufacture or treatment of products incidental to a permitted
use, or accessory to a permitted use, shall be allowed without a
conditional use permit.
C. Green space preservation. No use other than recreational and
landscaping shall be permitted in an area dedicated to green space as
finally approved in a Precise Implementation Plan.
D. Special uses. No special uses shall be permitted in the Fairview Station
Planned Community Development Business District.
E. Garbage collection. Garbage collection shall be provided to the
commercial users within the district based upon the standards and
regulations of the Village at the time of construction of any such
commercial structure. See Chapter 186, Solid Waste, Article I, of this
Code.
F. Building standards. Each structure constructed within the district shall
be constructed to Building Code requirements as contained within this
Code152 and within the Administrative Code of the State of Wisconsin
where applicable.
G. Off-street automobile parking facilities.
(1) The number and size of parking spaces ultimately approved as part
of a Precise Implementation Plan for this development shall be
maintained for the life of the development, and the development
shall be exempt from the requirements of § 245-64C of this Code.
(2) All parking areas within this district shall be constructed with
either cement concrete or asphaltic concrete over an approved
subbase, to depths for each application as established by the
Village Engineer prior to construction, giving consideration to the
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
152. Editor's Note: See Ch. 98, Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical Codes.
§ 245-78 TREES § 245-78
211:689
anticipated traffic flow and nature of vehicles to be serviced by said
facilities.
H. Electric and telephone service. All electric and telephone service wires
or cables, including cable television services, shall be installed
underground within the boundaries of the development.
I. Detailed site grading plans. Detailed site grading plans shall be
submitted to the Village for approval showing proposed finished grades
for all buildings, parking areas, and landscape areas on site and
showing proposed site drainage plans. Elevation of such site grading
plans shall be based on the Village datum and be approved by the
Village prior to construction.
J. Developer's agreement. The developer, owner, and the Village of
Waterford shall enter into a written developer's agreement, which may
be amended in writing as from time to time required, to address the
installation of all improvements to the site prior to the issuance of
building permits, for the installation of sewer mains, water mains,
stormwater conduits, sewers, detention and retention pond areas,
easement accesses, and ingress and egress easement rights for the
public, which agreement and any subsequent amendments shall be
approved by the Village of Waterford Plan Commission, Village Board,
Village Engineer, and Village Attorney, and which shall further contain
provisions for financial guarantees for such public improvements as set
forth in § 235-19D(4) of this Municipal Code, in a form approved by the
Village Attorney, and in amounts not less than 115% of the Village
Engineer's estimate of the cost of such improvements. All sanitary
sewer, water, and stormwater infrastructure must be installed and
inspected by the Village Engineer prior to the issuance of any building
permits for development within any area included in any precise
implementation plan. Building permits may thereafter be issued upon
the placement of first lift of asphalt, with second lifts of asphalt to be
applied within one year of the first lift, but no later than October 1 of
the year following the first lift, or sooner upon demand by the Village
Engineer. All improvements required within the Planned Unit
Development shall be installed at the developer's expense and pursuant
to the terms of the developer's agreement(s) above referenced. In
addition to the developer's responsibilities for guaranteeing the costs
anticipated in the construction and installation of public utility
infrastructure and roadways, the developer shall also be responsible, as
part of any agreement entered for such development, for the deposit of
amounts of money necessary to cover the costs, fees and expenses
which are related to the review, professional (legal and engineering),
technical, inspection and administrative work performed on by or on
behalf of the Village in pursuance of such proposed development. This
shall include legal fees incurred in the preparation of the legal
documents leading to any rezoning ordinance, including this section,
and any agreements reached for precise implementation plans
submitted pursuant to this section, together with all such time
§ 245-78 WATERFORD CODE § 245-78
211:690
expended in the oversight of such development by the Village Attorney,
and the review by the Village Engineer of all plans submitted, and
inspection of such installations, together with time spent in oversight
by the Village Engineer of such development, along with other costs
and fees as set forth in the developer's agreement(s). Such cash
deposits shall be made pursuant to policies established from time to
time by the Village of Waterford and specific language included in
developer's agreement(s) as from time to time entered.
K. Easements.
(1) In all areas where public utilities are located outside of the Village
rights-of-way, the developer shall provide the Village with
easements and dimensions in accordance with the developer's
agreement, such easements shall be maintained free and clear of
natural plantings, accessory outdoor appurtenances or permanent
outdoor recreation facilities, so as to allow open and free access by
emergency vehicles as may be from time to time required.
[Amended 4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 496]
(2) The developer shall grant to the Village easements over and across
the private roads in the development, together with additional
easements over and across the aprons abutting the private
roadways for purposes of providing public services, including, but
not limited to, fire, rescue, police protection and garbage
collection. These easements shall be in a width established in the
developer's agreement, with the easement center line
corresponding to the center line of the pavement of the private
roadway. In every instance, easements to be provided shall require
that no obstruction be allowed, except the planting of street trees,
within the applicable width, no lighting or other utility poles be
erected within the easement area, the owner or association to be
responsible for removing snow accumulations from the easement
area, and no parking of vehicles be allowed within the easement
area.
(a) The Village shall have the right to tow any vehicles and
similarly remove any other types of personal property which
are located within the easement area after giving a notice of
such encroachment at least six hours prior to the removal of
the property causing the encroachment. This notice shall be
given by written citation placed upon the vehicle or other
encroaching property.
(b) In the event the Village must remove personal property from
the easement area pursuant to Subsection K(2)(a) hereof, the
property shall be impounded by the Village until payment of
the costs and forfeiture for such violation have been paid. The
Village shall seek payment from the owner of the property
seized, and after reasonable efforts have been made to obtain
such payment, the Village may proceed for payment against
§ 245-78 TREES § 245-78
211:691
§ 245-79. Woodfield Condominium Planned Community
Development District. [Added 3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 483]
the property owner or association. In no event shall the Village
be required to commence legal action against the owner of the
property seized prior to seeking collection from owner of the
development or the association.
(c) In each instance where it becomes necessary for the Village to
remove personal property from the easement area pursuant to
Subsection K(2)(a) and (b) hereof, the penalty shall be equal to
the actual costs incurred by the Village for the removal of the
property, its impoundment and the collection of the costs above
defined, including actual attorney's fees and costs, plus $25 to
defray administrative expenses in enforcement of this
subsection.
L. Sidewalks and landscaping.
(1) The developer shall construct four-foot-wide concrete sidewalks to
a permanent line and grade, pursuant to § 235-21 of this Municipal
Code, in conformance with the developer's agreement and with
Precise Implementation Plans as approved by the Plan Commission.
No occupancy permit shall be granted prior to the completion of
the required sidewalks in each phase of the development. If, in the
future, the Village requires additional sidewalk installation, it may
proceed with the planning and construction of sidewalks with
payment therefor by special assessment against the individual
property owners at the time of construction.
(2) The developer shall provide the Village with a landscape plan as
part of each Precise Implementation Plan for each phase of
construction and a detailed material list, and shall implement and
maintain such plan after approval by the Village.
M. Private street and drive maintenance. Private off-street parking areas,
walks, and access roads shall be maintained by the owner so as to
provide safe access at all times to all areas of the development.
N. (Reserved)153
O. The property subject of this Planned Community Development District
is legally described in Ordinance No. 454, on file at the Village Hall.
[Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No.
490]
A. Permitted uses: A total of 20 structures, each containing two residential
living units with related improvements, including off-street parking,
153. Editor's Note: Former Subsection N, regarding the termination of the Fairview Station
Planned Community Development Business District, as amended, was repealed 1-26-2015
by Ord. No. 623.
§ 245-78 WATERFORD CODE § 245-79
211:692
common green space areas, recreational areas, easement areas for
public utilities and stormwater drainage installations as contained in
the developer's agreement and deed restrictions, and related accessory
uses, all as contained in the General Development Plan and the Precise
Implementation Plan which will remain on file with the Village of
Waterford. The permitted uses identified in this subsection shall be the
only permitted uses allowed in the Woodfield Condominium Planned
Community Development District.
B. Special uses. No special uses shall be permitted in the Woodfield
Condominium Planned Community Development District.
C. Dwelling standards.
(1) Each of the condominium dwelling units within the development
shall have a minimum floor area of not less than 1,300 square feet.
Such minimum floor area shall include utility rooms but shall
exclude cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages
and other spaces that are not used frequently or during periods of
unit habitation.
(2) Number of bedrooms per dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit shall
have two bedrooms.
(3) Number of bathrooms. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum of
two full bathrooms.
(4) Number of dwelling units per building. A maximum of two dwelling
units shall be allowed within one structure.
D. Garbage collection. The Village shall provide curbside garbage
collection for all condominium dwelling units in the development. Each
individual owner shall be responsible for meeting all requirements for
garbage collection as from time to time promulgated by the Village.
E. Building standards.
(1) Each structure constructed within the district shall be constructed
to building code requirements as contained within this Code and
within the Administrative Code of the State of Wisconsin where
applicable.
(2) Enclosed parking. Each condominium unit located in the
development shall have an attached two-car garage.
F. Automobile parking and parking facilities.
(1) All parking areas within this district shall be constructed with
either cement concrete or asphaltic concrete over an approved subbase,
to depths for each application as established by the Village
Engineer prior to construction.
§ 245-79 TREES § 245-79
211:693
(2) Parking shall be limited to driveway approaches and marked
parking stalls within the district. No parking shall be permitted in
or on any other area.
G. Electric and telephone service. All electric and telephone service wires
or cables, including cable television services, shall be installed
underground within the boundaries of the development.
H. Detailed site grading plan. A detailed site grading plan shall be
submitted to the Village for approval showing proposed finished grades
for all buildings, parking areas, and landscaped areas on site and
showing proposed site drainage plans. Elevation of such site grading
plans shall be based on the Village datum and be approved by the
Village prior to construction.
I. Developer's agreement. The developer, owner, and the Village of
Waterford shall enter into a written developer's agreement, which may
be amended in writing as from time to time required, to address the
installation of all improvements to the site, inclusive of the provision of
financial guarantees and a cash deposit in the amount necessary to
cover the Village's costs related to said development, meeting the
requirements of § 235-19D of this Code. The agreement and any
subsequent amendments shall be approved by the Village of Waterford
Plan Commission, Village Board, Village Engineer, and Village Attorney.
J. Landscaping. The developer shall provide the Village with a landscape
plan as part of the Precise Implementation Plan and a detailed material
list, and shall implement such plan after approval by the Village.
K. Easements.
(1) In all areas where public utilities are located outside of the Village
rights-of-way, the developer shall provide the Village with
easements and dimensions in accordance with the developer's
agreement, such easements shall be maintained free and clear of
natural plantings, accessory outdoor appurtenances or permanent
outdoor recreation facilities and shall be kept free of parked
vehicles, so as to allow open and free access to emergency and
utility vehicles as may be from time to time required.
(2) The developer shall grant to the Village easements over and across
the private roads in the development together with additional
easements over and across the aprons abutting the private
roadways for purposes of providing public services, including, but
not limited to, fire, rescue, police protection, pedestrian access,
and garbage collection. These easements shall be 31 feet in width,
with the easement center line corresponding to the center line of
the pavement of the private roadway. In every instance, easements
to be provided shall require that no obstruction be allowed within
the thirty-one-foot width, no lighting or other utility poles be
erected within the easement area, the owner or association to be
responsible for removing snow accumulations from the easement
§ 245-79 WATERFORD CODE § 245-79
211:694
area, and no parking of vehicles be allowed within the easement
area.
(a) The Village shall have the right to tow any vehicles and
similarly remove any other types of personal property which
are located within the easement area after giving a notice of
such encroachment at least six hours prior to the removal of
the property causing the encroachment. This notice shall be
given by written citation placed upon the vehicle or other
encroaching property. In cases of emergency, no such notice
shall be required.
(b) In the event the Village must remove personal property from
the easement area pursuant to Subsection K(2)(a) hereof, the
property shall be impounded by the Village until payment of
the costs and forfeiture for such violation have been paid. The
Village shall seek payment from the owner of the property
seized and after reasonable efforts have been made to obtain
such payment, the Village may proceed for payment against
the property owner or association. In no event shall the Village
be required to commence legal action against the owner of the
property seized prior to seeking collection from the property
owner or the association.
(c) In each instance where it becomes necessary for the Village to
remove personal property from the easement area pursuant to
Subsection K(2)(a) and (b) hereof, the penalty shall be equal to
the actual costs incurred by the Village for the removal of the
property, its impoundment and the collection of the costs above
defined, including actual attorney's fees and costs, plus $25 to
defray administrative expenses in enforcement of this
subsection.
L. Private street and drive maintenance. Private off-street parking areas,
walks, and access roads shall be maintained by the owner so as to
provide safe access at all times to all areas of the development.
M. Condominium declaration. At the time of recording the final site plans
for the development and prior to commencement of any construction
upon the property hereof, the owner shall submit to the Village a
Declaration of Condominium for review and approval by the Village
Attorney. Such declaration shall be recorded at the Office of the
Register of Deeds for Racine County prior to the commencement of
construction of the improvements as herein defined. The following
items shall be included to the satisfaction of the Village Attorney in such
condominium declaration:
(1) That a common maintenance authority shall be established to
maintain the commonly owned land and facilities.
(2) That all dwelling units shall be maintained in condominium
ownership.
§ 245-79 TREES § 245-79
211:695
N. Termination of Woodfield Condominium Planned Community
Development District. If substantial construction has not begun within
12 months of the approval of the Precise Implementation Plan for the
development, the Woodfield Condominium Planned Community
Development District shall be terminated and this subsection shall be
null and void without further action by the Plan Commission or the
Village Board, the zoning district in effect prior to the creation of the
Woodfield Condominium Planned Community Development District
shall be reinstated and the Village Board may act to rescind the
developer's agreement. The criteria to be used in determining if
substantial construction has commenced shall be that the building
foundation of one structure has been completed and capped.
O. Rezoning effected by passage of this amendment. The property subject
of this Planned Community Development District is legally described
as:
Being a part of the NW 1/4 of the NW 1/4, Section 35, Township 4
North, Range 19 East, Village of Waterford, Racine County,
Wisconsin.
Commencing at the Northwest corner of said Section 35; thence
S.00°09'07"W., along the west line of said NW 1/4, a distance of
532.04 feet; thence S.89°50'53"E., a distance of 38.52 feet to the
point of beginning of the hereinafter described lands; thence
S.74°39'34"E., a distance of 19.73 feet; thence S.89°59'32"E., a
distance of 53.12 feet; thence S.77°47'30"E., a distance of 56.94 feet;
thence S.89°58'36"E., a distance of 276.39 feet; thence
N.41°55'42"E., a distance of 17.96 feet; thence S.45°45'08"E., a
distance of 33.18 feet; thence N.89°48'43"E., a distance of 99.73 feet;
thence S.00°11'17"E., a distance of 601.31 feet; thence
S.86°31'08"W., a distance of 554.16 feet; thence N.00°25'08"E., a
distance of 427.56 feet; thence N.02°02'28"E., a distance of 234.39
feet to the point of beginning. Said lands contain 344,801 square feet
(7.92 acres).
Prior to enactment of this ordinance, a majority of the southerly
portion of said real estate maintained a zoning classification of Single
Family Residence District, and the northernmost portion of said land
was zoned as part of the Fairview Station Planned Community
Development District, set forth in § 245-78O of this Code (as amended
by Ordinance 490), and upon passage of this Planned Community
Development District ordinance all real estate above is removed from
said districts and is, in all respects, subjected to the Planned
Community Development District zoning rules and regulations of the
Code of the Village of Waterford and the specific terms and conditions
of this subsection.
P. Exhibits made a part of this section. The exhibits herein identified and
referred to as the developer's agreement and the final site plan each are
incorporated into this subsection by and through this specific
§ 245-79 WATERFORD CODE § 245-79
211:696
§ 245-80. Fluegge Planned Community Development District.
[Added 3-22-2010 by Ord. No. 550]
reference, and shall be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk
and incorporated herein as though fully set forth, and each of the
terms and conditions of the developer's agreement and the plan shall be
enforceable as an element of this chapter and subject to the provisions
for penalties and other legal action as provided by this chapter.
A. Permitted uses. The permitted uses in this mixed-use planned
community development district shall be:
(1) Business uses as set forth in § 245-21 of this chapter, including, but
not limited to:
(a) Marketing, manufacturing, fitting, and/or selling eyeglasses,
sunglasses and corrective lenses.
(b) Full-service retail pharmacy, including drive-through service,
in-store health services, sales of merchandise and alcoholic
beverages, and twenty-four-hour operations.
(2) Improvements related to the permitted uses, including off-street
parking, common green space areas, recreational areas, easement
areas for public utilities and stormwater drainage installations as
contained in the developer's agreement and deed restrictions, and
related accessory uses, all as contained in the General
Development Plan and Precise Implementation Plans as from time
to time submitted and which will remain on file with the Village of
Waterford.
(3) The permitted uses identified in this subsection shall be the only
permitted uses allowed in the Fluegge Planned Community
Development District.
B. Uses not permitted; limitation on permitted uses.
(1) No residential use is allowed.
(2) No special uses as set forth in § 245-10I are allowed in the Fluegge
Planned Community Development District.
(3) No outside sales are allowed, unless those sales are in participation
in an area-wide event such as a "sidewalk sale," or unless the Plan
Commission specifically approves those sales as part of a Precise
Implementation Plan. No tents, trailers or similar structures may
be placed in the district for the purpose of conducting any sales.
[Amended 7-23-2012 by Ord. No. 590]
(4) Green space preservation. No use other than recreational and
landscaping shall be permitted in an area dedicated to green space
as finally approved in a Precise Implementation Plan.
§ 245-79 TREES § 245-80
211:697
(5) Whereas the Fluegge Planned Community Development District
lies for the most part within the amended boundaries of Tax
Increment District No. 2 of the Village of Waterford ("TID No. 2"),
so long as TID No. 2 is in existence, no tax-exempt ownership or use
shall be permitted within this district, and the land and all of the
buildings and improvements on the land shall be owned and used in
such a way as to be fully assessable and taxable for real estate tax
and special assessment purposes, unless a payment in lieu of taxes
(PILOT) is made by the owner and user as set forth in the
developer's agreement. Those outlots held in undivided ownership
by the parcel owners of the development and taxed to said parcel
owners shall not be considered tax exempt hereunder.
C. Conditional uses. The conditional uses identified in this subsection shall
be the only conditional uses allowed in Fluegge Planned Community
Development District.
(1) The conditional uses permitted in this mixed-use planned
community development district shall be light manufacturing, light
industrial and related uses allowed in the Business and Industrial
District as provided in § 245-22A, when those uses are of a limited
nature and size and where relative proximity to other uses requires
restrictive regulation, and do not include those listed in Subsection
C(4) below. [Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
(2) The Plan Commission, in approving or disapproving proposed
locations for conditional uses under this subsection, shall give due
consideration to the character and suitability for development in
the neighborhood in which any such use is proposed to be located
and shall also base its decision on such evidence as may be
presented to the Plan Commission regarding the attributes of the
proposed use, such as increased traffic on the public streets, heavy
vehicular traffic, and the emission of noise, smoke, dust or dirt,
odorous or noxious gases, and the like that would be detrimental to
the character and suitability of the district.
(3) Improvements related to the conditional uses, including off-street
parking, common green space areas, recreational areas, easement
areas for public utilities and stormwater drainage installations as
contained in the developer's agreement and deed restrictions, and
related accessory uses, all as contained in the General
Development Plan and Precise Implementation Plans as from time
to time submitted and which will remain on file with the Village of
Waterford
(4) Conditional uses not permitted:
(a) No trucking company or motor freight company shall be
allowed;
§ 245-80 WATERFORD CODE § 245-80
211:698
(b) No heavy manufacturing uses shall be allowed, such as acid,
ammonia, bleach or soap manufacture; ammunition
manufacture; explosives or fireworks manufacture or storage;
asphalt, coal and coal tar or coke manufacture; distillation of
bones; cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture;
fat rendering; garbage, rubbish, offal or dead animal reduction
or dumping; gelatin, glue or size manufacture; manufacture,
refinement or storage of inflammable gases or liquids;
overground tank farms; slaughterhouses; stockyards; or
smelting facilities;
(c) No automobile wrecking yard, junkyard, or salvage yard shall
be allowed.
(d) No mini-warehousing uses shall be allowed.
(e) No adult establishments, adult bookstores or adult-only video
stores.
(f) No tattoo and/or body-piercing establishments.
(g) Any other use that is prohibited in the Business and Industrial
District as provided in § 245-22A in effect on the date of this
section, and as hereafter amended from time to time, is
prohibited in this district. [Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No.
658]
D. Building standards. Each structure constructed within the district shall
be constructed to Building Code requirements as contained within this
Code (See Chapter 98, Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical
Code.) and within the Administrative Code of the State of Wisconsin
where applicable. Modification of the building height, setback, area,
yard, parking and sign requirements found in §§ 245-21, 245-22, 245-15
and Chapter 245, Article VI, of this Municipal Code may be allowed by
the Plan Commission when the use of the building is a permitted use
herein.
E. Garbage and recyclable collection. The commercial users within the
district shall be responsible for the removal of garbage and recyclables
pursuant to the standards and regulations of the Village. See Chapter
186 of this Code.
F. Automobile parking and parking facilities.
(1) All parking areas within this district shall be constructed with
either cement concrete or asphaltic concrete over an approved
subbase, to depths for each application as approved by the Village
Engineer prior to construction.
(2) Parking shall be limited to driveway approaches and marked
parking stalls within the district. No parking shall be permitted in
or on any other area.
§ 245-80 TREES § 245-80
211:699
G. Electric and telephone service. All electric and telephone service wires
or cables, including cable television services, shall be installed
underground within the boundaries of the development.
H. Detailed site grading plans. Detailed site grading plans shall be
submitted to the Village for approval showing proposed finished grades
for all buildings, parking areas, and landscape areas on site and
showing proposed site drainage plans. Elevation of such site grading
plans shall be based on the Village datum and be approved by the
Village prior to construction.
I. Developer's agreement. The developer, owner, Village of Waterford
Community Development Authority and the Village of Waterford shall
enter into a written developer's agreement, which may be amended in
writing as from time to time required, to address the installation of all
improvements to the site and financial guarantees by the developer
pursuant to § 235-19D of this Municipal Code, along with the issuance
of building and occupancy permits. Public improvements made by the
developer shall be subject to the Prevailing Wage Law of the State of
Wisconsin.154 The agreement and any subsequent amendments shall be
approved by the Village of Waterford Plan Commission, Village of
Waterford Community Development Authority, Village Board, Village
Engineer, and Village Attorney.
J. Landscaping. The developer shall provide the Village with a landscape
plan as part of the Precise Implementation Plan for each phase of
construction and a detailed material list, and shall implement such plan
after approval by the Village.
K. Easements.
(1) Utility easements. In all areas where public utilities are located
outside of the Village rights-of-way, the owner shall provide the
Village with public utility easements for the purpose of permitting
the Village to re-install, re-lay, operate, repair, and maintain
underground pipes and conduits for public water, storm sewer, and
sanitary sewer service under the surface, and, where appropriate,
above the surface, along with the right of ingress and egress, in
dimensions in accordance with the developer's agreement. No
building, accessory appurtenance or other structure (except
mailboxes) shall be constructed in a utility easement area.
Landscaping and parking lots may be constructed in an easement
area; provided, however, that in the event that the landscaping is
removed or damaged by the Village pursuant to its rights under the
easement, the developer or landowner shall be responsible for all
costs related to removal and/or restoration of said landscaping
areas.
154. Editor's Note:: See e.g., Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0903, 103.49 and 103.50.
§ 245-80 WATERFORD CODE § 245-80
211:700
(2) Public safety. The owner shall grant to the Village easements over
and across the private paved driveways, roadways and accessways,
in dimensions set forth in the developer's agreement, for purposes
of providing public services, including, but not limited to, fire,
rescue, police protection and, if applicable, garbage collection. The
owner or association shall be responsible for removing snow
accumulations from the easement area.
(3) The Village shall have the right to tow any vehicles and similarly
remove any other types of personal property which are located
within a utility easement area after giving a notice that access to
the area is required at least six hours prior to the removal of the
property. This notice shall be given by written citation placed upon
the vehicle or other property. In the event of emergency, no such
notice shall be required. In the event the Village must remove
vehicles or personal property from an easement area pursuant to
this subsection, the property shall be impounded by the Village
until the costs of removal have been paid. The Village shall seek
payment from the owner of the property seized, and after
reasonable efforts have been made to obtain such payment, the
Village may proceed for payment against the property owner. In no
event shall the Village be required to commence legal action
against the owner of the property seized prior to seeking collection
from the property owner.
L. Private street and drive maintenance. Private off-street parking areas,
walks, and access roads shall be maintained by the owner so as to
provide safe access at all times to all areas of the development.
M. Termination of Fluegge Planned Community Development District. If no
Precise Implementation Plan has been approved by the Village by
September 31, 2010, or no Precise Implementation Plan for a
subsequent phase of the development is approved by the Village by
December 31, 2010, or if substantial construction has not begun within
12 months of the approval of a Precise Implementation Plan for a phase
of the development, there shall be a stay on the development of the
property, and the Village Board shall have 150 days during which no
plats or certified survey maps shall be submitted for approval wherein
the Village may act to rezone the property.
N. Rezoning effected by passage of this amendment. The property subject
of this planned community development district is legally described as
set forth in Exhibit A attached hereto,155 and made a part hereof. Prior
to enactment of this section, said real estate described in Exhibit A was
annexed to the Village with the zoning classification of Planned
Community Development District, the specific provisions for which
were to be set forth by separate ordinance, and, upon passage of this
planned community development district ordinance, all real estate
155. Editor's Note: Exhibit A of Chapter 245, § 245-80 (Ord. No. 550), is on file in the office of
the Village Clerk.
§ 245-80 TREES § 245-80
211:701
§ 245-81. Park Meadow Planned Community Development District.
[Added 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 659]
above is, in all respects, permanently subjected to the Planned
Community Development District Zoning Rules and Regulations of the
Code of the Village of Waterford and the specific terms and conditions
of this section.
O. Exhibits made a part of this section. The exhibits herein identified and
referred to as Exhibit A (the legal description),156 the developer's
agreement, and the General Development Plan each are incorporated
into this section by and through this specific reference, and shall be
kept on file with the Village of Waterford and incorporated herein as
though fully set forth, and each of the terms and conditions of the legal
description, the developer's agreement and the plan shall be
enforceable as an element of this chapter and subject to the provisions
for penalties and other legal action as provided by this chapter.
P. Recording. No building permit for construction in a particular phase of
the development shall be granted until the recording of those
documents referenced herein which are indicated as subject of
recordation in the Register of Deeds Office for Racine County,
Wisconsin, for that phase of the development.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) The permitted uses in this mixed-use planned community
development district shall be a total of 41 single-family structures
substantially conforming with the Single-family Residence B
provisions set forth in § 245-18 of this chapter.
(2) Improvements related to the permitted uses, including off-street
parking, common green space areas, recreational areas, easement
areas for public utilities and private stormwater drainage
installations as contained in the required developer's agreement
and deed restrictions, and related accessory uses, all as contained
in the general development plan, precise implementation plans,
and developer's agreement(s) as from time to time submitted and
which will remain on file with the Village of Waterford and recorded
with the Racine County Register of Deeds.
B. Other uses. No other uses are allowed in the Park Meadow Planned
Community Development District unless permitted pursuant to a
specific provision of this chapter.
C. Dwelling standards. Each of the dwelling units within the development
shall contain at least the minimum requirements set forth in the zoning
district set forth in Subsection A and shall conform with all applicable
building, plumbing, electrical and mechanical codes.
156. Editor's Note: Exhibit A of Chapter 245, § 245-80 (Ord. No. 550), is on file in the office of
the Village Clerk.
§ 245-80 WATERFORD CODE § 245-81
211:702
D. Area standards. Modification of the setback, yard, parking and sidewalk
requirements of this Municipal Code may be allowed by the Plan
Commission when the use of the building is a permitted use herein.
E. Garbage and recyclable collection. See § 186-7 of this Code.
F. Automobile parking and parking facilities.
(1) All parking areas within this district shall be constructed with
either cement concrete or asphaltic concrete over an approved subbase,
to depths for each application as approved by the Village
Engineer prior to construction.
(2) Parking shall be limited to driveway approaches, marked parking
stalls and public streets within the district. No parking shall be
permitted in or on any other area.
G. Electric and telephone service. All electric and telephone service wires
or cables, including cable and fiber-optic services, shall be installed
underground within the boundaries of the development.
H. Detailed site grading plans. Detailed site grading plans shall be
submitted to the Village for approval showing proposed finished grades
for all buildings, parking areas, and landscape areas on site and
showing proposed site drainage plans. Elevation of such site grading
plans shall be based on the Village datum and be approved by the
Village prior to construction.
I. Developer's agreement. Where land division or public improvements
are necessary for construction, the developer, owner, and the Village of
Waterford shall enter into a written developer's agreement, which may
be amended in writing as from time to time required, to address the
installation of all public improvements to the development and financial
guarantees by the developer pursuant to § 235-19D of this Municipal
Code, along with the issuance of building and occupancy permits. The
agreement and any subsequent amendments shall be approved by the
Village of Waterford Plan Commission, Village Board, Village Engineer,
and Village Attorney.
J. Landscaping. The developer shall provide the Village with a landscape
plan as part of the precise implementation plan for each phase of
construction and a detailed material list, and shall implement such plan
after approval by the Village.
K. Easements.
(1) Utility easements. In all areas where public utilities are located
outside of the Village rights-of-way, the owner shall provide the
Village with public utility easements for the purpose of permitting
the Village to reinstall, re-lay, operate, repair, and maintain
underground pipes and conduits for public water and public
sanitary sewer service under the surface, and, where appropriate,
§ 245-81 TREES § 245-81
211:703
above the surface, along with the right of ingress and egress, in
dimensions in accordance with the developer's agreement.
(a) All public storm sewers shall be laid in Village rights-of-way.
Stormwater management systems serving the development
must be constructed pursuant to Chapter 250 of this Municipal
Code, and shall remain private and the responsibility of the
owner or association, and easements shall be granted to the
Village in the event that it is required to provide emergency
repairs or maintenance.
(b) No building, accessory appurtenance or other structure
(except mailboxes) shall be constructed in a utility easement
area. Landscaping and parking may be constructed in an
easement area; provided, however, that in the event that the
landscaping is removed or damaged by the Village pursuant to
its rights under the easement, the developer or landowner
shall be responsible for all costs related to removal and/or
restoration of said landscaping areas.
(2) Public safety. The owner shall grant to the Village easements over
and across any private paved driveways, roadways and accessways,
in dimensions set forth in the developer's agreement, for purposes
of providing public services, including, but not limited to, fire,
rescue, police protection and, if applicable, garbage collection. The
owner or association shall be responsible for removing snow
accumulations from the easement areas.
(3) The Village shall have the right to tow any vehicles and similarly
remove any other types of personal property that are located within
a utility easement area after giving a notice that access to the area
is required at least six hours prior to the removal of the property.
This notice shall be given by written citation placed upon the
vehicle or other property. In the event of emergency, no such notice
shall be required.
(a) In the event the Village must remove vehicles or personal
property from an easement area pursuant to this subsection,
the Village may impound the property until the costs of
removal have been paid. The Village shall seek payment from
the owner of the property seized, and after reasonable efforts
have been made to obtain such payment, the Village may
proceed for payment against the property owner. In no event
shall the Village be required to commence legal action against
the owner of the property seized prior to seeking collection
from the property owner.
L. Private street and drive maintenance. Private off-street parking areas,
walks, and access roads, if any, shall be maintained by the owner so as
to provide safe access at all times to all areas of the development.
§ 245-81 WATERFORD CODE § 245-81
211:704
§ 245-82. (Reserved)
§ 245-83. (Reserved)
§ 245-84. (Reserved)
§ 245-85. (Reserved)
§ 245-86. (Reserved)
§ 245-87. (Reserved)
§ 245-88. (Reserved)
§ 245-89. (Reserved)
M. Termination of Park Meadow Planned Community Development
District. If no precise implementation plan has been approved by the
Village by February 28, 2019, or if substantial construction has not
begun within 12 months of the approval of a precise implementation
plan for the first phase of the development, the zoning implemented by
this section shall lapse and the zoning shall automatically revert to
Business District.
N. Rezoning effected by passage of this amendment. The property subject
of this planned community development district is legally described as
set forth in Exhibit A attached hereto, and made a part hereof. Prior to
enactment of this section, said real estate described in Exhibit A was
zoned Business District and, upon passage of this planned community
development district section, all real estate described on Exhibit A is, in
all respects, permanently subjected to the planned community
development district zoning rules and regulations of the Code of the
Village of Waterford and the specific terms and conditions of this
section.
O. Exhibits made a part of this section. The exhibits herein identified and
referred to as Exhibit A, the legal description, and Exhibit B, the
General Development Plan, each are incorporated into this section by
and through this specific reference, and shall be kept on file with the
Village of Waterford and incorporated herein as though fully set forth,
and each of the terms and conditions of the legal description and the
general development plan shall be enforceable as an element of this
chapter and subject to the provisions for penalties and other legal
action as provided by this chapter.
P. Recording. No building permit for construction in a particular phase of
the development shall be granted until the recording of those
documents referenced herein which are indicated as subject of
recordation in the Register of Deeds Office for Racine County,
Wisconsin for that phase of the development.
§ 245-81 TREES § 245-90
211:705
§ 245-90. (Reserved)
§ 245-91. (Reserved)
§ 245-92. (Reserved)
§ 245-93. (Reserved)
§ 245-94. (Reserved)
§ 245-95. (Reserved)
§ 245-96. (Reserved)
§ 245-97. (Reserved)
§ 245-98. (Reserved)
§ 245-99. (Reserved)
§ 245-90 WATERFORD CODE § 245-99
211:706
ARTICLE IX
Extraterritorial Zoning District
[Added 1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 463]
§ 245-100. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 62.23(7a) and the
amendments thereto, which grants the Village the authority to enact
extraterritorial zoning regulations, and which, by its terms, makes
applicable the provisions of Wis. Stat. § 62.23(7)(c) and the amendments
thereto, which grants the Village the authority to enact zoning regulations
to protect groundwater resources and to promote health and the general
welfare.
§ 245-101. Purpose.
The purpose of the Extraterritorial Zoning District is to institute land use
regulations and restrictions protecting the municipal water supply of the
Village of Waterford, following the boundary line requirements of Wis. Stat.
§ 62.23(7a)(a).
§ 245-102. Intent.
The Extraterritorial Zoning District shall be considered a holding district,
wherein existing zoning districts, as set forth by the County of Racine and
adopted by the Town of Waterford, shall be retained within subdistricts,
and the uses, area requirements, and yard setback requirements set forth
in Chapter 20 of the Racine County Code of Ordinances, the applicable
provisions of which are adopted as though fully set forth herein, shall
remain in full force and effect, except as limited within the Extraterritorial
Wellhead Protection Area Overlay District set forth in this article.
§ 245-103. Location and description.
A. The regulations specified in this article shall apply to the area of the
Town of Waterford that lies within the striped area shown on the
attached map and legally described as follows:157
157. Editor's Note: The extraterritorial zoning map is on file in the Village offices.
§ 245-100 TREES § 245-103
211:707
§ 245-104. Subdistricts; regulations.
The location of the subdistricts and the regulations within the
Extraterritorial Zoning District are as follows:
All of that land lying within Sections 25 and 36, Town 4 North, Range
19 East, of the Town of Waterford, County of Racine, State of
Wisconsin, described as:
Commencing at the center of Section 25 T4N R19E; thence S 87-56-46
W, 238.5 feet; thence southeasterly along the northeast right-of-way
line of State Highway "164", 516.1 feet to the quarter section line
of Section 25; thence S 0-16-26 E, 656.8 feet; thence S 87-40-44 W
1093.4 feet; thence N 0-16-26 W, 1433.3 feet; thence N 87-52-2 E,
3758.6 feet; thence S 0-9-16 E, 3784.2 feet; thence S 87-44-28 W,
1885.9 feet to the west right-of-way line of State Highway "36"; thence
northerly along said right-of-way to the northeast right-of-way line of
State Highway "164"; thence N 0-13-3 W, 1694.3 feet; thence S 87-52-3
W, 1328.6 feet to the point of beginning.
B. This Extraterritorial Zoning District and its subdistricts and overlay
district shall be incorporated on an official Village of Waterford
Extraterritorial Zoning Map.
A. A-1 Holding.
(1) Location: all of that land zoned A-1 General Farming District I on
the date of enactment of this article, identified as all of that land
within the Extraterritorial Zoning District which lies west of the
westerly right-of-way line of State Trunk Highway 36 and north of
the east-west center line of Section 25, along with all of that land
lying south of the east-west center line of Section 25 West which
also lies between the westerly right-of-way line of State Trunk
Highway 36 and the easterly corporate limits of the Village of
Waterford, shall be zoned A-1 Holding Subdistrict.
(2) Regulation. The A-1 Holding Subdistrict shall be subject to the
provisions of Division 23 of Chapter 20 of the Racine County Code
of Ordinances as adopted, administered and further limited by the
provisions of this article.
B. A-2 Holding.
(1) Location: all of that land zoned A-2 General Farming and
Residential District II on the date of enactment of this article,
identified as all of that land within the Extraterritorial Zoning
District which lies south of the east-west center line of Section 25
and west of the westerly corporate limits of the Village of
Waterford, along with all of that land lying south of the east-west
center line of Section 25 and east of the easterly right-of-way line of
State Highway 36, excluding therefrom all of that land identified as
Tax Identification Parcel 016-04-19-25-021-001 as it existed on the
§ 245-103 WATERFORD CODE § 245-104
211:708
effective date of this article and as legally described in Subsection
C(1), shall be zoned A-2 Holding Subdistrict.
(2) Regulation. The A-2 Holding Subdistrict shall be subject to the
provisions of Division 24 of Chapter 20 of the Racine County Code
of Ordinances as adopted, administered and further limited by the
provisions of this article.
C. B-3 Holding.
(1) Location: all of that land zoned B-3 Commercial Service District on
the date of enactment of this article, identified as all of that land
within the Extraterritorial Zoning District which lies north of the
east-west center line of Section 25 and east of the easterly right-ofway
line of State Highway 36, along with all of that land identified
as Tax Identification Parcel 016-04-19-25-021-001 as it existed on
the effective date of this article, and legally described as:
That part of the Northeast 1/4 of the Southeast 1/4 of Section 25,
Town 4 North, Range 19 East of the Fourth Principal Meridian in
the Town of Waterford and being more particularly described as
follows:
Commerce at the Northeast corner of said Southeast 1/4 Section;
thence S 01-08-23 E along the East line of said Southeast 1/4
Section, 50.03 feet (recorded as 50 feet); thence S 89-09-42 W
63.52 feet to the point of beginning of this description; thence S
31-05-10 W 530.48 feet; thence N 66-22-55 W 246.05 feet to a
point on the Easterly line of STH 36; thence N 18-41-56 E along
the East line of said Highway 106.42 feet; thence N 31-05-10 E
along the East line of said Highway 297.41 feet; thence N 89-09-42
parallel with and 50 feet south of the North line of the Southeast
1/4 of Section 25, 311.57 feet to the place of beginning shall be
zoned B-3 Holding Subdistrict.
(2) Regulation. The B-3 Holding Subdistrict shall be subject to the
provisions of Division 18 of Chapter 20 of the Racine County Code
of Ordinances as adopted, administered and further limited by the
provisions of this article.
D. ETWPA.
(1) Location: all of that land lying within the Wellhead Protection Zone
for Well Nos. 4 and 5 and delineated on "Exhibit A — Wells No. 4
and 5 Wellhead Protection Area" to the "Wellhead Protection Plan
for the Village of Waterford Municipal Wells No. 4 and No. 5,"
which lies within the Extraterritorial Zoning District, shown on the
map attached hereto158 as all of that land lying within the heavy
dotted lines and outside of the Village boundaries, described as
follows: all of that land lying within Sections 25 and 36, Town 4
158. Editor's Note: The map is on file in the Village offices.
§ 245-104 TREES § 245-104
211:709
North, Range 19 East, of the Town of Waterford, County of Racine,
State of Wisconsin, described as: Commencing at the center of
Section 25 T4N R19E; thence S 87-56-46 W, 238.5 feet; thence
southeasterly along the northeast right-of-way line of State
Highway "164", 516.1 feet to the quarter section line of Section
25; thence S 0-16-26 E, 656.8 feet; thence S 87-40-44 W 1093.4
feet; thence N 0-16-26 W, 502.8 feet; thence N 42-42-34 E, 1311.6
feet; thence N 87-52-2 E, 1563.1 feet; thence S 51-26-13 E, 1656.8
feet; thence S 0-9-16 E, 1673.9 feet; thence S 45-0-0 W, 1515.6
feet; thence S 87-44-28 W, 803.4 feet to the west right-of-way line
of State Highway "36"; thence northerly along said right-of-way
to the northeast right-of-way line of State Highway "164"; thence
N 0-13-3 W, 1694.3 feet; thence S 87-52-3 W, 1328.6 feet to the
point of beginning shall be zoned ETWPA (Extraterritorial Wellhead
Protection Area Overlay District).
(2) Regulation.
(a) Within the ETWPA, land use and activities in the recharge area
of Well No. 4 and No. 5 of the Village of Waterford shall be
regulated for the purpose of protecting the groundwater
recharge area for Well No. 4 and No. 5 from contamination.
The ETWPA is necessary to institute land use regulations and
restrictions within the area which contributes water directly to
the municipal water supply, so as to promote public health,
safety and welfare in the Village and to minimize public costs.
(b) The regulations specified in this section shall apply to the areas
of the Town of Waterford that lie within the area identified as
the ETWPA and are in addition to the requirements in the
underlying zoning district, if any. If there is a conflict between
the provisions of this overlay district and the underlying zoning
district, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
(c) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
AQUIFER — A saturated permeable geologic formation that
contains and will yield significant quantities of water.
CONE OF DEPRESSION — The area around a well, in which
the water level has been lowered at least one foot by pumping
of the well.
FIVE-YEAR TIME OF TRAVEL — The recharge area upgradient
of the cone of depression, the outer boundary of which it is
determined or estimated that groundwater will take five years
to reach a pumping well.
MUNICIPAL WATER SUPPLY — The municipal water supply of
the Village of Waterford.
§ 245-104 WATERFORD CODE § 245-104
211:710
RECHARGE AREA — In general, the recharge area is the
area which encompasses all areas or features that, by surface
infiltration of water that reaches the zone of saturation of
an aquifer, supplies groundwater to a well. The minimum
separation distance between a well and certain potential
contaminants is 1,200 feet, and, where the actual recharge
area is less than 1,200 feet from a well, "recharge area" as
used herein includes all of those areas lying within 1,200 feet
from a well or within the five-year time of travel, whichever is
greater.
THIRTY-DAY TIME OF TRAVEL — The recharge area
upgradient of a well, or its cone of depression, the outer
boundary of which it is determined or estimated that
groundwater will take 30 days to reach a pumping well.
ZONE OF SATURATION — The saturated zone is the area of
unconsolidation, fractured or porous material that is saturated
with water and constitutes groundwater.
(d) Permitted uses. Permitted uses within the ETWPA are subject
to the separation distance requirements set forth in Subsection
D(2)(e) below, and the prohibition of uses, activities or
structures designated in Subsection D(2)(f) below, and are also
subject to the underlying zoning requirements, and include:
[1] Public and private parks, provided there are no on-site
wastewater disposal systems or holding tanks within the
applicable separation distance required in Subsection
D(2)(e).
[2] Playgrounds.
[3] Wildlife areas and natural areas.
[4] Trails such as biking, hiking, skiing, nature and fitness
trails.
[5] Residential which meets the separation distances listed in
Subsection D(2)(e).
[6] Agricultural activities which are conducted in accordance
with United States Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, Wisconsin Technical
Guide, Nutrient Management Standard 590 (see Wis.
Admin. Code ch. NR 151 and ch. ATCP 50).
[7] Commercial establishments which are not municipally
sewered, provided that the separation distances required
in Subsection D(2)(e) are maintained.
(e) Separation distance requirements. The following separation
distances as specified in Wis. Admin. Code s. NR 811.16(4)(d)
§ 245-104 TREES § 245-104
211:711
shall be maintained [and even though a separation distance is
listed here, the used may be further regulated in Subsection
D(2)(f)]:
[1] Between Well No. 4 or 5 and a stormwater sewer main or
any sanitary sewer main constructed of water main
materials and joints which is pressure tested in place to
meet current AWWA 600 specifications: 50 feet.
[2] Between Well No. 4 or 5 and any sanitary sewer main,
sanitary sewer manhole, lift station or single-family
residential fuel oil tank: 200 feet.
[3] Between Well No. 4 or 5 and a septic tank or soil
adsorption unit receiving less than 8,000 gallons per day
or a stormwater drainage pond: 400 feet.
[4] Between Well No. 4 or 5 and any gasoline or fuel oil
storage tank installation that has received written
approval from the Department of Commerce or its
designated agent under Wis. Admin. Code s. Comm 10.10:
600 feet.
[5] Between Well No. 4 or 5 and land application of municipal,
commercial or industrial waste; or industrial, commercial
or municipal waste water storage structures: 1,000 feet.
[6] Between Well No. 4 or 5 and any post-consumer recycling
facility engaged in solid waste storage, transportation,
transfer, incineration, air curtain destructor, processing,
wood burning, one-time disposal or small demolition; coal
storage area; salt or deicing material storage area;
gasoline or fuel oil storage tanks that have not received
written approval from the Department of Commerce or its
designated agent under Wis. Admin. Code s. Comm 10.10;
bulk fuel storage facilities; and pesticide or fertilizer
handling or storage facilities: 1,200 feet.
[7] Separation distances listed in Wis. Admin. Code s. NR
811.16(4)(d) but not listed in this subsection shall be
applicable in the Extraterritorial Wellhead Protection
Overlay District.
(f) Prohibited uses. The method of regulation by prohibition of
certain uses is employed to provide the greatest assurance that
inadvertent discharge of pollutants into the groundwater
supply will not occur, since such an event would result in
almost certain contamination of the public water supply and
costly mitigation or remediation for which liability is difficult or
impossible to establish. The prohibited uses, activities or
structures inside the ETWPA include:
§ 245-104 WATERFORD CODE § 245-104
211:712
[1] Above- and below-ground hydrocarbon or petroleum
storage tanks that have not received written approval from
the Department of Commerce or its designated agent
under Wis. Admin. Code s. Comm 10.10.
[2] Cemeteries.
[3] Chemical manufacturers (Standard Industrial
Classification Major Group 28).
[4] Bulk coal storage.
[5] Dry cleaners with on-site cleaning facilities.
[6] Hazardous, toxic or radioactive materials transfer and
storage under Title III or SARA planning.
[7] Industrial lagoons and pits.
[8] Landfills and any other solid waste facilities, except postconsumer
recycling.
[9] Manure storage or manure stacks or storage structures.
[10] Nonmetallic earthen materials extraction or sand and
gravel pits.
[11] Bulk pesticide and bulk fertilizer transfer or storage.
[12]Railroad yards and maintenance stations.
[13] Rendering plants and slaughterhouses.
[14] Bulk salt or bulk deicing material storage.
[15] Salvage or junk yards.
[16] Septage or sludge spreading, storage or treatment.
[17] Septage, wastewater, or sewage lagoons.
[18] Private on-site wastewater treatment systems or holding
tanks receiving 8,000 gallons per day or more.
[19] Stockyards and feedlots.
[20] Vehicular services stations, repair, renovation and body
working [Gasoline filling stations are allowed if they meet
the separation distance requirements in Subsection
D(2)(e).]
[21]Wood preserving.
[22] The boundaries of a landspreading facility for spreading of
petroleum-contaminated soil regulated under NR 718
while that facility is in operation.
§ 245-104 TREES § 245-104
211:713
(g) Requirements for existing facilities which may cause or
threaten to cause environmental pollution. Existing facilities
within the ETWPA at the time of enactment of this section
which may cause or threaten to cause environmental pollution
include, but are not limited to, those which are named in the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources current
"Inventory of Sites or Facilities Which May Cause or Threaten
to Cause Environmental Pollution," or the Wisconsin
Department of Commerce's list of underground storage tanks
or list of facilities with hazardous solid waste permits, and all
other facilities which are considered a prohibited use in
Subsection D(2)(f), all of which are incorporated herein as if
fully set forth.
[1] Such facilities as above which exist within the ETWPA at
the time of enactment shall provide copies of all federal,
state and local facility operation approval or certificates
and on-going environmental monitoring results to the
Village.
[2] Such facilities as above which exist within the ETWPA at
the time of enactment shall provide environmental or
safety structures/monitoring to include an operational
safety plan, hazardous material containment, best
management practices, stormwater runoff management
and groundwater monitoring.
[3] Such facilities as above which exist within the ETWPA at
the time of enactment shall replace equipment, or expand
on the site or property of record associated with the
facility, in a manner that improves the environmental and
safety technologies already being utilized.
[4] Such facilities as above which exist within the ETWPA at
the time of enactment shall have the responsibility of
devising, filing and maintaining, with the Village, a
contingency plan which details how they intend to respond
to any emergency which occurs at their facility, including
notifying municipal, county and state officials.
[5] Such facilities as above shall not engage in or employ a
use, activity, or structure listed in Subsection D(2)(f) above
which they did not engage in or employ at the time of the
enactment of this section, and may only expand those
present uses, activities, or structures on the site or
property of record associated with the facility at the time
of enactment in a manner that improves the environmental
and safety technologies already being utilized.
(h) Changing technology.
§ 245-104 WATERFORD CODE § 245-104
211:714
§ 245-105. Compliance, zoning permits, changes and amendments.
[1] The uses prohibited in the ETWPA are prohibited based
upon the combined pollution experience of many
individual uses, and the technology generally employed by
a particular use considered to be of a high risk for
pollution to the groundwater resource. As the technology
of other uses change to low- or non-risk materials or
methods, upon petition from such use, after conferring
with the Department of Natural Resources, or other expert
opinion, and after appropriate public notice and hearing,
the Village through appropriate procedures and actions to
change these provisions of the Municipal Code, as set forth
in § 245-84C, may remove from the designated prohibited
uses such uses as are demonstrated convincingly that they
no longer pose a groundwater pollution hazard.
[2] In dealing with uses which attempt to become permissible,
under the terms of the ETWPA, by continuing to use
pollutant materials but altering their processing, storage
and handling, it is not the intention to accept alternate or
reduced hazards as the basis for making a use permissible.
It is the intention to continue a prohibition on such uses
until the technology of the use removes reliance upon the
pollutant materials or processes deemed to be a
groundwater hazard.
A. Compliance. No structure, land, development or water shall hereafter
be used and no structure or part thereof shall hereafter be located,
erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or
structurally altered except in conformity with the regulations specified
herein for the district, subdistrict and overlay district in which it is
located. Nothing in this section shall prevent the continuance of the
present occupancy or lawful use of any existing building, except as may
be necessary for the safety of life and property. A zoning permit
pursuant to this section shall be required prior to the issuance of a
building permit from the Town of Waterford.
B. Zoning permits.
(1) Permit required. No building or structure shall hereafter be
erected or structurally altered, and the use of land shall not be
changed within the Extraterritorial Zoning District until a zoning
permit is applied for and issued in compliance with the provisions
of this article regulating the use of the land, location of all
buildings, setback lines and all other zoning requirements as
herein prescribed for the district and each subdistrict and overlay
district. Compliance shall be evidenced by the issuance of a zoning
permit by the Zoning Administrator, except for gardening
purposes.
§ 245-104 TREES § 245-105
211:715
(2) Application. An application for a zoning permit required by this
section shall contain a location sketch in duplicate, drawn to scale,
showing the location, actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be
built upon, the exact size and location on the lot of the proposed or
existing building(s) and/or accessory building(s), the lines within
which the building(s) shall be erected, altered or moved, the
existing or intended use of each building or part of a building, the
number of families the building is intended to accommodate and
such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots
or buildings as may be necessary to determine and provide for the
enforcement of this section. In any case, no permit will be issued
unless the applicant indicates the intended use of the land and/or
buildings.
(3) Permit approval. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the
Zoning Administrator shall issue or refuse to issue a Zoning permit
within a reasonable time after receipt of an application therefor.
Refusal to issue a zoning permit shall be given in writing, with the
reasons for such refusal.
(4) Appeals. If a zoning permit is denied by the Zoning Administrator,
or any person alleges an error in a decision by the Zoning
Administrator under this section, an appeal may be made to the
Board of Appeals pursuant to § 245-54 of the Village of Waterford
Municipal Code.
(5) Fees. There shall be a fee for an application for a zoning permit
pursuant to this section in the amount of $35, to be submitted
together with the application for the permit; however, if the
applicant must also obtain a zoning permit from Racine County for
the same building or use on the same land, the fee payable to the
Village shall be waived.
C. Changes and amendments.
(1) Any landowner within the Extraterritorial Zoning District may
petition the Village Board to rezone his or her land to a zoning
district set forth in the Racine County Code of Ordinances. Any
person who shall petition the Village Board to amend, supplement
or change the district boundaries or regulations herein or
subsequently established thereby requiring notice by publication
and a hearing thereon, shall pay to the Treasurer at the time of
submitting the petition and prior to any publication or hearing
thereon, a fee of $150 to defray the necessary costs and expenses
of publication and hearing, which shall be paid into the Village
Treasury and no part thereof shall be returned to the applicant
regardless of the disposition of the petition.
(2) The Village Board may, from time to time on its own motion or on
petition, amend, supplement or change the district boundaries or
the regulations herein.
§ 245-105 WATERFORD CODE § 245-105
211:716
§ 245-106. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(3) Any amendment, whether by petition or otherwise, shall proceed
pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stat. § 62.23(7a)(f) and shall
require recommendation and report by the Joint Extraterritorial
Zoning Committee.
A. Any building or structure hereafter erected, moved or structurally
altered or any use hereafter established in violation of any of the
provisions of this article shall be deemed an unlawful building,
structure or use. The Zoning Administrator shall promptly report all
such violations to the Village Attorney, who shall bring action to enjoin
the construction, moving or structural alteration of such building or the
establishment of such use or to cause such building, structure or use to
be vacated or removed.
B. Any person who violates, disobeys, neglects, omits or refuses to comply
with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
article may also be required, upon conviction, to forfeit not less than
$25 nor more than $200 for each offense, together with the costs of
prosecution; and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of
prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the County Jail of Racine County
until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not to exceed 30 days for
each violation. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
C. In addition, the following provisions apply:
(1) In the event any person, partnership, corporation, or other legal
entity (hereinafter "person") that owns or operates a "facility" as
defined in § 245-83D(2)(g), (Requirements for existing facilities
which may cause or threaten to cause environmental pollution),
and that person/facility causes, or is the site of, the release of any
contaminants which endanger the municipal water supply
associated with the ETWPA, the activity causing said release shall
immediately cease, and a cleanup satisfactory to the Village shall
occur.
(2) The person/facility shall be responsible for all costs for cleanup,
Village consultant or outside contractor fees, fees at the invoice
amount plus administrative costs for oversight, review and
documentation, plus the following:
(a) The cost of Village employees' time associated in any way with
the cleanup based on the hourly rate paid to the employee
multiplied by a factor determined by the Village representing
the Village's cost for expenses, benefits, insurance, sick leave,
holidays, worker's compensation, holidays, overtime, vacation,
and similar benefits.
(b) The cost of Village equipment employed in the cleanup.
§ 245-105 TREES § 245-106
211:717
§ 245-107. Severability; nonliability.
(c) The cost of mileage incurred on Village vehicles used in any
activity related to the cleanup, or of mileage fees reimbursed
to Village employees attributed to the cleanup.
(d) See also Chapter 137, Hazardous Materials, of the Village of
Waterford Municipal Code.
A. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this article is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this article shall not be affected thereby.
B. If any application of this article to a particular structure, land, or water
is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such judgment shall not be applicable to any other
structure, land or water not specifically included in such judgment.
§ 245-106 WATERFORD CODE § 245-107
211:718
ARTICLE X
Land Use Regulations
[Added 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 658]
§ 245-108. Land use regulations.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to indicate which land uses may
locate in each zoning district and under what requirements, and which
land uses may not locate therein. Certain land uses may locate in a
given district as a matter of right upon compliance with special
regulations for such a land use. A further distinction is made for land
uses that may locate in a given district only upon obtaining a
conditional use or temporary use permit.
B. Regulation of allowable uses. The allowable land uses for each zoning
district are established in this article. Detailed descriptions and
regulations for uses are found in this article. Even if a land use may be
indicated as permitted by right or requiring a conditional use in a
particular district, such a land use may not necessarily be permitted or
permissible on any or every property in such district. No land use is
permitted or permissible on a property unless it can be located on it or
implemented in full compliance with all of the applicable standards and
regulations of this chapter or unless an appropriate variance has been
granted pursuant to § 245-54.
C. Principal land uses permitted by right. Principal land uses listed as
permitted by right (designated by the letter "P" in the Table of Land
Uses; see § 245-111) are permitted per the general land use
requirements of this article; per the area and other requirements of the
specific zoning district in which they are located; per any additional
requirements imposed by applicable overlay districts; per all other
applicable requirements of this chapter; and per any and all other
applicable Village, county, state, and federal regulations.
D. Principal land uses permitted as conditional uses. Principal land uses
allowed only with a conditional use permit (designated by the letter "C"
in the Table of Land Uses; see § 245-111) may be permitted subject to
all the requirements applicable to uses permitted by right as listed in
Subsection C above, plus any additional requirements applicable to that
particular land use imposed as part of the conditional use permit
process established in § 245-16. Each application for, and instance of, a
conditional use shall be considered a unique situation and shall not be
construed as precedence for similar requests. Except for uses approved
under a general development plan and final development plan in a
planned community development district (see Article VIII), all uses
requiring a conditional use permit shall comply with the procedural
requirements of § 245-16.
E. Accessory land uses. Accessory land uses are allowed subject to all the
requirements and exemptions applicable to principal land uses
permitted by right as listed in Subsection C above. Accessory land uses
§ 245-108 TREES § 245-108
211:719
§ 245-109. Regulations applicable to all land uses.
All uses of land initiated within the jurisdiction of this chapter on, or
following, the effective date of the applicable section of this chapter shall
comply with all of the applicable provisions of this chapter.
allowed only with a conditional use permit are subject to all the
requirements and exemptions applicable to principal land uses
requiring a conditional use permit as listed in Subsection D above. See
§ 245-117 for additional regulations applicable to accessory land uses.
F. Temporary land uses. Temporary land uses (designated by the letter "T"
in the Table of Land Uses; see § 245-111) are allowed on a temporary
basis subject to permitting requirements in § 245-56.4 of this chapter.
A. Land use regulations and requirements. All uses of land shall comply
with all the regulations and requirements of this chapter pertaining to
the types of uses allowed within particular zoning districts. Such
regulations and requirements address both general and specific
regulations that land uses shall adhere to and which are directly related
to the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of the
residents of the Village of Waterford.
B. Area regulations and requirements. All development and use of land
shall comply with all the applicable area regulations of this chapter
pertaining to that development and use.
C. Overlay zoning district requirements. All land use and/or development
of land shall comply with all the regulations and requirements of this
chapter pertaining to any applicable overlay zoning districts of this
chapter.
D. Exterior site and building design standards. All new, remodeled, and
expanded residential and nonresidential development shall comply with
all applicable building and site design guidelines as required in
§ 245-56.6 of this chapter.
E. Performance standards. All development of land shall comply with all
applicable requirements established in this chapter pertaining to the
provision of appropriate access, parking, loading, storage, and lighting
facilities. Such requirements address issues such as minimum required
parking spaces, the screening of storage areas, maximum permitted
intensity of lighting, as well as defining acceptable levels of potential
nuisances such as noise, vibration, odors, heat, glare, and smoke.
F. Landscape and preservation regulations. All development of land shall
comply with all the regulations and requirements of Article XI of this
chapter pertaining to the preservation of woodlands and mature trees
and provision of landscaping and bufferyards. Such requirements
address issues such as minimum required landscaping of developed
land and minimum required provision of bufferyards between adjoining
§ 245-108 WATERFORD CODE § 245-109
211:720
zoning districts, which are directly related to the effective bulk of a
structure.
G. Signage regulations. All land use and/or development of land shall
comply with all requirements of Article VI pertaining to the type and
amount of signage permitted on property. Such requirements address
issues such as the maximum area of permitted signage and the number
and types of permitted signage.
H. Number of buildings per lot. Only one principal building shall be
permitted on any one lot. More than one principal building may be
permitted on any one lot upon granting of a conditional use permit
allowing more than one building per lot (§ 245-16) or the approval of a
Planned Community Development District in compliance Article VIII.
I. Number of land uses per building. No combination of uses is allowed in
a building except as specifically set forth in this chapter.
J. Planned community development requirements. All uses and/or
development of land within a planned community development shall
comply with all requirements of Article VIII.
K. (Reserved)
L. (Reserved)
M. Nonconforming lots, uses, structures, and site requirements. Land uses
not in conformance with the requirements of the applicable zoning
district shall be subject to the special limitations and exceptions as
established in § 245-10F. Land uses located on nonconforming lots or in
nonconforming structures shall comply with all the regulations and
requirements of Article X.
N. Site plan review required. The use of all new, altered or expanded
buildings are subject to site plan review and approval in accordance
with § 245-56.6 of this chapter, except for the following:
(1) Single-family, two-family, and multiple-family residential uses on
individual lots in any zoning district.
(2) Uses within a precise implementation plan in a planned community
development in accordance with the procedures of Article VIII,
provided that the precise implementation plan substantially
conforms to the general development plan and provides a similar
level of detail and range of plans as a typical site plan submittal
required under this chapter.
O. Procedural regulations and requirements. All land use and/or
development of land shall comply with all requirements of this chapter
pertaining to the procedures necessary to secure review and approval
of land use and/or development. Such regulations and restrictions
address both procedural and technical requirements.
§ 245-109 TREES § 245-109
211:721
§ 245-110. Detailed land use descriptions and regulations.
The land use categories employed by this chapter are defined in this article.
Land use categories that are not listed in this chapter are not necessarily
excluded from locating within any given zoning district. Section 245-59
empowers the Zoning Administrator to make interpretations on matters
regarding specific land use proposals that are not addressed by this chapter.
§ 245-111. Table of Land Uses.
§ 245-112. Residential land use regulations.
P. Compliance with building code requirements. When a permitted land
use is located in a building, such building shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
Q. Dilapidated buildings. If the building inspector determines that a
building is dilapidated as set forth in § 98-28 of this Municipal Code,
such building cannot be used for a permitted land use until such time as
the property owner remedies the situation or the Plan Commission, in
consultation with the Building Inspector, approves a written
remediation plan with an acceptable timeline for compliance.
A. Generally. The Table of Land Uses is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
B. Nonconforming uses. See § 245-10F(10).
A. Single-family dwelling regulations. A single-family dwelling is a
dwelling designed for and occupied by not more than one family and
having no roof, wall or floor in common with any other dwelling unit.
This dwelling unit type consists of a fully detached single-family
residence that is located on an individual lot. See § 245-18 for the
regulations for this use.
B. Two-family dwelling land use regulations. A two-family dwelling is a
dwelling designed for and occupied by not more than two families and
having a roof, wall or floor in common with one other dwelling unit. See
§ 245-19 for the regulations for this use.
C. Multiple-family dwelling land use regulations. A multiple-family
dwelling is a dwelling designed for and occupied by more than two
families and having a roof, wall or floor in common with other dwelling
units. This dwelling unit type may be located on its own lot or within a
planned community development district.
(1) Covenants specifying respective obligations with regard to any
common structures, such as the shared wall, roof, and other
inseparable improvements, are required, unless the units remain in
common ownership.
§ 245-109 WATERFORD CODE § 245-112
211:722
§ 245-113. Business land use regulations.
(2) Any development comprised of more than one building or
containing six or more dwelling units shall provide additional site
design features such as underground parking, architectural
elements, landscaping, and/or on-site recreational facilities.
A. Office. Office land uses include exclusively indoor land uses whose
primary functions are the handling of information or administrative
services. Office uses do not typically provide services directly to
customers on a walk-in or on-appointment basis. Offices in the
Downtown District may not be located in the first floor.
B. Personal or professional service. Personal service and professional
service land uses include all exclusively indoor land uses whose primary
function is the provision of services directly to an individual on a walk-in
or on-appointment basis. Examples of such uses include professional
services, insurance or financial services, realty offices, hospitals,
medical offices and clinics, veterinary clinics, barbershops, beauty
shops, and fitness studios and instructional studios (e.g., dance, art,
and martial arts) where the occupancy load is 25 people or fewer as
determined under the Wisconsin Commercial Building Code (if the
occupancy load is more than 25 people, see Subsection F, below).
Personal or professional services in the Downtown District may not be
located on the first floor.
C. Artisan studio. A building or portion thereof used for the preparation,
display and sale of individually crafted artwork, jewelry, furniture,
sculpture, pottery, leather craft, hand-woven articles, and related items,
as either a principal use or accessory use. Artisan land uses shall
provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.60 along all property
borders abutting residentially zoned property.
D. Indoor sales or service. Indoor sales or service land uses include retail
sales and similar land uses that conduct sales or display merchandise or
equipment and provide nonpersonal or nonprofessional services
entirely within an enclosed building. This includes pharmacies,
dispensaries, tobacco and vape stores, and self-service facilities such as
coin-operated laundromats.
E. Outdoor display. Outdoor display land uses include land uses that
conduct sales and display merchandise or equipment outside of an
enclosed building. Examples include outdoor garden centers, outdoor
recreation equipment sales, monument sales, and manufactured and
mobile housing sales. Outdoor display uses do not include the storage
or display of inoperable equipment or other materials typically
associated with a junkyard or salvage yard. If a land use displays for
sale or rent only a limited amount of product outside of an enclosed
building, such use may instead be considered incidental indoor sales
under § 245-117K. Outdoor display land uses shall adhere to the
following listed regulations:
§ 245-112 TREES § 245-113
211:723
(1) The outdoor sales area shall be calculated as the area which would
be enclosed by a required physical separation installed and
continually maintained in the most efficient manner which
completely encloses all materials displayed outdoors.
(2) The display of items shall not be permitted in required setback
areas, landscape areas, bufferyards, or permanently protected
green space areas.
(3) Inoperable vehicles or equipment, or other items typically stored or
displayed in a junkyard or salvage yard, shall not be displayed for
this land use.
(4) In no event shall the display of items reduce or inhibit the use or
number of parking stalls provided on the property below the
requirement established in § 245-15. If the number of provided
parking stalls on the property is already less than the requirement,
such display area shall not further reduce the number of parking
stalls already present.
(5) Display areas shall be separated from any circulation area by a
minimum of 10 feet. This separation shall be clearly delimited by a
physical separation such as a greenway, curb, fence, or line of
planters or by a clearly marked paved area, except in the
Downtown District.
(6) Signs, screening, enclosures, landscaping, or materials being
displayed shall not interfere in any manner with either on-site or
off-site traffic visibility, including potential vehicle/vehicle and
vehicle/pedestrian conflicts.
(7) The facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60 along all borders of the display area abutting
residentially zoned property, except per Subsection E(5) above (see
Article XI).
(8) Outdoor display shall be permitted during the entire calendar year;
however, if goods are removed from the display area all support
fixtures used to display the goods shall be removed within 10
calendar days of the goods' removal.
F. Indoor commercial entertainment. Indoor commercial entertainment
land uses include all land uses that provide entertainment services
entirely within an enclosed building. Such activities often have
operating hours that extend significantly later than most other
commercial land uses. Examples of such land uses include restaurants,
taverns, theaters, bowling alleys, arcades, roller rinks, pool halls, and
fitness studios and instructional studios (e.g., dance, art, and martial
arts) where the occupancy load is more than 25 people. Indoor
commercial entertainment land uses shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:
§ 245-113 WATERFORD CODE § 245-113
211:724
(1) If located on the same side of the building as abutting residentially
zoned property, no customer entrance of any kind shall be
permitted within 150 feet, or as far as possible, of a residentially
zoned property, except on the front of the building.
(2) There shall be a bufferyard with minimum opacity of 0.60 along all
borders of the property abutting residentially zoned property (see
Article XI).
G. Outdoor commercial entertainment. Outdoor commercial
entertainment land uses include all land uses that provide
entertainment services partially or wholly outside of an enclosed
building. Such activities often have the potential to be associated with
nuisances related to noise, lighting, dust, trash, and late operating
hours. Examples of such land uses include outdoor commercial
swimming pools, driving ranges, miniature golf facilities, amusement
parks, drive-in theaters, ski hills, marinas, and water parks. Outdoor
commercial entertainment land uses shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:
(1) Activity areas shall not be located closer than 300 feet to a
residentially zoned property.
(2) The facility shall provide bufferyard with minimum opacity of 0.80
along all borders of the property abutting residentially zoned
property (see Article XI).
(3) The site must be planned so that activity areas (including drive-in
movie screens) shall not be visible from any residentially zoned
property.
(4) Outdoor commercial entertainment activities proposed in a public
right-of-way or on Village-owned property must receive Village
Board approval of a special event permit for such use, in addition to
any required conditional use permit.
H. In-vehicle sales or service. In-vehicle sales and service land uses
include all land uses which perform sales and/or services to persons in
vehicles or to vehicles which may or may not be occupied at the time of
such activity (except vehicle repair and maintenance services). Such
land uses often have traffic volumes that exhibit their highest levels
concurrent with peak traffic flows on adjacent roads. Examples of such
land uses include drive-in, drive-up, and drive-through food or retail
facilities, vehicular fuel stations, and all forms of car washes. If
performed in conjunction with a principal land use (e.g., a convenience
store, restaurant, or bank), in-vehicle sales and service land uses shall
be considered an accessory use. The following regulations shall apply:
(1) Clearly marked pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided for each
walk-in customer access to the facility adjacent to the drivethrough
lane(s).
§ 245-113 TREES § 245-113
211:725
(2) The drive-through facility shall be designed so as not to impede or
impair vehicular and pedestrian traffic movement or exacerbate
the potential for pedestrian/vehicular conflicts.
(3) In no instance shall a drive-through facility be permitted to operate
which endangers the public safety, even if such land use has been
permitted under the provisions of this section.
(4) The setback of any overhead canopy or similar structure shall be a
minimum of 10 feet from all street right-of-way lines, a minimum of
20 feet from all residentially zoned property lines, and shall be a
minimum of five feet from all other property lines. The total height
of any overhead canopy or similar structure shall not exceed 20
feet per the measurement of roof height.
(5) All vehicular areas of the facility shall provide a surface paved with
concrete or bituminous material that is designed to meet the
requirements of a minimum four-ton axle load.
(6) The facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
0.60 along all property borders abutting residentially zoned
property (see Article XI).
(7) Interior curbs shall be used to separate driving areas from exterior
fixtures such as fuel pumps, vacuums, menu boards, canopy
supports, and landscaped islands. Said curbs shall be a minimum of
six inches high and shall be of a nonmountable design. No curb
protecting an exterior fixture shall be located closer than 25 feet to
all property lines.
(8) Any text or logo larger on an overhead canopy or other accessory
structure shall be subject to regulation under Article VI of this
chapter (the Sign Code).
(9) In-vehicle sales or services are not allowed in the Downtown
District.
I. Bed-and-breakfast establishments and short-term rentals.
(1) Bed-and-breakfast establishments are indoor lodging facilities that
are defined in Wis. Stats. § 97.01(1g), and licensed by the State
pursuant to Wis. Stats. Ch. 97.
(a) Application requirements. Applicants for a conditional use
permit to operate a bed-and-breakfast shall submit a floor plan
of the single-family dwelling unit illustrating that the proposed
operation will comply with the requirements of the statutes,
the Wisconsin Administrative Code, and other applicable
Village codes and ordinances.
(b) Consideration of issuance. In addition to the standard criteria
for issuance of a CUP, after the Plan Commission holds its
public hearing it shall determine whether the CUP should be
§ 245-113 WATERFORD CODE § 245-113
211:726
issued based upon the public convenience and necessity of the
people in the Village. In the Plan Commission's determination
of the number of bed-and-breakfast operations required to
provide for such public convenience and necessity, the
Commission shall consider the effect upon residential
neighborhoods, conditions of existing holders of permits, and
the necessity of issuance of additional permits.
(c) Public nuisance violations. Bed-and-breakfast operations shall
not be permitted whenever the operation endangers, or
interferes with the safety or rights of others so as to constitute
a nuisance.
(d) Suspension, revocation, and renewal. Any permit issued under
the provisions of this subsection may be revoked by the Village
Board for good cause shown after investigation and
opportunity to the holder of such license to be heard in
opposition thereto pursuant to the provisions of § 245-16; in
such investigation the compliance or noncompliance with the
state law and local ordinances, the conduct of the licensee in
regard to the public, and other consideration shall be weighed
in determination of such issue.
(2) Short-term rentals are residential dwellings that are offered for
rent for a fee and for fewer than 29 consecutive days.
J. Commercial indoor lodging. Commercial indoor lodging facilities
include land uses that provide overnight housing for tourists and
transients, and include hotels, motels, inns and tourist rooming houses
as defined in Wis. Stats. § 97.01. Restaurants, lounges, fitness centers,
and other on-site facilities available to nonlodgers are not considered
accessory uses and therefore require review as a separate land use.
Commercial indoor lodging land uses shall adhere to the following
listed regulations:
(1) If located on the same side of a building as abutting residentially
zoned property, no customer entrance of any kind shall be
permitted within 100 feet of a residentially zoned property.
(2) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property (see Article XI).
K. Boardinghouse. Boardinghouses include rooming houses and any
residential use renting rooms that are not accommodating tourists or
transients. Boardinghouses shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:
(1) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property (see Article XI).
§ 245-113 TREES § 245-113
211:727
(2) Boardinghouses may only be located in an area of transition from
residential land uses to nonresidential land uses, as determined by
the Zoning Administrator.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any persons to operate a boardinghouse as
defined and as permitted in this chapter without first having
obtained a conditional use permit.
L. Campground. Campgrounds include any facilities designed for
overnight accommodation of persons in tents, travel trailers, or other
mobile or portable shelters or recreational vehicles. Campgrounds shall
adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Campgrounds shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.80 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property (see Article XI).
M. Group day-care center (nine plus children). Group day-care centers are
land uses in which qualified persons provide child care services for nine
or more children. Examples of such land uses include day-care centers
and nursery schools. Such land uses may be operated on a for-profit or
a not-for-profit basis. Such land uses may be operated in conjunction
with another principal land use on the same environs, such as a church,
school, business, or civic organization. In such instances, group daycare
centers are not considered as accessory uses and therefore
require review as a separate land use. Group day-care centers shall
adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Group day-care centers shall not be located within a residential
building.
(2) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.50 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property (see Article XI).
(3) The property owner's permission and signature is required as part
of the conditional use permit application.
N. Commercial small animal boarding. Commercial small animal boarding
facilities include land uses that provide short-term and/or long-term
boarding for animals and commercial kennels. Exercise yards, fields,
training areas, and trails associated with such land uses are considered
accessory thereto and do not require separate consideration.
Commercial animal boarding facilities shall adhere to the following
listed regulations:
(1) Each animal shall be provided with an indoor containment area.
(2) Special events such as shows, exhibitions, and contests shall only
be permitted when a temporary use permit has been secured.
O. Indoor maintenance service. Indoor maintenance services include all
land uses that perform maintenance services, including repair, and
§ 245-113 WATERFORD CODE § 245-113
211:728
contain all operations (except loading) entirely within an enclosed
building. Because of outdoor vehicle storage requirements, vehicle
repair and maintenance is considered an outdoor maintenance service
land use (see Subsection P).
P. Outdoor maintenance service. Outdoor maintenance services include
all land uses that perform maintenance services, including repair, and
have all or any portion of their operations located outside of an
enclosed building. Outdoor maintenance services shall adhere to the
following listed regulations:
(1) All outdoor activity areas shall be completely enclosed by a
minimum six-foot-high fence. Such enclosure shall be located a
minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property and shall
be screened from such property by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60 (see Article XI).
(2) Outdoor storage of abandoned or inoperable vehicles is prohibited.
Q. Vehicle sales. Vehicle sales include the sale and display of vehicles for
sale or rent outside of an enclosed building. Such land uses also include
a repair shop associated with the vehicle display lot and sales building,
provided the repair portion is clearly incidental to the sales operation
as determined by the Plan Commission. Such land uses do not include
the storage or display of inoperative vehicles or equipment or other
materials typically associated with a salvage yard or junkyard. Vehicles
sales land uses shall adhere to the following regulations:
(1) The outdoor display and sales area shall be calculated as the area
that would be enclosed by a required physical separation installed
and continually maintained in the most efficient manner which
completely encloses all vehicles displayed outdoors.
(2) The display of vehicles shall not be permitted within required
setback areas for the principal structure.
(3) The display of vehicles shall not be permitted in permanently
protected green space areas, required landscaped areas, or
required bufferyards.
(4) In no event shall the display of vehicles reduce or inhibit the use or
number of parking stalls provided on the property below the
requirement established by the provisions of § 245-15. If the
number of provided parking stalls on the property is already less
than the requirement, such display area shall not further reduce
the number of parking stalls already present.
(5) Display areas shall be separated from any circulation area by a
minimum of 10 feet. This separation shall be clearly delimited by a
physical separation such as a greenway, curb, fence, or line of
planters or by a clearly marked paved area.
§ 245-113 TREES § 245-113
211:729
(6) Signs, screening, enclosures, landscaping, or materials being
displayed shall not interfere in any manner with either on-site or
off-site traffic visibility, including potential vehicle/vehicle and
vehicle/pedestrian conflicts.
(7) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60 along all borders of the display area abutting
residentially zoned property, except per Subsection Q(5) above (see
Article XI).
(8) Vehicle sales shall be permitted during the entire calendar year;
however, if vehicles are removed from the display area, all support
fixtures used to display the vehicles shall be removed within 10
calendar days of the vehicles' removal.
(9) Inoperable vehicles or equipment, or other items typically stored or
displayed in a junkyard or salvage yard, shall not be displayed for
this land use.
(10) Vehicle sales are not allowed in the Downtown District.
R. Sexually oriented land uses. See also § 245-16.1. Sexually oriented land
uses include any facility oriented to the display of sexually oriented
materials, such as videos, movies, photos, books, or magazines, or
actual persons displaying and/or touching sexually specified areas,
including the provision of body piercing or tattooing services to sexually
specified areas. For the purpose of this chapter, "sexually specified
areas" includes any of the following: genitals, anal area, female areola
or nipple. "Sexually oriented material" includes any media which
displays sexually specified area(s). Establishments that sell or rent
sexually oriented materials shall not be considered sexually oriented if
the area devoted to sale of said materials is less than 50% of the sales
area devoted to nonsexually oriented materials and if such materials
are placed in generic covers or otherwise obscured areas. Sexually
oriented land uses shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Facilities shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from the property
line of any residentially zoned property and shall be located a
minimum of 1,000 feet from the property line of any school, church,
or outdoor recreational facility.
(2) Exterior building appearance and signage shall be designed to
ensure that the use does not detract from the ability of businesses
in the vicinity to attract customers nor affect the marketability of
properties in the vicinity for sale at their assessed values.
S. Truck-trailer rental establishment. A place where trucks, utility trailers,
and related items are kept and rented out, generally to those moving
their personal and household belongings. Servicing of vehicles and
trailers stored on site is allowed provided such use is clearly incidental
as may be established by the Plan Commission. Truck-trailer rental
establishments shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
§ 245-113 WATERFORD CODE § 245-113
211:730
§ 245-114. Industrial land use descriptions and regulations.
(1) Trucks and trailers shall not be stored within the front yard
setback, the side yard setback, or the rear yard setback.
(2) The location on the property where trucks and trailers may be
stored shall be clearly indicated on an approved site plan, which
shall include the total number of trucks and trailers that may be
stored on site, whether there is a limit on the size and/or number of
axles on the trucks or trailers that may be stored on site, and
whether trucks that require a commercial driver's license to
operate may be stored on site.
T. Vehicle towing establishment. A place where tow trucks may be kept
along with towed vehicles.
U. Business and light industrial incubator land or facilities that encourage
the development and retention of start-up and entry-level businesses
suited to the Village, including, but not limited to, recreational
businesses that use the Fox River, and their accessory buildings and
uses.
A. Light industrial. Light industrial land uses are industrial facilities at
which all operations (with the exception of loading operations) are
conducted entirely within an enclosed building; not potentially
associated with nuisances such as odor, noise, heat, vibration, and
radiation which are detectable at the property line; and do not pose a
significant safety hazard (such as danger of explosion). Light industry
includes the manufacture of articles through the process of
transforming raw materials into a change of form for use, or the
fabricating or assembling of finished or unfinished manufactured parts
by hand or machine, or both. Light industrial land uses may conduct
indoor sales as an accessory use, provided that the requirements of
§ 245-117K are complied with. All activities, except loading and
unloading, shall be conducted entirely within the confines of a building.
If outdoor storage is required, the use shall be classified as heavy
industrial.
B. Heavy industrial. Heavy industrial land uses are land uses that may be
wholly or partially located outside of an enclosed building, may have the
potential to create certain nuisances that are detectable at the property
line, and may involve materials that pose a significant safety hazard.
Examples of heavy industrial land uses include meat product producers,
including distillation of bones and fat rendering; paper, pulp or
paperboard producers; chemical and allied product producers (except
drug producers), including acid, ammonia, bleach, chorine, soap,
poison, or fertilizer producers; petroleum and coal product producers;
gelatin, glue or size manufacture, asphalt, concrete or cement
producers; tanneries; stone, clay, or glass product producers; primary
metal producers; heavy machinery producers; electrical distribution
equipment producers; electrical industrial apparatus producers;
§ 245-113 TREES § 245-114
211:731
transportation vehicle producers; commercial sanitary sewage
treatment plants; railroad switching yards; recycling facilities not
involving the on-site storage of salvage materials; ammunition
manufacture; explosives or fireworks manufacture or storage;
inflammable gases or liquids; the refining, storage or distribution or
manufacture of overground tank farms; and large-scale alcohol
beverage producers exceeding the production limits in Wis. Stats. Ch.
125. Heavy industrial land uses shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:
(1) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 1.00 along all borders of the property other than
permanent open space abutting properties that are not zoned
industrial (see Article XI).
(2) All outdoor activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet
from residentially zoned property.
(3) No equipment or materials shall be stacked or otherwise stored so
as to be visible over bufferyard screening elements.
(4) Vibration standards. In no instance shall a heavy industrial land use
exceed the following vibration performance standards, which
regulate the creation of vibration that adversely affects adjoining
properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to
promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
(a) Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all uses
and activities which create detectable vibrations, except that
these standards shall not apply to vibrations created during the
construction of the principal use on the subject property.
(b) Review and approval. Through the site plan review process,
the Plan Commission shall review and approve all development
on the subject property.
(c) Depiction on required site plan. Any activity or equipment that
creates detectable vibrations outside the confines of a building
shall be depicted as to its location on the site plan required for
the development of the subject property.
(d) Requirements. No activity or operation shall cause or create
earthborn vibrations in excess of the displacement values set
forth in Subsection B(4)(f).
(e) Method of measurement. Measurements shall be made at or
beyond the adjacent lot line or the nearest residential district
boundary line. Vibration displacements shall be measured with
an instrument capable of simultaneously measuring in three
mutually perpendicular directions. The maximum permitted
displacements shall be determined in each zoning district by
the following formula: D = K/f, where D = displacement in
§ 245-114 WATERFORD CODE § 245-114
211:732
inches; K = a constant to be determined by reference to
subsection (f), below; and f = the frequency of vibration
transmitted through the ground (cycles per second).
(f) Vibration measurement constant. The following constant shall
not be exceeded:
K K
All other
districts
In the Industrial
District
On or beyond any
adjacent lot line:
Continuous 0.003 0.015
Impulsive 0.006 0.030
<8 pulses/24-hour
period
0.015 0.075
On or beyond any
residential district lot
line:
Continuous 0.003 0.003
Impulsive 0.006 0.006
<8 pulses/24-hour
period
0.015 0.015
(5) Noise standards. In no instance shall a heavy industrial land use
exceed the following noise performance standards when measured
at or within the property boundary of the receiving land use.
(a) Method of measuring noise:
[1] Equipment. Noise measurement shall be made with a
sound meter meeting the requirements of American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) Standard S1.4-1983
or any nationally or Wisconsin-adopted standard
superseding the above standard. Sound level meters shall
be capable of both fast and slow meter response.
[2] Location and interpretation. The following steps must be
followed when preparing to take sound level
measurements:
[a] The instrument manufacturer's specific instructions
for preparation and use of the instrument shall be
followed.
[b] The sound level meter shall be calibrated periodically,
under the manufacturer's instructions.
§ 245-114 TREES § 245-114
211:733
[c] When outdoor measurements are taken, a windscreen
shall be placed over the microphone of the sound level
meter under the manufacturer's instructions.
[d] The sound level meter shall be placed at the nearest
lot line of the premises from which noise complaint(s)
are received, at an angle to the sound source, as
specified by the manufacturer's instructions, and
placed at least four feet above the ground. The meter
must be placed so as not to be interfered with during
the taking of sound measurements.
[e] Measurements must be taken at any point within a
receiving zone which point is outside of the property
line of the source of the stationary sound.
[f] Impulse sound, i.e., sounds of short duration, usually
less than one second, must be measured with the
sound level meter set for fast meter response. All
other sound shall be measured with the sound level
meter set for slow meter response.
[g] Under this section, sounds capable of being accurately
measured are those sounds that cause no more than
(+ or -) two decibels fluctuation of the sound level
meter or, in the case of impulse sound, the mean
average of four peak readings measured over the
period of an hour.
(b) Maximum permissible sound levels.
[1] General limitations. In the following zoning districts the Aweighted
sound level emitted from any source of
stationary sound shall not exceed the following limits at
any point within a receiving zone which point is outside of
the property line of the source of the stationary sound for a
period of greater than 30 seconds:
Receiving Zone Maximum dBA
Residential or Institutional 65
Business and Commercial 75
Business and Industrial 75
[2] Additional restrictions on impulse sound. A reduction of
five dBA shall apply to each of the limitations set forth
under Subsection B(5)(b)[1] of this subsection for all
impulse sounds.
[3] Special exception for ambient sound. When the ambient
sound at the source of a stationary sound equals or
exceeds the decibel limits provided in this section, the
§ 245-114 WATERFORD CODE § 245-114
211:734
owner or operator of the property that is the source of
such stationary sound may seek a special exception from
the sound limitations of this section. Application for a
special exception from the sound limitation shall be made
to the Zoning Administrator. The Plan Commission shall
hear and act upon all applications for a special exception
under this subsection. The Commission may grant the
appeal where it finds that the ambient sound equals or
exceeds the decibel limits for a property in a receiving
zone and that the combination of the ambient sound and
the sound from the stationary sound producing source
does not exceed the limit for the receiving affected
property by more than 10 dBA.
[4] Nonconforming source. Any source of stationary sound
that does not conform to the requirements of this section,
which existed lawfully when this section was adopted and
which remains nonconforming, or which shall became
nonconforming upon the adoption of this section, or of any
subsequent amendments thereto, may continue, as
provided in this subsection.
[a] Any such nonconforming source of stationary sound
shall not be modified, altered, added to, or enlarged in
any manner unless such modifications, alterations,
additions, or enlargements thereto are made to
conform with all of the sound or noise control
regulations applicable to the source.
[b] Any such nonconforming source of stationary sound
that is discontinued for one year shall not be used
unless the use is made to conform with all of the sound
or noise control regulations applicable to the source.
[c] Any such nonconforming source of stationary sound
shall not be repaired or restored to the extent that the
cost of repair or restoration exceeds 50% of the full
market value of the source. In the event that damage
or destruction requires repairs or restoration that is
less that 50% of such market value, repairs or
restoration may be made if work is commenced within
one year from the date of the partial destruction and is
diligently prosecuted to completion.
[5] Effect of zoning change of affected property. When the
zoning classification of a receiving property is changed in
a manner which would result in a then-existing sound
source being in noncompliance with this section, the sound
source shall be considered a nonconforming and shall be
subject to the provisions of Subsection H of this section.
§ 245-114 TREES § 245-114
211:735
(6) Air pollution standards. In no instance shall a heavy industrial land
use exceed the following air pollution standards, which regulate
the creation of air pollution that adversely affects adjoining
properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to
promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
(a) Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land
uses and activities, except that these standards shall not apply
to air pollution created during the construction of the principal
use on the subject property or by incidental traffic, parking,
loading, or maintenance operations.
(b) Standards. In addition to all applicable state and federal
standards, the following shall apply:
[1] The emission of particulate matter containing a particle
diameter larger than 44 microns is prohibited.
[2] Emission of smoke or particulate matter of a density equal
to or greater than Number 2 on the Ringelmann Chart
(U.S. Bureau of Mines) is prohibited at all times.
[3] Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind
from such sources as storage areas, yards, and roads
within the boundaries of any lot shall be kept to a
minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, or
other acceptable means.
[4] All applicable state and federal standards.
(7) Odor standards. In no instance shall a heavy industrial land use
exceed the following odor standards which regulate the creation of
odor that adversely affects adjoining properties in order to prevent
the creation of nuisances and to promote the health, safety, and
general welfare of the public.
(a) Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land
uses and activities, except that these standards shall not apply
to odors created during the construction of the principal use on
the subject property or by incidental fertilizer application,
traffic, parking, loading, or maintenance operations.
(b) Standards. Except for food preparation and cooking odors
emanating from residential land uses and odors associated
with property development and maintenance (such as
construction, lawn care, and the painting and roofing of
structures), no odors shall be created for periods exceeding a
total of 15 minutes per any day which are detectable (by a
healthy observer such as the Zoning Administrator or a
designee who is unaffected by background odors such as
tobacco or food) at the boundary of the subject property, where
§ 245-114 WATERFORD CODE § 245-114
211:736
said lot abuts property within any residential, institutional or
business and commercial zoning district.
(8) Glare and heat standards. In no instance shall a heavy industrial
land use exceed the following glare and heat standards which
regulate the creation of glare or heat in order to prevent the
creation of nuisances and to promote the health, safety, and welfare
of the public.
(a) Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land
uses and activities, except that these standards shall not apply
to glare created during the construction of the principal use on
the subject property or by incidental traffic, parking, loading,
or maintenance operations.
(b) Standards. No direct or sky-reflected glare shall be visible at
the lot line of the subject property, whether from floodlights or
from temperature processes, such as combustion, welding, or
otherwise. As determined by the Zoning Administrator, there
shall be no discernible transmission of heat or heated air at the
lot line. Solar systems regulated by Wis. Stats. § 66.0401 shall
be entitled to the protection of its provisions.
(9) Fire and explosions. In no instance shall a heavy industrial land use
exceed the following fire and explosion standards which regulate
the creation of fire and/or explosion hazards that adversely affect
adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances
and to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
(a) Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land
uses and activities.
(b) Standards. Any use involving materials which could
decompose by detonation shall be located not less than 400
feet from any residential, institutional or business and
commercial zoning district, except that this standard shall not
apply to the storage or usage of liquefied petroleum or natural
gas for normal residential or business and commercial
purposes. All activities and storage of flammable and explosive
materials at any point shall be provided with adequate safety
and firefighting devices in accordance with all fire prevention
codes of the State of Wisconsin.
(c) Outdoor furnaces are not allowed in the Village. See §§ 100-5
and 100-7 of this Municipal Code.
(10) Toxic, noxious and waste materials. In no instance shall a heavy
industrial land use violate the toxic, noxious and waste material
regulations which regulate the handling of toxic, noxious, or waste
material which adversely affects adjoining properties in order to
prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the health, safety,
and general welfare of the public.
§ 245-114 TREES § 245-114
211:737
(a) Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land
uses and activities.
(b) Standards. No use shall discharge across the boundaries of the
subject property, or through percolation into the subsoil, toxic
or noxious material in such concentration as to be detrimental
to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare or
cause injury or damage to private property or business. No use
shall discharge at any point into any public or private sewage
disposal system or stream or river, or into the ground, any
liquid or solid materials except in accordance with the
regulations of the Wisconsin Department of Health Services.
C. Production greenhouse. Any business whose principal activity is the
growing and wholesaling of plants or plant byproducts (not including
fruits and vegetables) that are either grown or stored within an
enclosed building or structure constructed chiefly of glass or glass-like
material, cloth, or other transparent material. Such uses also often
involve the seasonal display of plants and related products outdoors.
Production greenhouses shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) The outdoor display of items shall not be permitted in required
setbacks, bufferyards, or landscaped areas.
(2) In no event shall the display of items reduce or inhibit the use or
number of parking stalls provided on the property below the
requirement established by the provisions of § 245-15. If the
number of provided parking stalls on the property is already less
than the requirement, such display area shall not further reduce
the number of parking stalls already present.
(3) Storage and/or outdoor display areas shall be separated from any
vehicular parking or circulation area by a minimum of 10 feet. This
separation shall be clearly distinguished by a physical feature or
barrier such as a greenway, curb, fence, or line of planters or by a
clearly marked paved area.
(4) Signs, screening, enclosures, landscaping, or materials being
displayed shall not interfere in any manner with either on-site or
off-site traffic visibility, including potential traffic/traffic and traffic/
pedestrian conflicts.
(5) The facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60 along all borders of outdoor display areas abutting
residentially zoned property (see Article XI).
D. Indoor food production. Any business whose principal activity is the
production and wholesaling of plants or plant byproducts (including
fruits and vegetables) that are grown on-site within an enclosed
building or structure constructed chiefly of glass or glass-like material,
cloth, or other transparent material. Such uses also often involve the
seasonal display of plants and related products outdoors. Indoor food
§ 245-114 WATERFORD CODE § 245-114
211:738
production also includes the farming of aquatic organisms (plants and
animals) under controlled conditions and which is located entirely
within an enclosed building and utilizes recirculating (closed) system
technology. Such operations may also incorporate aquaponics, which
is the symbiotic cultivation of plants and aquatic organisms in a
recirculating system. Indoor food production land uses shall adhere to
the following listed regulations:
(1) All outdoor storage areas shall be completely enclosed by any
permitted combination of buildings, structures, walls, and/or
fencing. Such walls and fencing shall be a minimum of eight feet in
height and shall be designed to completely screen all stored
materials or products from view of nonindustrialized areas at an
elevation of five feet above the grade of all adjacent properties and
rights-of-way. Said walls or fencing shall be screened from
residentially zoned property by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.80 (see Article XI).
(2) Storage and/or outdoor display areas shall be separated from any
vehicular parking or circulation area by a minimum of 10 feet. This
separation shall be clearly distinguished by a physical feature or
barrier such as a greenway, curb, fence, or line of planters or by a
clearly marked paved area.
(3) All outdoor storage areas shall be located no closer to a
residentially zoned property than the required minimum setback
for buildings on the subject property.
(4) The storage of items shall not be permitted in any landscaping
areas, bufferyard areas, or permanently protected green space
areas.
(5) In no event shall the storage of items reduce or inhibit the use or
number of parking stalls provided on the property below the
requirement established by the provisions of § 245-15. If the
number of provided parking stalls on the property is already less
than the requirement, such storage area shall not further reduce
the number of parking stalls already present.
(6) Materials being stored shall not interfere in any manner with either
on-site or off-site traffic visibility, including potential vehicle/vehicle
and vehicle/pedestrian conflicts.
(7) Indoor aquaculture operations shall be connected to the municipal
water and sanitary sewer system, and all wastewater shall be
discharged to the municipal sanitary sewer system.
(8) Prior to the issuance of a conditional use permit, applicants wishing
to establish indoor aquaculture operations shall prepare a report
outlining the estimated average daily water usage and quantity of
wastewater discharge. Such report shall be reviewed and approved
§ 245-114 TREES § 245-114
211:739
by the Public Works Director and the Western Racine County
Sewerage District.
(9) On-site processing of seafood is permitted, provided that the
activity is conducted entirely within an enclosed building and no
odors are detectable from the property line.
(10) The on-site retail sale of seafood or vegetables shall be considered
indoor sales for light industrial subject to the provisions of
§ 245-117K, provided that the area devoted to sales does not
exceed 25% of the total area of the building(s) within which the
operation is located. Retail areas that exceed 25% of the total area
of the building(s) within which the operation is located shall be
considered an indoor sales and service principal land use.
(11) Site plans shall be provided which indicate the location of all
outdoor activity areas.
(12) On-site composting shall be permitted, subject to the following
regulations:
(a) Compost areas shall be fully screened on all four sides.
(b) Composting shall comply with all county, state, and federal
rules, regulations, and permitting requirements.
(13)No outdoor activity areas shall be located in bufferyard areas. No
materials shall be stacked or otherwise stored so as to be visible
over bufferyard screening elements.
E. Communication tower. Communication towers include all freestanding
broadcasting, receiving, or relay structures and similar principal land
uses and any office, studio, or other land uses directly related to the
function of the tower. Communication towers shall adhere to the
following listed regulations:
(1) Communication towers shall be erected and installed in accordance
with the State Electrical Code adopted by reference in Chapter 98,
Building Construction, of the Village Code, the National Electrical
Safety Code, the Federal Communications Commission, and the
instructions of the manufacturer. In cases of conflict, the stricter
requirements shall govern.
(2) Cell phone transmission towers shall adhere to the requirements
included in § 245-17.2.
(3) Communication towers are not allowed in the right-of-way without
a conditional use permit and a permit issued pursuant to § 191-3.
F. Contractor yard. Contractor yards are used by general contractors,
excavation contractors, landscaping contractors, building contractors,
oil or well drilling contractors, or similar business for the storage of
vehicles, equipment, and materials used in the day-to-day operation of
§ 245-114 WATERFORD CODE § 245-114
211:740
the business. This use may include a building that may be used for
administrative offices, indoor storage, and the care and maintenance of
equipment and vehicles in the fleet. Contractor yards shall adhere to
the following listed regulations:
(1) Type of outdoor storage. Outside storage of construction
equipment and fleet vehicles is allowed. Construction materials
may be kept out of doors provided such materials are being staged
for a specific work project. The storage of construction debris, tree
branches, wood chips, and the like is strictly prohibited.
(2) Equipment repair and maintenance. The repair and maintenance of
construction equipment and vehicles must occur within an
enclosed building, unless specifically permitted in the conditional
use order authorizing the use.
(3) Sales. The on-premises sale, at retail or wholesale, of any materials
is strictly prohibited.
(4) Incidental uses. Fabrication and assembly of component parts for
use in a building project is permitted inside of a building on the
subject property, provided such activity is of an incidental nature.
(5) Location of use areas. Outdoor storage areas and other activity
areas related to this use may not be located:
(a) In the front-yard building setback area;
(b) Within 30 feet of a side or rear lot line when the adjoining
property is located in a residential zoning district or a planned
development district that allows residential uses;
(c) Within 20 feet of a side or rear lot line when the adjoining
property is located in a business zoning district; and
(d) Ten feet from a side or rear lot line when the adjoining
property is located in any other zoning district. Employee
parking areas may be located in those areas otherwise allowed
in this chapter.
(6) Fencing. Depending on the scale and nature of the contractor yard,
the Plan Commission may on a case-by-case basis require a solid
fence, as approved by the Plan Commission, in those areas where
screening is needed in the judgment of the Plan Commission to
mitigate potential impacts to adjoining properties.
(7) Control of fugitive dust. As part of the site plan and operation plan
review process, the control of fugitive dust (e.g., dust from a gravel
yard) generated by this use, if any, shall be addressed to the
satisfaction of the Plan Commission.
(8) Hazardous materials and bulk fuel. As part of the site plan and
operation plan review process, the storage of hazardous materials
§ 245-114 TREES § 245-114
211:741
and bulk fuel, if any, shall be addressed to the satisfaction of the
Plan Commission.
G. Indoor storage and wholesaling. Indoor storage and wholesaling land
uses are primarily oriented to the receiving, holding, and shipping of
packaged materials for a single business or a single group of
businesses. With the exception of loading and parking facilities, such
land uses are contained entirely within an enclosed building. Examples
of this land use include conventional warehouse facilities, long-term
indoor storage facilities, and joint warehouse and storage facilities.
Retail outlets associated with this use shall be considered accessory
uses per § 245-117K below.
H. Multipurpose business storage. Multipurpose business storage uses are
primarily oriented to those businesses that require an office/reception/
display area and a larger storage area for stock goods, materials,
equipment, and supplies. With the exception of loading and parking
facilities, such land uses are contained entirely within an enclosed
building. Examples of potential businesses include plumbing or
electrical contractor, product sales representative, and small-scale
warehousing. When located in the Business and Commercial Zoning
District, the following additional standards apply:
(1) The front portion of the building is specifically reserved for office,
administrative, and/or display purposes and the back portion is
used for storage of stock goods, materials, supplies, and equipment
specifically related to the business occupying the space. These two
areas are to be separated by a wall that may include one or more
doorways for access. The overall design is intended to look like a
traditional retail business space from the street on which it fronts.
(2) Overhead doors may be located on the back of the building to
provide access to the storage space. All overhead doors shall be
located so they are not readily visible from a public street.
Screening shall be provided to obscure the view of any overhead
doors visible from an adjoining parcel zoned for a residential use.
(3) This use may be located in a single building or in a multitenant
building. When this use is located in a single building, the
maximum floor area is 2,500 square feet. When this use is located
in a multitenant building with two or three tenant spaces, the
maximum floor area of this use is 2,500 square feet. When this use
is located in a multitenant building with four or more tenant
spaces, the maximum floor area of this use is 5,000 square feet.
(4) Fleet vehicles must be parked behind the rear of the building in a
separate parking area. Screening shall be provided to obscure the
view of such parking area from an adjoining parcel zoned for a
residential use.
I. Outdoor storage and wholesaling. Outdoor storage and wholesaling
land uses are primarily oriented to the receiving, holding, and shipping
§ 245-114 WATERFORD CODE § 245-114
211:742
of packaged materials for a single business or a single group of
businesses. Such a land use, in which any activity beyond loading
and parking is located outdoors, is considered an outdoor storage and
wholesaling land use. Examples of this land use include contractors'
storage yards, equipment yards, lumberyards, coal yards, landscaping
materials yards, construction materials yards, and shipping materials
yards. Such land uses do not include the storage of inoperable vehicles
or equipment or other materials typically associated with a junkyard or
salvage yard. Outdoor storage and wholesaling land uses shall adhere
to the following listed regulations:
(1) All outdoor storage areas shall be completely enclosed by any
permitted combination of buildings, structures, walls, and fencing.
Such walls and fencing shall be a minimum of eight feet in height
and shall be designed to completely screen all stored materials
from view from nonindustrialized areas at an elevation of five feet
above the grade of all adjacent properties and rights-of-way. Said
walls or fencing shall be screened from residentially zoned
property by a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.80 (see
Article XI).
(2) The storage of items shall not be permitted in required frontage
landscaping areas, bufferyard areas, or permanently protected
green space areas.
(3) Storage areas shall be separated from any vehicular parking or
circulation area by a minimum of 10 feet. This separation shall be
clearly delimited by a physical separation such as a greenway, curb,
fence, or line of planters or by a clearly marked paved area.
(4) Materials being stored shall not interfere in any manner with either
on-site or off-site traffic visibility, including potential vehicle/vehicle
and vehicle/pedestrian conflicts.
(5) Inoperable vehicles or equipment or other items typically stored in
a junkyard or salvage yard shall not be stored under the provisions
of this land use.
J. Personal storage facility. Personal storage facilities, also known as "mini
warehouses," are land uses oriented to the indoor storage of items
entirely within partitioned buildings having an individual access to each
partitioned storage area. Such storage areas may be available on either
a condominium or a rental basis. Personal storage facilities shall adhere
to the following listed regulations:
(1) Facility shall be designed so as to minimize adverse visual impacts
on nearby developments. The color, exterior materials, and
orientation of proposed buildings and structures shall complement
surrounding development.
§ 245-114 TREES § 245-114
211:743
(2) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.80 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property (see Article XIV).
K. Salt storage shed. Salt storage sheds are structures for storing salt
stockpiles typically associated with a municipal public works
department or a snow-plowing business. Salt storage sheds shall
adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Prior to the establishment of this use, the property owner shall
obtain and maintain all necessary approvals from the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation under Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans
277, and any other state agency or the federal government.
(2) The site shall be planned so that the shed is located so that it is not
readily visible from a public street. Additionally, screening shall be
provided to obscure the view of the shed from any adjoining parcel
zoned for business, commercial or residential use.
L. Vehicle storage and impound yard: A place for the temporary storage of
wrecked and/or inoperative and/or abandoned motor vehicles. The
dismantling, wrecking, or sale of said vehicles or parts thereof is strictly
prohibited.
M. Bus yard. Bus yards are a place where buses are parked when not in use
and may include administrative offices and a building for the storage,
care, and maintenance of buses in the fleet. Bus yards shall adhere to
the following listed regulations:
(1) Location of use areas. Outdoor storage areas and other activity
areas related to this use may not be located:
(a) In the front-yard building setback area;
(b) Within 30 feet of a side or rear lot line when the adjoining
property is located in a residential zoning district or a planned
development district that allows residential uses;
(c) Within 20 feet of a side or rear lot line when the adjoining
property is located in a commercial zoning district; and
(d) Ten feet from a side or rear lot line when the adjoining
property is located in any other zoning district. Employee
parking areas may be located in those areas otherwise allowed
in this chapter.
(2) Vehicle maintenance. The repair and maintenance of busses and
other vehicles in the fleet must occur within an enclosed building.
(3) Fencing. Depending on the scale and nature of the bus yard, the
Plan Commission may on a case-by-case basis require a solid fence,
as approved by the Plan Commission, in those areas where
§ 245-114 WATERFORD CODE § 245-114
211:744
screening is needed in the judgment of the Plan Commission to
mitigate potential impacts to adjoining properties.
(4) Control of fugitive dust. As part of the site plan and operation plan
review process, the control of fugitive dust (e.g., dust from a gravel
yard) generated by this use, if any, shall be addressed to the
satisfaction of the Plan Commission.
(5) Hazardous materials and bulk fuel. As part of the site plan and
operation plan review process, the storage of hazardous materials
and bulk fuel, if any, shall be addressed to the satisfaction of the
Plan Commission.
N. Transit center. A building, structure, and/or area designed and used for
the purpose of loading, unloading, or transferring passengers or
accommodating the movement of passengers from one mode of
transportation to another. Examples include bus stations, train stations,
and park and ride stations. Transit centers shall adhere to the following
listed regulations:
(1) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 1.00 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property (see Article XIV).
(2) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other
activity areas, except employee and passenger parking, shall be
located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines abutting
residentially zoned property.
O. Distribution center. Distribution centers are facilities oriented to the
short-term indoor storage and possible repackaging and reshipment of
materials involving the activities and products of a single user. Retail
outlets associated with this use shall be considered accessory uses per
§ 245-117K below. Distribution centers shall adhere to the following
listed regulations:
(1) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 1.00 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property (see Article XI).
(2) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other
activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot
lines abutting residentially zoned property.
(3) In no instance shall activity areas be located within a required
frontage landscaping or bufferyard areas.
P. Freight terminal. Freight terminals are defined as land and buildings
representing either end of one or more truck carrier line(s) which may
have some or all of the following facilities: yards, docks, management
offices, storage sheds, buildings and/or outdoor storage areas, freight
stations, and truck maintenance and repair facilities, principally
§ 245-114 TREES § 245-114
211:745
§ 245-115. Municipal campus land use descriptions and
regulations.
serving several or many businesses requiring transshipment. Freight
terminals shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 1.00 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property (see Article XI).
(2) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other
activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot
lines abutting residentially zoned property.
(3) In no instance shall activity areas be located within a required
frontage landscaping or bufferyard areas.
Q. Off-site parking. Off-site parking lots are any areas used for the
temporary parking of vehicles that are fully registered, licensed, and
operable. See also § 245-15 for additional parking regulations. Off-site
parking facilities shall adhere to the following regulation: access and
vehicular circulation shall be designed so as to discourage cut-through
traffic.
R. Salvage yard or junkyard. Junkyard or salvage yard facilities are any
land or structure used for a salvaging operation, including but not
limited to the aboveground, outdoor storage and/or sale of wastepaper,
rags, scrap metal, and any other discarded materials intended for sale
or recycling, and/or the collection, dismantlement, storage, or salvage
of two or more unlicensed and/or inoperable vehicles. Recycling
facilities involving on-site outdoor storage of salvage materials are
included in this land use. Salvage yard or junkyard land uses shall
adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00
along all property borders abutting residentially and business
zoned property (see Article XI).
(2) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other
activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all roads
and 200 feet from all other lot lines.
(3) In no instance shall activity areas be located within a required
frontage landscaping or bufferyard areas.
(4) Operations shall not involve the storage, handling, or collection of
hazardous materials as defined by state statutes.
(5) Minimum required parking: one space for every 20,000 square feet
of gross storage area, plus one space for each employee on the
largest work shift.
§ 245-114 WATERFORD CODE § 245-115
211:746
§ 245-116. Institutional land use descriptions and regulations.
A. Indoor municipal campus. Indoor municipal land uses include indoor
municipal buildings and recreational facilities (such as municipal
buildings, libraries, and community centers).
B. Outdoor open space municipal campus. Outdoor open space municipal
campus land uses include green space areas and open grassed areas
not associated with any particular active recreational land use, and
similar land uses.
C. Passive outdoor public recreation. See § 245-116.
D. Active outdoor public recreation. See § 245-116.
A. Indoor institutional. Indoor institutional land uses include all indoor
public and not-for-profit recreational facilities (such as gyms, swimming
pools, libraries, museums, and community centers), schools, churches,
funeral homes, nonprofit clubs, nonprofit fraternal organizations,
convention centers, jails, prisons, and similar land uses. Indoor
institutional land uses shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Shall provide an off-street passenger loading area if the majority of
the users will be children (as in the case of a school, church, library,
or similar land use).
(2) All structures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
B. Outdoor open space institutional. Outdoor open space institutional land
uses include cemeteries, privately held permanently protected green
space areas, open grassed areas not associated with any particular
active recreational land use, and similar land uses. Outdoor
institutional land uses shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) All structures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
(2) Shall comply with § 245-16, standards and procedures applicable to
all conditional uses.
C. Passive outdoor public recreation. Passive outdoor public recreation
land uses include all recreational land uses located on public property
that involve passive recreational activities. Such land uses include
arboretums, natural areas, wildlife areas, hiking trails, bike trails,
cross-country ski trails, picnic areas, picnic shelters, botanical gardens,
fishing areas, and similar land uses.
D. Active outdoor public recreation. Active outdoor public recreation land
uses include all recreational land uses located on public property
(including school district property) that involve active recreational
activities. Such land uses include play courts (such as tennis courts and
basketball courts), play fields (such as ball diamonds, football fields,
§ 245-115 TREES § 245-116
211:747
and soccer fields), neighborhood parks, tot lots, outdoor swimming
pools, swimming beach areas, fitness courses, public golf courses, and
similar land uses. Active outdoor public recreation land uses shall
adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Facilities using recreational facility night lighting and adjoining a
residentially zoned property shall install and continually maintain a
bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.60 (see Article XI). Said
bufferyard shall be located at the property line adjacent to said
residentially zoned property.
(2) All structures and active recreational areas shall be located a
minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property.
(3) Facilities that serve a regional or community-wide function shall
provide an off-street passenger loading area if the majority of the
users will be children.
E. Intensive outdoor public recreation. Intensive outdoor public recreation
land uses include recreational land uses located on public property that
generate regional traffic and noise beyond property lines and require
intensive lighting. Such land uses include racetracks, stadiums,
fairgrounds, ski hills, marinas, and similar land uses. Intensive outdoor
public recreation land uses shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:
(1) Facilities using night lighting and adjoining a residentially zoned
property shall install and continually maintain a bufferyard with a
minimum opacity of 1.00 (see Article XI). Said bufferyard shall be
located at the property line adjacent to the residentially zoned
property.
(2) Facilities that serve a regional or community-wide function shall
provide an off-street passenger loading area if the majority of the
users will be children.
(3) A minimum setback of 100 feet shall be required to any activity
area other than parking.
F. Public service and utilities. Public service and utilities land uses include
all Village, county, state, and federally owned facilities (except those
otherwise treated in this section), emergency service facilities such as
fire departments and rescue operations (including dormitories serving
those facilities), wastewater treatment plants, public and/or private
utility substations, water towers, utility and public service related
distribution facilities, and similar land uses. Public service and utility
land uses shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) All structures shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
§ 245-116 WATERFORD CODE § 245-116
211:748
(2) Outdoor storage areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from
any residentially zoned property.
(3) The exterior of all buildings shall be compatible with the exteriors
of surrounding buildings.
(4) All outdoor storage areas adjoining a residentially zoned property
shall install and continually maintain a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60 (see Article XI). Said bufferyard shall be located at
the property line adjacent to the residentially zoned property.
G. Institutional residential (one to 12 residents). This land use is a form of
residential development designed to accommodate institutional
residential land uses with 12 or fewer residents (of all ages), such as
senior housing, retirement homes, assisted living facilities, nursing
homes, hospices, group homes, convents, monasteries, dormitories,
nursing homes, convalescent homes, limited care facilities,
rehabilitation centers, and similar land uses not considered to be
community living arrangements (see separate listings) under the
provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23. Institutional residential uses with 12
or fewer residents shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) No individual lots are required, although the development shall
contain a minimum of 800 square feet of gross site area for each
occupant of the development.
(2) Project shall provide an off-street passenger loading area at a
minimum of one location within the development.
(3) A minimum of 30% of the development's gross site area shall be
held as permanently protected green space.
H. Institutional residential (13 or more residents). This land use is a form
of residential development designed to accommodate institutional
residential land uses with 13 or more residents (of all ages), such as
senior housing, retirement homes, assisted living facilities, nursing
homes, hospices, group homes, convents, monasteries, dormitories,
nursing homes, convalescent homes, limited care facilities,
rehabilitation centers, and similar land uses not considered to be
community living arrangements (see separate listings) under the
provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23. Institutional residential land with 13
or more residents shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) No individual lots are required, although the development shall
contain a minimum of 800 square feet of gross site area for each
occupant of the development.
(2) Project shall provide an off-street passenger loading area at a
minimum of one location within the development.
(3) A minimum of 30% of the development's gross site area shall be
held as permanently protected green space.
§ 245-116 TREES § 245-116
211:749
I. Community living arrangement (one to eight residents). Community
living arrangement land uses include all facilities provided for in Wis.
Stats. § 46.03(22), including child welfare agencies, group homes for
children, foster homes, treatment foster homes, adult family homes,
and community-based residential facilities. Community living
arrangements do not include group day-care centers (see § 245-113M),
nursing homes (and institutional residential land use), hospitals,
prisons, or jails (all indoor institutional land uses). Community living
arrangement facilities are regulated depending upon their capacity as
provided for in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(i), provided that any such
regulations do not violate federal or state housing or antidiscrimination
laws. Community living arrangements housing up to eight residents
shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) No community living arrangement shall be established within
2,500 feet of any other such facility regardless of its capacity unless
the Plan Commission and Village Board agree to a reduction in
spacing.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the total capacity of all
community living arrangements (of all capacities) in the Village
shall not exceed 1% of the Village's population (unless specifically
authorized by the Village Board following a public hearing by the
Plan Commission).
(3) Foster homes housing four or fewer children and licensed under
Wis. Stats. § 48.62 shall not be subject to Subsection I(1) above and
shall not be subject to, or count toward, the total arrived at in
Subsection I(2) above.
J. Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents). See description
under Subsection I, above. Community living arrangements housing
nine to 15 residents shall adhere to the following listed regulations,
subject to federal or state housing or antidiscrimination laws:
(1) No community living arrangement shall be established within
2,500 feet of any other such facility, regardless of capacity, unless
the Plan Commission and Village Board agree to a reduction in
spacing.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the total capacity of all
community living arrangements (of all capacities) in the Village
shall not exceed 1% of the Village's population (unless specifically
authorized by the Village Board following a public hearing by the
Plan Commission).
K. Community living arrangement (sixteen-plus residents). See
description under Subsection I, above. Community living arrangements
housing 16 or more residents shall adhere to the following listed
regulations, subject to federal or state housing or antidiscrimination
laws:
§ 245-116 WATERFORD CODE § 245-116
211:750
§ 245-117. Accessory land uses and structures.
(1) No community living arrangement shall be established within
2,500 feet of any other such facility, regardless of capacity, unless
the Plan Commission and Village Board agree to a reduction in
spacing.
(2) The total capacity of all community living arrangements (of all
capacities) in the Village shall not exceed 1% of the Village's
population (unless specifically authorized by the Village Board
following a public hearing by the Plan Commission).
A. Accessory uses are land uses that are incidental to the principal activity
conducted on the subject property. In addition to specific requirements
for each accessory use listed under Subsections B through S, accessory
land uses shall adhere to the following requirements:
(1) Any accessory use or structure shall conform to the applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located, except as
specifically otherwise provided.
(2) No accessory use or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior
to establishment of an allowable principal use, unless otherwise
stated in this chapter.
(3) No accessory structure shall have a larger floor area than the
principal structure.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection F, § 245-12C, or otherwise
specifically allowed in this Code, accessory buildings, uses, and
other structures that are not part of the main building shall not be
located in a front yard, shall not occupy more than 50% of the area
of the rear yard, shall not be more than 20 feet high, and shall not
be nearer than three feet to any lot line, except that where a private
garage has an entrance facing an alley, such entrance shall be
located not less than 10 feet from the nearest alley line. In one- and
two-family residence districts, the area covered by dwellings and
accessory buildings shall not exceed 40% of the square footage of
the lot (see §§ 245-18 and 245-19).
(5) Where an accessory building, use or structure is a part of the main
building or is substantially attached thereto (such as an attached
garage or deck), the side yard and rear yard requirements for the
main building shall be applied to the accessory building or
structure.
(6) Unless approved as part of a temporary use permit or special event
permit, in no instance shall an accessory structure, tent, vehicle or
part thereof, automobile trailer, or recreational trailer being used
for residential purposes be located on a public street, in a public
parking lot, or in a front yard. In the case of residential use of such
§ 245-116 TREES § 245-117
211:751
a structure or vehicle, the use must be screened from public view.
See also § 245-109H.
(7) Accessory buildings located within a residential district shall be
constructed or finished in a complementary architectural style and
with complementary materials to the principal residential buildings
in the neighborhood.
(8) Accessory uses and structures in residential zoning districts.
(a) Accessory uses and detached accessory structures are
permitted in the rear yard only of residential zoning districts.
(b) In addition to one garage, and one accessory structure, one
additional accessory structure (including a second garage)
shall be allowed on a lot. The maximum size of the additional
accessory buildings shall not exceed the following square
footage for each lot size, or 30% of the area of the required
rear yard, whichever is less, provided that the total footprints
of all of the accessory buildings or other structures do not
cover more than 30% of the required rear yard:
[1] Lot area up to 10,000 square feet: 750 square feet
maximum.
[2] Lot area up to 15,000 square feet: 800 square feet
maximum.
[3] Lot area up to 20,000 square feet: 850 square feet
maximum.
[4] Lot area up to 40,000 square feet: 900 square feet
maximum.
[5] In one- and two-family residence districts, the area
covered by dwellings and accessory buildings shall not
exceed 40% of the square footage of the lot (see §§ 245-18
and 245-19).
B. Home occupation. Home occupations are economic activities
performed within a dwelling and are allowed in every residence district.
Examples include personal and professional services and handicrafts.
Home occupations are intended to provide a means to accommodate a
small home-based family or professional business without the necessity
of a rezoning from a residential to a business district. Home
occupations are limited to service-oriented businesses and businesses
that do not generate substantial customer visits. Home occupations
shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) The home occupation shall be conducted only within the enclosed
area of the dwelling unit or attached garage.
§ 245-117 WATERFORD CODE § 245-117
211:752
(2) The home occupation must be clearly incidental to the use of the
dwelling unit as a residence, with 25% or less of the habitable floor
area of an individual dwelling unit (excluding an attached garage)
being used for the home occupation.
(3) Activity related to a home occupation may be conducted in a
detached, roofed, and completely enclosed structure (including a
detached garage) or attached garage on the same property,
provided that no more than 25% of the total floor area of the
detached structure or attached garage is used for the home
occupation, there are no employees of the home occupation, and no
member of the public enters the detached structure or attached
garage for business purposes.
(4) There shall be no exterior alterations that change the character of
the structure.
(5) There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation, other
than those signs permitted per Article VI.
(6) No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies, or equipment
related to the operation of the home occupation shall be visible
outside any structure located on the premises.
(7) Outdoor sales of goods produced by the home occupation are
allowed only pursuant to Chapter 182, Article II, Rummage Sales,
of this Municipal Code. Occasional outdoor lemonade stands or
similar sales by a child or children under the age of 17 are not
considered home occupation and are not prohibited under this
section.
(8) No use shall create smoke, odor, glare, noise, dust, fumes,
vibration, or hazard detectible to the normal senses off of the
property. No equipment or process shall be used that creates visual
or audible electrical interference in any radio, telephone,
computer, television signal or other device off the premises, or
causes fluctuations in line voltage, or creates any other nuisance
not normally associated with the average residential use in the
district.
(9) No toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, corrosive, radioactive
or other restricted materials shall be used or stored on the site for
home occupation purposes. This does not preclude a home
occupation for a gunsmith for the service or repair of firearms or
for a firearm collector, licensed by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,
and Firearms.
(10) A home occupation shall not endanger the public health and safety
and shall not interfere with other parcels in the neighborhood.
Except for computer hardware, no mechanical or electrical
equipment shall be installed or maintained other than such as
customarily incidental to domestic use.
§ 245-117 TREES § 245-117
211:753
(11) The home occupation shall require no additional parking above
that normally associated with a dwelling unit. Commercial vehicles
shall not operate out of a residential district as part of a home
occupation; provided, however, that, pursuant to § 245-15A, one
commercial vehicle that meets the weight limits and other
requirements in § 245-15A(2) that is used for transportation to and
from an off-site worksite of the occupant may be parked on a
residential property. No other vehicular equipment of a commercial
or industrial nature related to the home occupation, except as
stated above, shall be parked or stored outdoors, whether on the
property or on the street, for more than two consecutive hours and
four accumulated hours during any twenty-four-hour period in a
residential district.
(12) The following uses are prohibited as home occupations:
(a) Adult establishments;
(b) Animal clinics, kennels and/or pet boarding, provided that
occasional boarding of pets is allowed if the limit of the number
of dogs and/or cats allowed in a residence is not exceeded at
any time (see § 87-18 of this Municipal Code);
(c) Antique shops;
(d) Barber shops, beauty shops and/or hair or nail salons;
(e) Clinics and/or doctors' offices;
(f) Dress shops and/or millinery shops;
(g) Engine repair shops;
(h) Food shops or stores;
(i) Furniture stripping and/or refinishing;
(j) Hospitals;
(k) Gift shops;
(l) Mortuaries;
(m) On-site tune-up, servicing, repair, salvage, wrecking, or
painting services for nonresident automobiles, trucks, boats,
trailers, snowmobiles, recreational vehicles or other motorized
vehicles;
(n) Private clubs;
(o) Real estate offices;
(p) Restaurants, ice cream shops, tearooms, or any other food or
beverage service, provided that caterers are allowed if there is
§ 245-117 WATERFORD CODE § 245-117
211:754
no on-site consumption of food or beverages by customers or
members of the public;
(q) Tattoo and/or body piercing establishments;
(r) Tobacco and/or e-cigarette or vaporizer shops;
(s) Tourist rooming houses, except short-term rentals of dwellings
are allowed without limitation as to the percentage of the
property being rented [see § 245-113I(2)];
(t) Any other occupation not meeting the limits defined herein.
C. Family day-care home (four children to eight children). Family day-care
homes are occupied residences in which a qualified person or persons
provide child care for four children to eight children. The care of fewer
than four children is not subject to the regulations of this chapter. State
law reference: Wis. Stats. § 66.1017(1)(a).
D. Intermediate day-care home (nine children to 15 children).
Intermediate day-care homes are occupied residences in which a
qualified person or persons provide child care for nine children to 15
children. State law reference: Wis. Stats. § 48.65.
E. Residential garage or shed. Residential garages are structures
primarily used to shelter parked passenger vehicles. A residential shed
is a structure used primarily to store residential maintenance
equipment of the subject property. Residential garages and sheds shall
adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) One or two attached or detached garages and up to two sheds shall
be permitted by right, provided that there are no more than three
accessory buildings on the lot.
(2) Detached garages and sheds are permitted in the rear yard only.
The roof pitch shall not exceed the steepest pitch of the principal
structure.
(3) Sheds shall not exceed the sizes set forth in § 245-117A, above.
(4) A garage in a residential district, whether or not the private garage
is attached to the main building, shall not have a vehicle storage
capacity of greater than three vehicles, nor be of a size greater
than 1,000 square feet, unless approval has been granted by the
Plan Commission pursuant to § 98-22, Architectural control, of this
Municipal Code.
(5) A conditional use permit is required for a combination of accessory
structures exceeding a total of the maximum allowed square
footage for all uses set forth in Subsection A, or more than three
accessory structures.
§ 245-117 TREES § 245-117
211:755
F. Residential recreational facility. This land use includes all active
outdoor recreational facilities located on a private residential lot that
are not otherwise listed in the Table of Land Uses in 245-111. Common
examples include swing sets, tree houses, basketball courts, tennis
courts, swimming pools, and recreation-type equipment. Residential
recreational facilities shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) All private residential recreation facilities and their attendant
structures shall comply with the general provisions in Article IV,
and no such use may exceed 20 feet in height, except for flagpoles.
(2) Materials and lighting at the property line are to be equal to or less
than 0.5 footcandle.
(3) Swimming pools shall be regulated by the standards provided in
§ 245-17.
(4) Tree houses and similar platforms are allowed.
(5) Children's play structures (swing sets, jungle gyms and tree
houses) shall only be located in a rear yard, unless the Plan
Commission approves an alternate location because placement in
the rear yard is not practical due to the configuration of the lot.
(6) Arbors, trellises, flagpoles, light poles and basketball hoops may be
located in a front, side, or rear yard.
G. On-site parking. On-site parking lots are any areas located on the same
site as the principal land use which are used for the temporary parking
of vehicles which are fully registered, licensed, and operable. See
§ 245-15.
H. Company cafeteria. A company cafeteria is a food service operation that
provides food only to company employees and their guests. Company
cafeterias shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Company cafeterias shall meet state food service requirements.
(2) Company cafeterias shall be located on the same property as a
principal land use engaged in an operation other than food service.
I. Company on-site recreation. This land use includes any active or
passive recreational facility located on the same site as a principal land
use and which is reserved solely for the use of company employees and
their guests. Company on-site recreational facilities shall adhere to the
following listed regulations:
(1) All structures and actively used outdoor areas shall be located a
minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property.
(2) Outdoor recreation facilities using night lighting and adjoining a
residentially zoned property shall install and continually maintain a
bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.60 (see Article XI). Said
§ 245-117 WATERFORD CODE § 245-117
211:756
bufferyard shall be located at the property line adjacent to said
residentially zoned property.
(3) Facilities using night lighting shall require a conditional use
permit.
J. Incidental outdoor display. Incidental outdoor display includes the sale
and display of merchandise or equipment outside of an enclosed
building and is incidental to a principal commercial or industrial land
use. Incidental outdoor display land uses shall comply with all
regulations of § 245-113E, and the display area shall not exceed 25% of
the gross floor area of the principal building on the site. A business may
expand upon the 25% gross floor area limitation up to 10 times per year
by temporary use permit.
K. Incidental indoor sales. Incidental indoor sales include any retail sales
activity conducted exclusively indoors which is incidental to a principal
land use such as warehousing, wholesaling, or any light industrial land
use on the same site. Incidental indoor sales shall adhere to the
following listed regulations:
(1) The total area devoted to sales activity shall not exceed 25% of the
total area of the buildings on the property. Areas devoted to artisan
studio uses such as custom ceramics, glass, wood, paper, fabric,
and similar crafts may exceed 5,000 square feet with the granting
of a conditional use permit for such use.
(2) Shall provide restroom facilities directly accessible from retail
sales area.
(3) The retail sales area shall by physically separated by a wall from all
other activity areas.
(4) Minimum required parking. Adequate parking, per the
requirements of § 245-15, shall be provided for customers. Said
parking shall be in addition to that required for the principal land
use.
L. Incidental light industrial. These land uses include any light industrial
activity conducted exclusively indoors that is incidental to a principal
land use, such as indoor sales or service, on the same site. Incidental
light industrial shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) The total area devoted to light industrial activity shall not exceed
15% of the total area of the buildings on the property, or 5,000
square feet, whichever is less.
(2) The production area shall be physically separated by a wall from
other activity areas and shall be soundproofed to the level required
by § 245-114B(5) for all adjacent properties.
(3) Minimum required parking: per § 245-15.
§ 245-117 TREES § 245-117
211:757
M. Exterior communications device. This land use includes any structures
used for communication reception, such as satellite dishes and
antennas. Exterior communications devices over one meter in diameter
shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Installation standards. Signal-receiving antennas installed in any
zoning district within the Village shall comply with the following
provisions:
(a) Any freestanding signal receiving antenna and its mounting
post shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from any property
line.
(b) Subject to the provisions herein, freestanding signal-receiving
antennas shall only be located in the rear yard of any lot. If
reasonable reception of signals is not possible with a rear yard
placement due to the physical characteristics of the lot and
area, the signal-receiving antenna shall be placed in the side
yard of the lot. In the event that reasonable reception of signals
is not possible by locating the signal-receiving antenna on the
rear or side yard of the property, such antenna may be placed
in the front yard or on the roof of structures on the property.
For corner lots, a side yard is only a yard that does not face a
street.
(c) If side yard, front yard, or roof mounting is requested, the
Zoning Administrator shall determine where reasonable
reception is possible, based on evidence provided by the
person seeking to erect or construct the antenna.
(2) Mounting. Signal receiving antennas attached to the wall or roof of
any principal or accessory structure shall be permitted only if the
structure is properly constructed to carry all imposed loading and
complies with applicable state and local building code
requirements. The Zoning Administrator may require engineering
calculations.
(3) Diameter. The diameter of signal receiving antenna shall not
exceed 10 feet, and six feet for a roof-mounted antenna, except for
systems used to provide community antenna television services.
(4) Height.
(a) A ground-mounted signal receiving antenna, including any
platform or structure upon which said antenna is mounted or
affixed, may not exceed 10 feet in height, as measured from the
ground to the highest point of the antenna.
(b) A roof-mounted antenna may not exceed eight feet in height
above the surrounding roofline as measured from the highest
point of the existing roofline.
§ 245-117 WATERFORD CODE § 245-117
211:758
(c) An antenna that is designed to receive only local television
broadcast signals is not subject to the height limitations in this
section.
(5) Exterior communication devices shall be erected and installed in
accordance with the State Electrical Code adopted by reference in
Chapter 98, Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical Code, of
the Village Code, the National Electrical Safety Code, the Federal
Communications Commission and the instructions of the
manufacturer. In cases of conflict, the stricter requirements shall
govern.
N. Ham radio tower and antenna. This land use includes any structures,
appurtenances, and components used for ham radio purposes that are
located outside of a permitted principal or accessory structure. These
regulations are enacted to protect the aesthetics of the Village and the
public health and safety, and represent the minimum necessary
regulation to fulfill the purpose and intent of this chapter as set forth in
§§ 245-2 and 245-3. Depending on the height of the structure, ham
radio towers and antennas either are permitted by right or may require
a conditional use permit, as indicated in Subsection N(1) through (3),
below. Ham radio towers and antennas shall adhere to the following
listed regulations:
(1) Ham radio devices up to 45 feet in height are permitted by right as
an accessory use in all zoning districts. Such ham radio devices
shall adhere to the following regulations:
(a) Such ham radio devices shall require a building permit and onsite
inspection (and related fees) for all installations for
placement, height, structural integrity, and electrical
connections.
(b) No portion of such ham radio device is permitted between the
principal structure and a public street.
(c) All portions of such ham radio device shall comply with the side
and rear yard setback requirements for accessory structures
for the subject property's zoning district.
(2) Ham radio devices between 45 and 75 feet in height are permitted
by right as an accessory use in all zoning districts. Such ham radio
devices shall adhere to the following regulations:
(a) Such ham radio devices shall require a building permit and onsite
inspection (and related fees) for all installations for
placement, height, structural integrity and electrical
connections.
(b) No portion of such ham radio device is permitted between the
principal structure and a public street.
§ 245-117 TREES § 245-117
211:759
(c) Device shall be subject to the site plan review process per
§ 245-56.6. As part of this process, the agenda for the Plan
Commission's consideration of the site plan shall be mailed to
the owners of properties adjacent (including properties
adjacent at lot corners) to the subject property. The purpose of
this notice is to provide the owners of adjacent properties an
opportunity to learn about the federal limitations on the
Village's regulation of ham radio devices and the details of the
proposed installation and to provide comments about the
proposed site plan. A formal public hearing is not required.
(d) All portions of such ham radio device exceeding the maximum
height for an accessory structure shall provide minimum side
and rear yard setbacks equivalent to the requirements for
accessory structures for the subject property's zoning district,
plus one additional foot of setback for every three feet of
additional maximum height over 45 feet.
(3) Ham radio devices not complying with all requirements for either
Subsection N(1) or (2) above, including proposed device with a
height of over 75 feet, shall adhere to the following regulations:
(a) Such ham radio devices shall require a building permit and onsite
inspection (and related fees) for all installations for
placement, height, structural integrity, and electrical
connections.
(b) Such ham radio devices shall be subject to the conditional use
process per § 245-16. The applicant shall demonstrate the
necessity to seek a waiver from any and all requirements of
either Subsection N(1) or (2), to the satisfaction of the Plan
Commission. As consistent with any proposed conditional use,
the Plan Commission may approve the proposal, may add
conditions of approval, or may deny the application.
O. Lawn care. Lawn care includes any activity involving the preparation of
the ground and/or installation and maintenance of vegetative ground
cover (including gardens). Lawn care is not permitted in certain
permanently protected green space areas.
P. Stormwater facilities. These include all improvements, including but
not limited to swales, ditches, culverts, drains, tiles, gutters, levees,
basins, detention or retention facilities, impoundments, and dams,
intended to affect the direction, rate and/or volume of stormwater
runoff, snowmelt, and/or channelized flows across, within, and/or away
from a site. Stormwater facilities shall also adhere to applicable state
regulations and regulations in the Village of Waterford Municipal Code.
Q. Vehicle towing establishment. A place where tow trucks may be kept
along with towed vehicles, provided such use is associated with a
permitted or conditional use, and the scale of the operation is clearly
incidental to the permitted or conditional use as may be established by
§ 245-117 WATERFORD CODE § 245-117
211:760
§ 245-118. Temporary uses.
All temporary use permit applicants shall comply with the standards and
procedures set forth in § 245-56.4. Signage shall comply with the
requirements of Article VI.
the Plan Commission. Vehicle towing establishments shall adhere to the
following listed regulations:
(1) One parking space for each tow truck kept on the premises if the
principal use does not comply with the number of parking spaces as
required by this code.
(2) Towed vehicles stored on the premises shall be kept inside of an
enclosed building.
R. Solar energy systems. Solar energy systems that meet the all of the site
regulations, inclusive of setback and height requirements, for accessory
structures in the zoning districts in which they are located, whether
freestanding or roof- or wall-mounted, are allowed without conditional
use permits. Any solar energy system that does not meet said
requirements is required to obtain a conditional use permit.
S. Wind energy systems. Vertical wind turbines that meet the all of the site
regulations, inclusive of setback and height requirements, for accessory
structures in the zoning districts in which they are located, whether
freestanding or roof- or wall-mounted, are allowed without conditional
use permits. Any vertical wind energy system that does not meet said
requirements is required to obtain a conditional use permit, including
vertical wind energy turbines greater than 20 feet in height. Vertical
wind energy turbines greater than 30 feet in height, including the base,
are not allowed.
A. Temporary farm product sales. This land use includes the temporary
outdoor display and sales of farm products, typically from a roadside
stand. Temporary farm product sales shall adhere to the following listed
regulations:
(1) Display shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation,
including vehicular sight distances.
(2) If subject property is located adjacent to a residential area, sales
and display activities shall be limited to daylight hours.
(3) Adequate parking shall be provided.
B. Temporary outdoor sales. Includes the display of any items outside the
confines of a building that is not otherwise permitted as a permitted or
conditional use, a sidewalk seating and display permit, or a special
event otherwise regulated by the Municipal Code. Examples of this land
use include, but are not limited to, sidewalk sales, seasonal garden
shops, tent sales, Christmas tree sales, bratwurst stands, and more
§ 245-117 TREES § 245-118
211:761
than three garage sales per year (see § 182-12 for garage sale
regulations).
(1) The user shall provide a layout of the activities to the Zoning
Administrator for approval prior to any event or sales activity.
(2) Material for sale shall not be placed in any right-of-way, nor shall it
block visibility for vehicles on or off the lot in a way that would
create a safety hazard.
(3) The hours of operation shall be limited to the hours between 7:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
C. Temporary outdoor assembly. Includes any organized outdoor assembly
of more than 100 persons, such as an outdoor wedding or tent meeting.
Temporary outdoor assembly shall adhere to the following regulations:
(1) Activities shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation,
including vehicular sight distances.
(2) If subject property is located adjacent to a residential area,
activities shall be limited to daylight hours.
(3) Adequate provisions for crowd control shall be made and shall be
described within the temporary use application.
(4) Adequate parking, drinking water, and toilet facilities shall be
provided and shall be described in the temporary use application.
D. Temporary fair or amusement park. All temporary fairs and amusement
parks shall be located contiguous to an arterial or collector street.
Temporary fairs and amusement parks that utilize public lands are
subject to Chapter 188, Special Events, of this Municipal Code.
E. Preconstruction sales offices. Preconstruction sales offices that are
stand-alone (not located in a model home or model dwelling unit), used
exclusively as sales offices by a builder/developer and to display the
builder/developer's product or to display to prospective buyers the
builder/developer's features (such as exterior siding treatments,
roofing materials, interior trim, moldings, floor coverings, etc.), may be
staffed by the builder/developer's sales force and are subject to the
following restrictions:
(1) District dimensional requirements to be met. The preconstruction
sales office shall meet all district requirements for lot and yard
dimensions.
(2) Sign illumination. Signs shall not be illuminated after 9:00 p.m.
(3) Business activity not permitted before 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.
The preconstruction sales office shall not be used for any business
activity before 8:00 a.m. or later than 9:00 p.m.
§ 245-118 WATERFORD CODE § 245-118
211:762
(4) Screening and trash receptacles. Landscape drawings shall be
required and shall show adequate landscaping and screening from
adjoining residential lots or units, with the clear marking of the
boundaries of the model home lot or unit. Trash receptacles for use
by the public shall be provided around the model home.
(5) Termination of use. The use of a preconstruction sales office within
a residential subdivision or condominium development, or within
any single phase of a multiphase subdivision or condominium
development, is not subject to the thirty-day time limit but shall
terminate when building permits have been issued for 90% of the
lots therein; provided, however, that the Plan Commission may
extend the permit upon application by the builder or developer. The
preconstruction sales office shall be removed within 30 days of the
termination of the permit.
(6) Temporary concrete batch plants or asphalt or asphalt
reprocessing plants (including materials processing and handling)
and temporary stone crushers are not allowed in the Village.
F. Temporary structures. The following temporary structures may be
permitted as specified:
(1) Construction trailers as temporary offices. A licensed contractor
engaged in a construction project for which a building permit has
been issued or is otherwise authorized by the Village shall obtain a
temporary use permit from the Zoning Administrator, who will
specify the terms of the occupancy,
(2) Fireworks stands. No temporary use permit is required (a fireworks
permit is required; see Chapter 132 of this Municipal Code).
(3) Temporary storage containers. These containers are portable
storage containers designed and used primarily for the temporary
storage of household goods and other such materials for use on a
limited basis on residential property. Temporary storage containers
that adhere to the following regulations and meet the requirements
of Subsection F(3)(b) below shall require a temporary use permit.
(a) The container shall not exceed outside dimensions of 40 feet in
length, 10 feet in width, and nine feet in height.
(b) The container shall be permitted on the property for the time
required by the applicant and set forth in the permit. No permit
is required for a container in place for less than eight days.
(c) The container cannot encroach on the public right-of-way,
neighboring property, or sidewalk or be placed in the street.
(d) This section does not apply to a temporary storage container to
be placed in a public right-of-way. Placement of a temporary
§ 245-118 TREES § 245-118
211:763
storage container or dumpster in the right-of-way requires a
right-of-way permit from the Department of Public Works.
(4) Temporary construction storage. Temporary construction storage
includes any structure or outdoor storage area designed for the onsite
storage of construction equipment and/or materials for an
active construction project. Temporary construction storage,
including dumpsters, may be used for the duration of the project,
subject to the following regulations:
(a) The structure shall be removed within 10 days of issuance of a
full certificate of zoning compliance.
(b) Projects requiring the structure to be in place for more than
365 days shall require a conditional use permit. Said time limit
may be extended with Village Board approval.
(c) The structure shall be limited to a maximum area not
exceeding 10% of the property's gross site area.
(d) This section does not apply to temporary construction storage
or dumpsters to be placed in a public right-of-way. Placement
in the right-of-way requires a right-of-way permit from the
Director of Public Works.
(5) Relocatable buildings. A relocatable building includes but is not
limited to any manufactured building, shed or other rigid structure
that is not permanently attached to a foundation, that can be or is
used for the storage of personal property or equipment of any kind,
and that is located outside of an enclosed building. When used in
conjunction with a temporary use permit, no separate permit is
required. When used as part of the permanent use of the property,
relocatable buildings are considered accessory structures that
must meet the requirements of § 245-117 of this Municipal Code
and do not require a temporary use permit. Relocatable buildings
larger than 200 square feet in area require building permits. See
Ch. 98 of this Municipal Code.
(6) Tents, canopies or other flexible structures.
(a) A tent, canopy or other flexible or semi-flexible structure
associated with a permitted temporary use is allowed for the
time period for the temporary use if it is incidental to the
permitted temporary use and was approved as part of the
application. It shall not be located in the vision clearance
triangle.
(b) Tents used for temporary recreational purposes in residential
zoning districts shall not be regulated when they are incidental
to the residential use and are placed in the side or rear yard.
§ 245-118 WATERFORD CODE § 245-118
211:764
(c) Tents, canopies and other flexible or semi-flexible structures
shall not be used for storage of any kind in any zoning district
unless associated with a temporary use permit or special event
permit, or for temporary recreational purposes.
G. Farmers' market and food trucks. Farmers' markets and food trucks
include the temporary or occasional outdoor retail sales of farm
produce, plants and flowers, bakery goods, foods, and/or crafts from
vehicles or temporary stands located within a parking lot. When located
on public land, farmers markets and food, trucks are subject to Chapter
188, Special Events, of this Municipal Code. Farmers' markets and food
trucks shall adhere to the following listed regulations:
(1) Facility shall have vehicular access to a collector or higher
classification street.
(2) Minimum required parking: one space per vendor, plus adequate
parking to accommodate customer traffic.
(3) Where required, farmers' market and food truck vendors shall
obtain Health Department approval of their business. Food truck
vendors operating outside of a special event permit shall also
obtain a direct seller's permit pursuant to Chapter 182.
§ 245-118 TREES § 245-118
211:765

ARTICLE XI
Landscaping Requirements
§ 245-119. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish landscaping requirements and
other regulations intended to preserve and maintain vegetation in a manner
that promotes the natural resource protection, aesthetic, and public health
goals of the Village of Waterford. Any nonconforming situation (lot, use,
structure and/or site) shall adhere to the provisions of § 245-10 or the
instructions of the Zoning Administrator.
§ 245-120. Interpretation.
§ 245-121. Landscaping points.
All landscaping requirements are stated in terms of the number of
landscaping points required. The required number of landscaping points is
dependent upon the type of land use, the zoning district, and the size of the
development.
A. This article contains the standards that govern the amount, size, type,
installation and maintenance of required landscaping. This article
recognizes the important and diverse benefits which landscaping
provides in terms of protecting the health, safety, and general welfare
of the community.
B. Each section of this article is oriented to a specific category of required
landscaping. The landscaping requirements described in this article are
cumulative in nature and are required for all development, except
single-family and two-family residential, in the following locations:
around building foundations, in developed lots, along street frontages,
in or around paved areas, in permanently protected green space areas,
in reforestation areas, and in bufferyards.
C. In each instance, a "landscaping point" concept is used to provide a
maximum amount of flexibility in terms of the selection of plant
materials. Sections 245-121 and 245-122 present sample landscape
point combination alternatives used by this chapter.
A. Plants. Points are awarded based on plant type, which is dependent
upon its typical growth rate, its mature height, and whether it is a
deciduous or evergreen species. Figure 245-121 itemizes the number of
points awarded per plant type and the minimum installation size
required for each of these plant categories.
B. Fences and berms. Points are awarded based on the type and height of
fence, and the height of a berm.
(1) Fences contributing to landscaping requirements are not permitted
along street frontages for nonresidential uses. Where used in
combination with plant materials to meet bufferyard requirements,
§ 245-119 TREES § 245-121
211:767
a minimum of 50% of all plant materials must be located on the
exterior side (the side away from the center of the subject property)
of the fence. A building wall that does not contain doors (except
those used for emergency exit) may be used to satisfy the required
fence portions of the bufferyard requirements.
(2) Berms. Earthen berms shall be designed to transition to existing
surrounding grades, not to exceed a slope ratio of 2:1, and shall be
covered with plant material or ground cover or partially rip-rapped
to prevent erosion. Berms with vegetative cover shall be designed
to retain irrigation water rather than encourage runoff. All earthen
berms shall be safely designed in order to accommodate mowing
when needed. Sloes steeper than 2:1 may be allowed with the
approval of the Plan Commission.
Figure 245-121: Landscaping Points
Plant Category
Landscaping
Points Per Plant
Minimum
Permitted
Installation Size
Climax tree 75 2" caliper
Tall deciduous tree 30 1 1/2" caliper
Medium deciduous
tree
15 6' tall
Low deciduous tree 10 4' tall
Tall evergreen tree 40 5' tall
Medium evergreen
tree
20 4' tall
Low evergreen tree 12 3' tall
Tall deciduous shrub 5 36" tall
Medium deciduous
shrub
3 24" tall
Low deciduous shrub 1 18" tall
Medium evergreen
shrub
5 18" tall/wide
Low evergreen
shrub
3 12" tall/wide
Noncontributory
plants
0 N/A
Structure Category
Landscaping
Points Per
Structure Installation Size
Fence, picket or split
rail
35 44 to 48" tall
Fence, solid 65 44 to 48" tall
§ 245-121 WATERFORD CODE § 245-121
211:768
§ 245-122. Sample landscaping schemes.
Structure Category
Landscaping
Points Per
Structure Installation Size
Fence, solid 85 6' tall
Fence, solid 105 8' tall
Berm 115 4' tall
Berm 135 5' tall
Berm 155 6' tall
A. Sample landscaping schemes that may be used for building
foundations, developed lots, street frontages, paved areas,
reforestation, and bufferyards are depicted in Figure 245-122A. In
general, landscaping schemes similar to Alternative A are best for
building foundations, landscaping schemes similar to Alternative B are
best for developed lots, landscaping schemes similar to Alternative C
are best for street frontages, landscaping schemes similar to
Alternative D are best for paved areas (including parking lots, walkways
and plazas), landscaping schemes similar to Alternative E are best for
reforestation, and landscaping schemes similar to Alternative F are
best for bufferyards.
Figure 245-122A: Sample Landscaping Schemes
Alternative A: Best suited for building foundations.
750 landscaping points:
20 medium trees
15 small shrubs
60 shrubs
§ 245-121 TREES § 245-122
211:769
Alternative B: Best suited for developed lots.
1,250 landscaping points:
6 climax trees
8 small trees
20 medium trees
41 evergreen plantings
Alternative C: Best suited for street frontages.
Option 1.
280 landscaping
points:
2 climax trees
2 tall trees
2 small trees
Option 2.
280 landscaping points:
2 climax trees
2 tall trees
4 small trees
8 evergreen shrubs
§ 245-122 WATERFORD CODE § 245-122
211:770
Alternative D: Best suited for paved areas.
Option 1.68
880 landscaping
points:
2 climax trees
13 tall trees
68 evergreen shrubs
Option 2.
880 landscaping points:
5 climax trees
6 tall trees
68 evergreen shrubs
Alternative E: Best suited for reforestation.
§ 245-122 TREES § 245-122
211:771
§ 245-123. Landscaping requirements for regular developments.
Alternative F: Best suited for bufferyards.
B. A minimum amount of landscaping points, based upon the zoning
district, is required for the linear feet of building foundations; the gross
area of buildings on developed lots; the linear feet of street frontage;
and the total combined area of paved areas. Figure 245-122B illustrates
the measurement techniques used to determine these requirements.
Figure 245-122B: Measurement for Landscaping Requirements
Landscaping calculation equations for this example:
Paved area = (P1 x P2) + (P3 x P4) + (P5 x P6) + (P7 x P8) + (P9 x
P10)
Street frontage = S1 + S2
Building perimeter = F1 + F2 + F3 + F4 + F5 + F6 + F7 + F8
Building floor area = (B1 x B2) + (B3 x B4) + (B5 x B6)
A. Building foundations. As indicated in Figure 245-123, certain buildings
or building additions constructed after the effective date of this chapter
are required to be accented by a minimum amount of landscaping
placed near the building foundation.
(1) Foundation landscaping shall be placed so that, at maturity, the
plant's drip line is located within 10 feet of the building foundation.
§ 245-122 WATERFORD CODE § 245-123
211:772
Such landscaping shall not be located in those areas required
for landscaping as street frontages, paved areas, protected green
space areas, reforestation areas, or bufferyards. Foundation
landscaping shall be installed and permanently maintained in
conformity with the requirements of §§ 245-128 and 245-129.
(2) For each 100 feet of building foundation perimeter, the landscaping
installed shall at a minimum meet the number of landscaping points
specified in Figure 245-123. The actual number of points required
for such landscaping shall be computed on a prorated basis and
installed and permanently maintained per the requirements of
§§ 245-128 and 245-129.
(3) Climax trees and tall trees shall not be used to meet the foundation
landscaping requirement. The intent of this section is to require a
visual break in the mass of buildings and to require a visual screen
of a minimum of six feet in height for all exterior perimeter
appurtenances (such as HVAC/utility boxes, standpipes,
stormwater discharge pipes and other pipes).
(4) If the officially approved site plan depicts a future building
extension, the foundation landscaping requirement shall be
calculated by measuring the length of the total perimeter. However,
foundation plantings need only be installed based on the landscape
points calculated from the portions of the building perimeter that
will not be affected by building extension. If this results in a point
requirement not met by the initial planting, then the requirement
shall be met within five years after the issuance of the building
permit or within such larger time period as established in writing
by the Plan Commission.
B. Street frontages. As indicated in Figure 245-123, street frontages on
certain lots developed after the effective date of this article must
contain a minimum amount of landscaping in those areas abutting the
right-of-way of a public street, but also in accordance with the vision
clearance triangle requirements set forth in § 245-13H.
(1) All landscaping used to meet street frontage requirements shall be
located within 10 feet of the public right-of-way. Under no
circumstances shall such landscaping be located within a public
right-of-way. Landscaping shall not impede vehicle or pedestrian
visibility and shall be installed and permanently maintained in
conformity with the requirements of §§ 245-128 and 245-129.
(2) For every 100 linear feet of street frontage of a developed lot
abutting a public street right-of-way, the landscape installed shall
at a minimum meet the number of landscaping points specified in
Figure 245-123. The actual number of points required for such
landscaping shall be computed on a prorated basis and installed
and maintained per the requirements of §§ 245-128 and 245-129.
§ 245-123 TREES § 245-123
211:773
(3) Shrubs shall not be used to meet street frontage landscaping
requirements. A minimum of 50% of all points shall be devoted to
climax or tall trees, or a combination of such trees, and a minimum
of 30% of all points shall be devoted to medium trees.
C. Paved areas. As indicated in Figure 245-123, paved areas on certain lots
developed after the effective date of this chapter must contain a
minimum amount of landscaping within 10 feet of the paved area. The
intent is to require a continuous visual screen of parking areas from
public rights-of-way at a minimum height of 40 inches, but also in
accordance with the vision clearance triangle provisions of § 245-13H.
(1) A minimum of 360 square feet of landscaped area, which shall be
located within 10 feet of the paved area, is required for the
placement of every 100 paved area landscaping points. Said area
does not have to be provided in one contiguous area. Sample
configurations are depicted in Figure 245-122A above. Plants used
to fulfill this requirement shall visually screen parking, loading and
circulation areas from view from public streets. Paved area
landscaping shall be installed and permanently maintained in
conformity with the requirements of §§ 245-128 and 245-129.
(2) For every 20 off-street parking stalls or 10,000 square feet of
pavement (whichever yields the greater landscaping requirement)
located in a development, the landscaping installed shall at a
minimum meet the number of landscaping points specified in
Figure 245-123. The actual number of points required for such
landscaping shall be computed on a prorated basis and installed
and maintained per the requirements of §§ 245-128 and 245-129.
(3) A minimum of 30% of all points shall be devoted to climax or tall
trees, or a combination of such trees, and a minimum of 40% of all
points shall be devoted to shrubs.
(4) Parking lot design shall employ interior landscaped islands with a
minimum of 400 square feet at all parking aisle ends and in
addition shall provide a minimum of one landscaped island of a
minimum of 400 square feet in each parking aisle for every 20 cars
in that aisle. Aisle-end islands shall count toward meeting this
requirement. Landscaped medians shall be used to break large
parking areas into distinct pods, with a maximum of 100 spaces in
any one pod. The Plan Commission may grant exceptions to this
provision during site plan review.
D. Developed lots. As indicated in Figure 245-123, lots developed after the
effective date of this article must contain a minimum amount of
landscaping.
(1) Landscaping required by this section is most effective if located
away from those areas required for landscaping as building
foundations, street frontages, paved areas, protected green space
areas, reforestation areas, or bufferyards.
§ 245-123 WATERFORD CODE § 245-123
211:774
(2) The number of landscaping points specified in Figure 245-123 shall
be provided on a prorated basis for every 1,000 square feet of gross
building floor area and installed and maintained per the
requirements of §§ 245-128 and 245-129.
(3) The intent of this section is to provide yard shade and to require a
visual screen of a minimum of six feet in height for all detached
exterior appurtenances (such as HVAC/utility boxes, standpipes,
stormwater discharge pipes and other pipes).
Figure 235-123 Landscaping Requirements for Regular Development
Landscaping Components
Building
Foundation Street Frontages Paved Areas Developed Lots
Types of Landscaping Climax trees and
tall trees shall not
be used to meet
this requirement
Shrubs not
allowed; a
minimum of 50%
of points from
climax or tall trees
and 30% from
medium trees
A minimum of 30%
of points climax/
tall trees and 40%
from shrubs
All plant categories
can be used for this
requirement
Placement of
Landscaping
Located so that at
maturity the
plant's drip line is
located within 10
feet of building
foundation
Located within 10
feet of the public
right-of-way
Within paved area
or within 10 feet
of paved area
Located away from
areas that meet
other landscaping
requirements
Calculation of
Landscaping Points
Points per 100 feet
of building
foundation
Points per 100
linear feet of
street frontage
Greater of: points
per 20 parking
stalls or 10,000
square feet of
paved area
Points per 1,000
square feet of total
building footprints
Zoning Districts
Two-family
Residential
45 45 90 20
Multiple-family
Residential
60 60 100 30
Business and
Commercial
40 40 80 20
Business and
Industrial
20 20 40 5
Municipal 30 30 20 20
Institutional 30 30 20 20
Downtown District 0 0 20 20
Note: Landscaping is not required for single-family residential
§ 245-123 TREES § 245-124
211:775
§ 245-124. Permanently protected green space.
This section requires that each acre of other permanently protected green
space after the effective date of this article be planted with a minimum
amount of landscaping. For every one acre of other permanently protected
green space in a development, 200 landscaping points (as described in
§ 245-121) shall be provided. In addition, adequate ground cover shall be
provided to stabilize the soil.
§ 245-125. Clear-cutting and reforestation requirements.
A. Clear-cutting. Clear-cutting includes the one-time, continuing, or
cumulative clearing, cutting, harvesting, or other destruction of trees in
an area (or combined areas) of more than 30% of the woodlands on a
property (or up to 100% for developments approved prior to the
effective date of this article). Clear-cutting shall adhere to the following
listed regulations:
(1) Clear-cutting is permitted only as a conditional use. Any owner of
property who intentionally clear-cuts any area of his or her
property or who intentionally solicits or causes another to
intentionally clear-cut any area of his or her property without first
having secured a conditional use permit for such activity shall be
subject to a forfeiture for such wrongful conduct and shall be
required to implement mitigation standards required for the
destruction of woodlands solely at his/her expense, including costs
associated with site inspection to confirm the satisfaction of
mitigation requirements. Areas having been clear-cut
unintentionally as a result of fire shall not subject the owner of the
property to forfeiture for such nonapproved clear-cutting activity
but shall require the satisfaction of mitigation requirements at the
owner's expense, including costs associated with site inspection to
confirm the satisfaction of mitigation requirements.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that clear-cutting will improve the
level of environmental protection on the subject property.
(3) Areas of the subject property that are clear-cut beyond the
limitations established above shall be replanted per the
requirements of Subsection B, i.e., the replanting of trees in other
portions of the subject property, thereby freeing the currently
wooded area for development while ensuring that the amount of
required wooded area on the subject property remains constant.
(4) Clear-cutting shall not be permitted within a required bufferyard or
landscaped area or within an area designated as permanently
protected green space.
B. Each area requiring reforestation shall be reforested and maintained in
a manner appropriate to site conditions. The provisions of this section
are designed to ensure that reforestation efforts required as part of
§ 245-124 WATERFORD CODE § 245-125
211:776
§ 245-126. Bufferyard requirements.
woodland disruption mitigation standards result in the thorough and
reasonably rapid replacement of the important and varied
environmental functions that woodlands provide. A detailed
reforestation plan shall be submitted by the property owner and
approved by the Village prior to clear-cutting. This plan shall be
reviewed by a reforestation consultant chosen by the Village, with
funding for consulting services provided by the petitioner to the Village.
A. Purpose. This section provides the landscaping and width requirements
for bufferyards on lots developed after the effective date of this chapter.
A bufferyard is a combination of distance and a visual buffer or barrier.
It includes an area together with the combination of plantings, berms
and fencing that are required to eliminate or reduce existing or
potential nuisances. These nuisances can often occur between adjacent
zoning districts. Such nuisances are dirt, litter, noise, glare, signs, and
incompatible land uses, buildings, or parking areas.
B. Required locations for bufferyards. Bufferyards shall be located along
(and within) the outer perimeter of a lot wherever two different zoning
districts abut one another, except when the Downtown District abuts a
Business and Commercial District. Bufferyards shall not be required in
front yards.
C. Determination of required bufferyard opacity. The required level of
bufferyard opacity is determined using Figure 245-126A. Opacity is a
quantitatively derived measure that indicates the degree to which a
particular bufferyard screens the adjoining property. The required level
of opacity is directly related to the degree to which the potential
character of development differs between different zoning districts. The
provisions of this section indicate the minimum opacity requirements
for bufferyards located along zoning district boundaries.
D. Identification of detailed bufferyard requirements. If a proposed use
adjoins a parcel for which a bufferyard is required by the presence of a
zoning district boundary, that use shall provide a bufferyard with the
level of the opacity indicated in Figure 245-126A. For each level of
opacity listed in Figure 245-126A, a wide variety of width, landscaping
point, berm, and structure combinations are possible. These are listed
in Figure 245-126B. The requirements listed in Figure 245-126B
pertain to the number of landscaping points and the minimum
bufferyard width within every 100 feet of required bufferyard. A variety
of landscaping point options are available and may be mixed within
distinct portions of the same bufferyard. Section 245-122 describes the
various available landscaping point alternatives. The Plan Commission
may allow a variance from these requirements during the site plan
review process.
§ 245-125 TREES § 245-126
211:777
Figure 245-126A: Required Bufferyard Opacity Values
Apply the required opacity value from this chart to Figure 245-126B
and select the most appropriate bufferyard option. Note that certain
land uses and conditional uses may have more stringent bufferyard
requirements.
R-1 R-2 R-3 B-2 B-1 MC INST B-3
Single
Family
(R-1)
0
Two
Family
(R-2)
0 0
Multiple
Family
(R-3)
0.4 0.3 0
Business
and
Commercial
(B-2)
0.6 0.5 0.4 0
Business
and
Industrial
(B-1)
0.8 0.6 0.6 0.6 0
Downtown
District
(B-3)
Muni
Campus
(MC)
0.4 0.4 0.2 0 0 0
Institutional
(INST)
0.4 0.4 0.2 0 0 0 0
Figure 245-126B: Detailed Bufferyard Requirements
Opacity
Width of
bufferyard
(feet)
Minimum
Number of
Landscaping
Points Per 100
Feet
Structure
Required (if none
listed, structure is
optional)
0.05 10 to 20 35
+20 to 30 30
0.10 10 to 20 85
+20 to 35 65
35+ 60
§ 245-126 WATERFORD CODE § 245-126
211:778
Figure 245-126B: Detailed Bufferyard Requirements
Opacity
Width of
bufferyard
(feet)
Minimum
Number of
Landscaping
Points Per 100
Feet
Structure
Required (if none
listed, structure is
optional)
0.20 10 to 25 180
+25 to 35 150
+35 135
0.30 10 to 25 250
+25 to 40 220
+35 to 45 165
45+ 135
0.40 10 to 25 440
+25 to 35 385
+35 to 45 320
45+ 290
0.50 15 to 25 565
+25 to 35 480
+35 to 45 410
+45 to 60 365
60+ 320
0.60 20 to 35 630
+35 to 45 570
+45 to 60 515
60+ 480
0.80 30 to 45 910
+45 to 60 820
+60 to 70 710
70+ 680
1.00 40 to 50 1,100 Minimum 8-foot
solid fence required
in addition to points
listed
+50 to 60 950 Minimum 8-foot
solid fence required
in addition to points
listed
§ 245-126 TREES § 245-126
211:779
§ 245-127. Classification of plant species.
For the purpose of this chapter, plant materials are classified into the
groupings set forth in § 245-121. Species suitable for landscaping use and
compatible with local climate and soil factors should be chosen using
appropriate source materials, such as "A Guide to Selecting Landscape
Plants for Wisconsin," E. R. Hasselkus, UW-Extension Publication: A2865.
The Zoning Administrator shall review proposals for the viability of the
species chosen, and may reject species that are incompatible with the local
climate.
§ 245-128. Installation requirements.
Figure 245-126B: Detailed Bufferyard Requirements
Opacity
Width of
bufferyard
(feet)
Minimum
Number of
Landscaping
Points Per 100
Feet
Structure
Required (if none
listed, structure is
optional)
+60 to 70 850 Minimum 8-foot
solid fence required
in addition to points
listed
+70 to 80 750 Minimum 8-foot
solid fence required
in addition to points
listed
80+ 640 Minimum 8-foot
solid fence required
in addition to points
listed
A. Any and all landscaping and bufferyard material required by the
provisions of this chapter shall be installed on the subject property, in
accordance with the approved site plan (see § 245-56.6), within 365
days of the issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance for any
building on the subject property, unless a conditional use is approved to
allow for greater than 365 days.
B. If the subject property is to be occupied prior to the installation of all
required landscaping and bufferyard material, the property owner shall
sign an instrument agreeing to install the landscaping within the threehundred-
sixty-five-day period and shall furnish to the Village an
irrevocable letter of credit or other form of security acceptable to the
Village sufficient to guarantee completion of the work. Such security
shall be provided by the property owner at the time that the agreement
is signed. It shall be in an amount equal to 110% of the estimated actual
cost for all of the required elements of the approved site plan and shall
§ 245-126 WATERFORD CODE § 245-128
211:780
specifically guarantee that all such elements shall be made and
installed according to the approved site plan. The costs of the work
shall be furnished by the property owner and shall be verified by the
Village. The financial security shall remain in force until all of the
work has been completed and approved by the Village. This agreement
shall also contain a statement indicating that the property owner's
failure to comply with the requirements of the terms of the agreement
will constitute a violation of this chapter and subject the property
owner to a forfeiture upon conviction. If the required landscaping and
bufferyard materials are to be installed during different phases of a
subdivision development, the developer may furnish for each phase
financial security in an amount sufficient to guarantee completion of the
landscaping and bufferyard work performed during a particular phase,
unless Chapter 235, Subdivision of Land, of the Village Code requires
otherwise. If the property owner is a governmental unit, it may, in lieu
of signing an agreement and furnishing a guarantee, file a resolution
or letter from officers authorized to act in its behalf agreeing to comply
with the provisions of this article.
C. If existing plant material meets the requirements of this article and will
be preserved on the subject property following the completion of
development, it may be counted as contributing to the landscaping
requirements.
D. All landscaping and bufferyard areas shall be seeded or sodded with
lawn or native ground cover unless such vegetation is already fully
established.
E. The exact placement of plants and structures shall be depicted on the
required detailed landscaping plan submitted to the Village for its
approval. Such plant and structure location shall be the decision of each
property owner, provided that the following requirements are met:
(1) Evergreen shrubs shall be planted in clusters to maximize their
chance for survival.
(2) Where a combination of plant materials, berming, and fencing is
used in a bufferyard, the fence and/or berm shall be located toward
the interior of the subject property and the plant material shall be
located toward the exterior of the subject property.
(3) A property owner may establish through a written agreement,
recorded with the Register of Deeds, that an adjacent property
owner agrees to provide on the immediately adjacent portion of his
or her land a partial or full portion of the required bufferyard,
thereby relieving the developer of the responsibility of providing
the entire bufferyard on his property.
(4) Under no circumstance shall landscaping or bufferyard materials
be selected or located in a manner resulting in the creation of a
safety or visibility hazard.
§ 245-128 TREES § 245-128
211:781
§ 245-129. Maintenance requirements.
The continual maintenance of all required landscaping and bufferyard
materials shall be a requirement of this chapter and shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the property on which said materials and
plants are required. This requirement shall run with the property and
shall be binding upon all future property owners. Development of any or
all property following the effective date of this article shall constitute an
agreement by the property owner to comply with the provisions of this
section. If the property owner fails to comply with these provisions, the
Village may enter upon the property for the purpose of evaluating and
maintaining all required landscaping and bufferyard materials and may
specially assess the costs thereof against the property. A property owner's
failure to comply with this requirement shall also be considered a violation
of this chapter and shall be subject to any and all applicable enforcement
procedures and penalties.
§ 245-130. Use requirements.
§ 245-131. Calculating landscaping and bufferyard requirements.
In calculating the number of required landscaping points under the
provisions of this article, all areas and distances on which required
calculations are based shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number
of square feet or linear feet. Any partial plant derived from the required
calculations of this section (for example, 23.3 canopy trees) shall be
rounded up to the nearest whole plant (24 canopy trees).
(5) The restrictions on types of plants listed in this article shall apply.
F. The Zoning Administrator may waive any provision of Article XI in order
to promote a symbiosis of the built and natural environment, or to
promote orderly development.
A. Use of required bufferyard and landscaped areas. Any and all required
bufferyards or landscaped areas may be used for passive recreation
activities. Said areas may contain pedestrian or bike trails, provided
that no required material is eliminated; the total width of the required
bufferyard, or the total area of required landscaping, is maintained; and
all other regulations of this chapter are met. However, in such areas, no
swimming pools, tennis courts, sports fields, golf courses, or other such
similar active recreational uses shall be permitted. No parking and no
outdoor display or storage of materials shall be permitted. Paving in
such areas shall be limited to that required for necessary access to,
through, or across the subject property.
B. Utility easements. Landscaping materials, fences and berms located
within a duly recorded utility or a pedestrian easement shall not count
toward meeting a landscaping requirement, unless authorized
otherwise by a conditional use permit. However, the width of such areas
may be counted as part of a landscaping requirement.
§ 245-128 WATERFORD CODE § 245-132
211:782
§ 245-132. Depiction on required site plan.
Any and all proposed landscaping on the subject property, required to meet
the standards of this chapter, shall be clearly depicted and labeled as to its
location and makeup on the site plan required for the development of the
subject property.
§ 245-132 TREES § 245-132
211:783

ARTICLE XII
Lighting
§ 245-133. Outdoor lighting installations.
A. Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article to minimize "light
trespass" or "obtrusive light," or more specifically to regulate and
reduce the nuisance caused by unnecessary intensity of artificial
illumination of property and buildings, to mitigate the impact on
ecosystems, to promote the safety and welfare of the citizens by
restricting glare producing sources of light and generally establish
proper levels of lighting.
B. Scope.
(1) The regulations in this article shall apply to all luminaries installed,
erected or maintained in all districts except on parcels that contain
a single-family or two-family dwelling unit, provided that the glare
regulations set forth in § 245-143A do apply on single-family or twofamily
parcels where a luminary is not a fully shielded or full cut-off
fixture and one or more neighboring parcels are affected by glare.
The regulations apply in common areas of developments containing
more than one main use on a lot, including condominiums
regardless of the number of units per building. Examples of
common areas include, but are not limited to, pathways,
clubhouses, shared driveways, parking lots, and play areas.
(2) New uses, buildings, and additions. All new land uses,
developments, buildings, structures, or building additions of 25%
or more in terms of gross floor area, either with a single addition or
cumulative additions, subsequent to the effective date of this
article shall meet the requirements of this section for the entire
property. This provision includes additions of any size that increase
the number of parking spaces by 25%. For building additions less
than 25%, the applicant shall meet the provisions of this section for
all new outdoor lighting installed.
(3) Change of use. Any change of use to an existing building or
structure, except in the case of a single tenant in a multitenant
building, shall meet the requirements of this section for the entire
property to the greatest extent possible as determined by the
Zoning Administrator.
(4) These regulations do not apply to the public right-of-way and shall
not conflict with Village streetlights. The regulations do not apply
to lighting necessary for emergency equipment or work conducted
in the interest of law enforcement, or for the safety, health, or
welfare of the community.
§ 245-133 TREES § 245-134
211:785
§ 245-134. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACREAGE, NET — The area of a parcel being developed for a development
project including the open space required by the zoning district.
CLASSIFICATIONS OF LIGHTING — Lighting shall be classified in one of
the following categories:
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT — Any residential, commercial, industrial or
mixed use subdivision plan or development plan that is submitted to the
Village for approval.
DIRECT ILLUMINATION — Illumination resulting from light emitted
directly from a lamp or luminaire, not light diffused through translucent
signs or reflected from other surfaces such as the ground or building faces.
FOOTCANDLE — A unit of light expressed in lumens per square foot.
FULLY SHIELDED FIXTURE or FULL CUTOFF FIXTURE — An outdoor
light fixture shielded in such a manner that 100% of all light emitted by
the fixture, either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture, is
projected below the horizontal plane as determined by photometric test or
certified by the manufacturer.
GLARE — Intense light from an illumination source that may result in
visual impairment or discomfort to the average person. Lighting installed
in conformance with this article should not be considered to cause glare
unless unforeseen circumstances or conditions are discovered during or
after installation.
Class 1 "functional" lighting. All outdoor lighting used for, but not
limited to, outdoor sales or eating areas, assembly, advertising and
other signs, recreational facilities and other similar applications where
color rendition is important to preserve the effectiveness of the activity.
A.
Class 2 "safety" lighting. All outdoor lighting used for, but not limited
to, illumination for walkways, roadways, equipment yards, parking lots
and outdoor security where general illumination for safety or security
of the grounds is the primary concern.
B.
Class 3 "decorative" lighting. Any outdoor lighting used for decorative
effects including, but not limited to, architectural illumination, flag and
monument lighting, and illumination of trees, bushes, etc.
C.
Multiclass lighting. Any outdoor lighting used for more than one
purpose, such as security and decoration, such that its use falls under
the definition of two or more classes as defined for Class 1, 2 and 3
lighting. All multiclass lighting shall comply with the most restrictive
class of which it falls under.
D.
§ 245-134 WATERFORD CODE § 245-134
211:786
HEIGHT — The height of a light structure shall be the vertical distance
between the uppermost extremity of any light structure, pole or supporting
member and the grade level.
LIGHT SOURCE — A single artificial source of luminescence.
LUMEN — The unit used to measure the actual amount of light that is
produced by a lamp. For all lamp types and sources, the initial output, as
defined by the lamp or source manufacturer, is the value to be considered.
LUMINAIRE — The complete lighting unit consisting of a lamp or lamps
together with the parts designed to distribute the light, to position and
protect the lamps and to connect the lamps to the power supply.
MEASUREMENT — For the purposes of this article, unless otherwise
stated, illumination levels shall be measured at a point three feet above
grade with the measuring device aimed directly at the light source(s) being
measured. Measurements shall be taken using baffles or shields to separate
the sources(s) under review from other existing or ambient sources such
as streetlights, in a manner that eliminates to the greatest extent possible
other light sources.
OPAQUE — Opaque means that material must not transmit light from an
internal illumination source.
OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURES — Outdoor electrically powered illuminating
devices, outdoor lighting or reflective surfaces, lamps and similar devices,
either permanently installed or portable, which are used for illumination or
advertisement. Such devices shall include, but are not limited to, linear strip
lights, search lights, spotlights and flood lights for buildings and structures;
recreational areas; parking lot areas; landscape and architectural lighting;
signs (advertising or other); or product display areas.
OUTDOOR LIGHT OUTPUT, TOTAL — The maximum total amount of light,
measured in lumens, from all outdoor light fixtures. For all lamp types and
sources, the initial output, as defined by the lamp or source manufacturer,
is the value to be considered.
PARTIALLY SHIELDED FIXTURE or CUTOFF FIXTURE — An outdoor light
fixture shielded in such a manner that more than zero but less than 10%
of the light emitted directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture is
projected at angles above the horizontal, as determined by photometric test
or certified by the manufacturer.
TEMPORARY LIGHTING — Lighting that does not conform to the provisions
of this article and which will not be used for more than one thirty-day
period within a calendar year, with one thirty-day extension. Temporary
lighting is intended for uses that by their nature are of limited duration;
e.g., civic events, or construction projects, not including exempt lighting
listed in § 245-151. Temporary lighting requires approval by the Zoning
Administrator.
UNIFORMITY RATIO — The average illuminance shall not exceed minimum
values by more than the product of the minimum value and the specified
ratio.
§ 245-134 TREES § 245-134
211:787
USE, ABANDONMENT OF — The relinquishment of a property, or the
cessation of a use or activity by the owner or tenant for a period of one
year, excluding temporary or short term interruptions for the purpose of
remodeling, maintaining, or otherwise improving or rearranging a facility. A
use shall be deemed abandoned when such use is suspended as evidenced
by the cessation of activities or conditions that constitute the principle use
of the property.
WATT — The unit used to measure the electrical power consumption of a
lamp, or when describing a fixture, the fixture input wattage before ballast
losses.
§ 245-135. Establishment of zones. Lighting zones are defined by a
parcel's base zoning district.
§ 245-136. Shielding and exceptions.
All nonexempt outdoor lighting fixtures shall have full shielding to prevent
direct view of the lamp or reflector as viewed from anywhere along the
property line or above the horizontal, except for the following:
§ 245-137. Total outdoor light output standards.
Total outdoor lighting lumen output shall not exceed the limits in Table
245-137, given in lumens per acre. The following shall be included in this
limit:
A. Zone 1: Principal nonresidential uses in or adjacent to residential uses.
B. Zone 2: Business uses.
C. Zone 3: Institutional and industrial uses.
*Note: Planned community development properties must use the
criteria for the use on the parcel, when not adjacent to residential use.
If adjacent to a residential use, Zone 1 shall be used.
A. Class 1 and Class 3 lighting fixtures with an initial lamp output at or
below 500 lumens per fixture may be unshielded provided that the
fixture is screened from public view.
B. Class 1 and Class 3 lighting fixtures with an initial lamp output at or
below 1,000 lumens per fixture may be partially shielded provided that
the fixture is screened from public view.
A. Indoor lighting, located within 12 feet of window glass, that is used for
or contributes to illumination of displays, merchandise or signage shall
be included in the total outdoor light output, by including 25% of the
contributing as though they produced only 1/4 of the lamp's rated
lumen output. If the indoor lighting is directed through the window
glass or otherwise used for exterior illumination, then the full 100% of
the lamp's rated lumen output shall be included.
§ 245-134 WATERFORD CODE § 245-137
211:788
§ 245-138. General regulations.
B. Outdoor lighting fixtures that are fully shielded and installed under
canopies, roof eaves and building overhangs are counted toward these
limits according to the following:
(1) Outdoor light fixtures installed under canopies, building
overhangs, or roof eaves where the center of the lamp or luminaire
is located at least five feet but less than 10 feet from the nearest
edge of the canopy or overhang are to be included in the total
outdoor light output, by including 25% of the contributing lamp's
rated lumen output;
(2) Outdoor light fixtures located under the canopy and 10 or more feet
from the nearest edge of a canopy, building overhang, or eave are
to be included in the total outdoor light output, by including 10% of
the contributing lamp's rated lumen output;
(3) Outdoor lighting fixtures located under the canopy and less than
five feet from the nearest edge of the canopy, building overhang, or
eave, are to be included in the total outdoor light input by including
100% of the contributing lamp's rated lumen output.
Table 245-137 Total Outdoor Light Output Standards
Maximum
Lumens Per
Acre (Initial
Lamp
Lumens) Lighting Zone
Zone 3 Zone 2 Zone 1
Total (fully
shielded plus
unshielded)
125,000 100,000 50,000
Unshielded
only (Class 1
and 3)
10,000 10,000 4,000
A. All classes of lighting. Luminaries attached to a building shall not
exceed 16 feet in height from grade.
B. Class 1 lighting.
(1) The maximum illumination of any interior or exterior illuminated
sign, including subdivision signs, shall not exceed 15 footcandles
when measured with a light meter held perpendicular to the sign at
a distance of 12 inches. All signage existing signage on the date of
adoption of this article is grandfathered, provided that, if the
lighting elements must be replaced, they shall be replaced with
conforming elements.
§ 245-137 TREES § 245-138
211:789
§ 245-139. Light trespass.
Unless otherwise approved in accordance with this section, all luminaries
shall be of a full cutoff design and directed so as to confine the area of
light dispersion to the property and/or building area that it is intended to
(2) The maximum illumination of any vertical building surface shall not
exceed 10 footcandles.
C. Class 2 lighting.
(1) Parking lot lighting shall maintain a two-footcandle average and a
uniformity ratio of 12:1.
(2) The height of parking lot light structures may by right be, but shall
not exceed, the greater of 16 feet or 75% of the height of the
principal structure; provided in no case shall the height of any
parking lot light structure exceed 20 feet or shall any structure
located within 100 feet of a residential use or an undeveloped
residentially zoned property exceed a height of 16 feet.
(3) Light structures intended for pedestrian traffic shall not exceed 10
feet in height and have average illumination levels between 0.5 and
one footcandle.
(4) Bollards shall not exceed 42 inches in height and 8,500 lumens per
fixture with 0% of lumen output at or above the horizontal plane.
(5) Security lighting shall not exceed 25% of the total allowed lumen
output.
(6) Lighting intended for exit discharge shall not exceed 1.5
footcandles at the floor or grade level.
D. Class 3 lighting.
(1) Only the United States flag, the flag of another country, and state
flags are permitted to be illuminated from dusk to dawn. Other
flags may be illuminated if they are located on the same pole or
part of a group or array that includes the United States, a country,
or a state flag. Flag lighting sources shall not exceed 1,600 lumens
for a fifteen-foot flagpole, 7,000 lumens for a twenty-foot flagpole,
and 11,000 lumens for a twenty-five-foot flagpole, and shall be
shielded to prevent viewing the fixture opening from public areas
and neighboring lots, and designed to apply at least 80% of the
fixture output onto the area of the flag.
(2) Lighting of aesthetic features, including but not limited to
hardscape and landscape features, fountains, displays, and
statuary, shall not exceed 500 lumens per fixture.
(3) The maximum illumination of any vertical building surface or
facade shall not exceed 10 footcandles.
§ 245-138 WATERFORD CODE § 245-139
211:790
illuminate. More specifically, all lighting installations shall conform to the
following standards:
§ 245-140. Hours of operation.
§ 245-141. Special uses.
In addition to the requirements of this article, the following uses shall have
additional restrictions.
A. All luminaries except street lights shall be located, aimed or shielded so
as to prevent stray light trespassing across property boundaries,
measurable at or below 0.05 footcandle while holding meter
perpendicular to and aimed directly at the offending source(s).
B. Where adjacent to nonresidential property, the maximum permitted
illumination level located 10 feet within that adjacent property shall be
no greater than 0.1 horizontal footcandles.
C. Where adjacent to residential property, the maximum permitted
illumination level on a residentially zoned parcel located immediately
within that adjacent property shall be no greater than 0.01 horizontal
footcandles.
D. Ground-mounted lighting. In order to fully hide the light fixture from
public view and to prevent glare and brightness from normal public
view, all ground-mounted luminaries designed or intended for purposes
of illuminating, signs, flagpoles or other onsite amenities shall be
completely screened, at the time of installation, with nonseasonal
vegetative cover or other materials as approved by the Plan
Commission. Additional louvers or shielding may be required to prevent
source brightness and glare from normal public view.
A. All outdoor luminaries shall be turned off from close of business to
sunrise with the following exceptions:
(1) Business, industrial and institutional uses that remain open after
11:00 p.m. as permitted by zoning regulations or conditional use
requirements shall be allowed to keep their approved outdoor
lighting on for the period of time they remain open and up to onehalf
hour after closing.
(2) Approved business, industrial, and institutional security lighting
shall be allowed in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
(3) All illuminated on-premises and off-premises signs for advertising
purposes shall be turned off from close of business to sunrise.
B. Recreational facilities shall be allowed to keep their approved outdoor
lighting on for the period of time the recreational use continues.
A. Illuminated outdoor recreation facilities:
§ 245-139 TREES § 245-141
211:791
§ 245-142. Permits.
(1) Shall be subject to a conditional use grant.
(2) Lighting for outdoor recreational facilities including athletic fields,
courts, or tracks shall be exempt from the lumens per acre limits of
this section.
(3) All lighting installations shall be designed to achieve no greater
than the minimal illuminance levels for the activity as
recommended by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North
America (IESNA RP-6).
(4) Lighting trespass requirements are maintained.
B. Auto display lots.
(1) Lighting for display lots shall be exempt from the lumens per parcel
limits of this section.
(2) Total output. The total light output used for illuminating display lots
shall not exceed 20 footcandles.
(3) Every display lot lighting system and design shall be certified by a
registered engineer as conforming to all restrictions in this section.
C. Service station canopies.
(1) All luminaries mounted on the under surface of service station
canopies shall be fully shielded, recessed, and utilize flat glass or
flat plastic (acrylic or polycarbonate) covers, with no direct
illumination permitted at or above the horizontal plane.
(2) Total output. The total light output used for illuminating service
station canopies, defined as the sum of all under-canopy initial
lamp outputs in lumens, shall not exceed 20 footcandles. All
lighting mounted under the canopy, including but not limited to
luminaries mounted on the lower surface of the canopy and
auxiliary lighting within signage or panels over the pumps, is to be
included toward the total.
(3) No lighting shall be placed on the facade or roof of the canopy.
D. Street lighting installed by private parties (developers and land
owners). Where private street lighting is installed, the luminaries shall
be fully shielded and shall not exceed 2,700 lumens per fixture. Where
private parties install street lighting on streets that are or will become
public streets, the luminaries shall be approved by both the Plan
Commission and the Public Works and Utilities Committee.
A. Prior to the erection, installation or placement of any exterior artificial
light source, an application for permit shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator. All applications shall include a scaled plan depicting:
§ 245-141 WATERFORD CODE § 245-142
211:792
(1) The proposed number, types, intensity (in wattage and lumens),
class, and specific locations of fixtures, along with photometric
drawings;
(2) The manufacture specification sheets, manufacturer's fixture
cutsheets, manufacturer's ISO footcandle curve reference plot, or
other manufacturer provided information for all proposed lighting
fixtures.
(3) If building elevations are proposed for illumination, drawings shall
be provided for all relevant building elevations showing the
fixtures, the portions of the elevations to be illuminated, the
illuminance levels of the elevations, and the aiming point for any
remote light fixture.
(4) If needed, the Zoning Administrator may request additional
information following the initial lighting plan submittal, such as:
(a) A brief written narrative, with accompanying plan or sketch,
which demonstrates the objectives of the lighting.
(b) Photometric data, Color Rendering Index (CRI) of all lamps
(bulbs), and other descriptive information on the fixtures, and
if applicable or required, designation as Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) "cutoff"
fixtures.
(c) Computer-generated photometric grid showing footcandle
readings every 10 feet within the property or site, and 10 feet
beyond the property lines at a scale specified by the
Administrator. ISO-footcandle contour line style plans are also
acceptable.
(d) Landscaping information that indicates mature tree size,
shrubbery and other vegetation in order to evaluate the longterm
and seasonal effectiveness of lighting or screening of
lighting.
(5) When not submitted as part of a site plan requiring Plan
Commission review, staff, in their judgment, may defer the plan to
the Plan Commission for approval. The plans submitted in
compliance hereto shall not necessarily be deemed sufficient to
fulfill the technical requirements of Chapter 98, but are in addition
thereto.
B. Any permit issued under the provisions of this section shall expire and
be null and void if not implemented within six months of the date of
approval. Whenever a permit is granted in conjunction with a site plan
approval, such permit shall be valid for the same time period as the
related site plan.
§ 245-142 TREES § 245-143
211:793
§ 245-143. Lighting standards for uses adjacent to residential
zones.
§ 245-144. Open-air parking lot lighting.
A. With the exception of street lights, for exterior lighting installations and
fixtures adjacent to existing, zoned, or platted single- and two-family
residential areas, the following requirements shall apply:
(1) Lighting fixtures shall be no higher than 15 feet above grade.
(2) Lighting fixtures shall be aimed and shielded in a manner that shall
not direct illumination on adjacent residential zones. Fixtures
should be of a type or adequately shielded so as to prevent glare
from normal viewing angles.
(3) Where feasible, additional landscaping may be required by the
Zoning Administrator or Plan Commission to provide light
screening between business zones and residential zones to help
prevent light trespass. Where landscaping is used for light
screening, the Village shall take into consideration the applicable
landscaping standards found elsewhere in these regulations, the
creation of excessive shadows or dark spaces, and views into and
out of a site.
B. The height restrictions of this section shall not apply to lighting used to
illuminate outdoor performance areas, sport and recreation facilities,
and playfields, except where such lighting fixtures are located within 50
feet of the property line of a single- or two-family residential use or
vacant lot. Lighting of outdoor performance areas, sport and recreation
facilities, and playfields shall also meet the standards in § 245-146.
A. Open-air parking lots shall comply with the standards of this section in
addition to the other requirements of this article.
B. For multilevel parking facilities, the roof level shall be considered an
open-air parking lot.
C. Open-air parking lot lighting shall be designed to provide adequate
vision, comfort and safety.
D. Open-air parking lot lighting shall be designed to provide for uniform
lighting throughout the facility with no dark patches or pockets.
E. Open-air parking lot lighting shall be designed to provide a minimum
value of lighting necessary for the safety and identification of features.
F. Open-air parking lot lighting shall not cause direct illumination on
adjacent and nearby properties or streets. Fixtures should be of a type
or adequately shielded so as to prevent glare from normal viewing
angles.
§ 245-143 WATERFORD CODE § 245-144
211:794
G. In order to direct light downward and minimize the amount of light
spilled into the dark night sky, all lighting fixtures serving open-air
parking lots, except as allowed in Subsection H of this section, shall be
full cutoff fixtures as defined by the Illuminating Engineering Society of
North America (IESNA).
H. If the design of an area suggests the use of parking lot lighting fixtures
of a particular "period" or architectural style, the Village may permit
alternatives or supplements to the lighting described above. In order to
minimize the amount of light spilled into the dark night sky, the
following shall apply:
(1) Mounting heights of such alternative fixtures shall not exceed 15
feet above grade or pavement.
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall require reasonable measures to
minimize light trespass and light spill into the dark night sky.
I. The following mounting height regulations shall apply to open-air
parking lot lighting fixtures. Mounting height shall be measured as the
vertical distance between the parking surface and the bottom of the
lighting fixture.
(1) The maximum permissible mounting height of open-air parking lot
lighting fixtures within 50 feet of low and low-moderate density
residential zones (densities less than or equal to R-6) shall be 15
feet.
(2) The maximum permissible mounting height for open-air parking lot
lighting fixtures, on top levels of structures, shall be 15 feet.
(3) The maximum permissible mounting height of open-air parking lot
lighting fixtures, not listed in Subsection I(1) and (2) above, shall be
25 feet.
J. The Plan Commission may allow increases from basic to enhanced
security lighting levels (see table below), when personal security is an
issue, such as where the parking facility is used during all hours of the
day and night, where special security needs exist, or where vandalism
or crime are possible. The Plan Commission may consider specific site
characteristics, level of vehicle and pedestrian conflict, special security
needs, and history or likelihood of crimes in making its determination.
K. The table below establishes open-air parking lot lighting standards.
Basic1
Enhanced
Security2
Minimum footcandles on pavement3 0.2 fc 0.5 fc
Maximum footcandles on pavement 4.0 fc 7.5 fc
Uniform ratio maximum/minimum4 20:1 15:1
§ 245-144 TREES § 245-144
211:795
§ 245-145. Canopy lighting and lighting of service stations.
Basic1
Enhanced
Security2
Maximum footcandles at five feet
above pavement5
0.1 fc 0.25 fc
NOTES:
fc = footcandle
1 For typical conditions. During periods of nonuse, the illuminance
of certain parking facilities should be turned off or reduced to
conserve energy. If reduced lighting is to be used only for the
purpose of property security, it is desirable that the minimum (low
point) value not be less than 0.1 footcandle. Reductions should not
be applied to facilities subject to intermittent night use, such as at
apartments, hospitals and transportation terminals.
2 The Plan Commission may allow increases from basic to enhanced
security lighting levels, when personal security is an issue, such
as where the parking facility is used during all hours of the day
and night, where special security needs exist, or where vandalism
or crime are possible. The Plan Commission may consider specific
site characteristics, level of vehicle and pedestrian conflict, special
security needs, and history or likelihood of crimes in making its
determination.
3 Measured on the parking surface, without any shadowing effect
from parked vehicles or trees at points of measurement.
4 The highest horizontal illuminance point at grade, divided by the
lowest horizontal illuminance point or area should not be greater
than the values shown.
5 Measured at 1.5 meters (five feet) above parking surface at the
point of the lowest horizontal illuminance, excluding facing
outward along boundaries.
A. Lighting of such areas shall not be used to attract attention to the
business. Signs allowed under the appropriate section of these
regulations shall be used for that purpose.
B. Lighting levels shall be adequate to facilitate the activities taking place
in such locations.
C. In order to minimize the extent of direct glare, light fixtures mounted
on canopies shall be recessed so that the lens cover is recessed or flush
with the bottom surface (ceiling) of the canopy or shielded by the
fixture or the edge of the canopy so that light is restrained to 85° or less
from vertical.
§ 245-144 WATERFORD CODE § 245-145
211:796
§ 245-146. Lighting of outdoor performance, sport and recreation
facilities and playfields.
§ 245-147. Security lighting.
D. As an alternative (or supplement) to recessed ceiling lights, indirect
lighting may be used where light is beamed upward and then reflected
down from the underside of the canopy. When this method is used, light
fixtures must be shielded so that direct illumination is focused
exclusively on the underside of the canopy.
E. Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides (fasciae) of the canopy.
The sides (fasciae of the canopy) shall not be illuminated in a manner
other than that prescribed under the section of these regulations
regulating signs.
F. Areas around service station pump islands shall be illuminated so that
the minimum horizontal illuminance at grade level is at least 1.0
footcandle and no more than 5.0 footcandles. The uniformity ratio
(average illumination to minimum illumination) shall be no greater than
4:1. At the discretion of the Plan Commission, increased lighting levels
may be permitted for enhanced security purposes only.
A. Lighting levels for outdoor performance areas, sport and recreation
facilities, and playfields shall not exceed by more than 5% the
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) published
standards for the proposed activity.
B. Where playing fields or other special activity areas are to be
illuminated, lighting fixtures shall be mounted, aimed and shielded so
that their beams fall within the primary playing area and immediate
surroundings, and so that no direct illumination is directed off the site.
C. The main lighting shall be turned off as soon as possible following the
end of the event. The main lighting shall not remain on longer than 30
minutes following the end of the event. Where feasible, a low-level
lighting system shall be used to facilitate patrons leaving the facility,
cleanup, nighttime maintenance and other closing activities. The lowlevel
lighting system shall provide an average horizontal illumination
level at grade of no more than 3.0 footcandles, with a uniformity ratio
(average illumination to minimum illumination) not exceeding 4:1.
A. Security lighting is defined as "lighting designed and used to
discourage crime and undesirable activity."
B. Security lighting should use the lowest possible illumination to
effectively allow surveillance.
C. The use of sensor technologies, timers or other means to activate
lighting during times when it will be needed may be required by the
Plan Commission to conserve energy, provide safety, and promote
compatibility between different land uses.
§ 245-145 TREES § 245-147
211:797
§ 245-148. Architectural accent lighting.
D. In order to direct light downward and minimize the amount of light spill
into the dark night sky, all security lighting fixtures shall be full cutoff
fixtures as defined by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North
America (IESNA).
E. Security lighting shall be shielded and aimed so that illumination is
directed to the designated areas.
F. Where security lighting is proposed, the table below shall govern the
range of permissible light levels for the listed applications. Where a
proposed security lighting application is not identified in the table
below, the table shall be used a guide for establishing the range of
permissible light levels.
Security Lighting Application on
Ground
Average Horizontal
Illumination Level
Large open areas 0.5 to 2.0 fc1
Buildings 0.5 to 2.0 fc1
Perimeter fence 0.5 fc2
Entrances 10 fc3
Gatehouses 30 fc4
Pedestrian pathways and access routes 4 to 6 fc
NOTES:
fc = footcandle
1 The greater the brightness of the surrounding area, the higher the
illuminance required to balance the brightness
2 Illuminance on the ground
3 Illuminance on the ground in the inspection area
4 Illuminance on the work-plane in the gatehouse. This lighting
must be dimmable to low levels at night so the guard can see
outside the gatehouse.
A. Fixtures used to accent architectural features, materials, colors, style
of buildings, or art shall be located, aimed and shielded so that light is
directed only on those features. Such fixtures shall be aimed or shielded
so as to minimize light spill into the dark night sky. The Plan
Commission may allow exceptions to this provision if minimal light
escapes into the dark night sky or onto adjacent properties.
B. Lighting fixtures shall not generate excessive light levels, cause glare,
or direct light beyond the facade onto neighboring property, streets or
the night sky.
§ 245-147 WATERFORD CODE § 245-148
211:798
§ 245-149. Lighting of landscaping.
Illumination of landscaping shall utilize diffused or muted lighting, avoid
glare, and minimize light trespass and escape beyond landscaping onto
neighboring property, streets, or the night sky.
§ 245-150. Temporary lighting.
§ 245-151. Prohibitions.
The following types of lighting shall be prohibited except as otherwise
approved by the Plan Commission:
C. The maximum illumination of any vertical surface or angular roof
surface in dark surroundings shall not exceed three footcandles.
D. The maximum illumination of any vertical surface or angular roof
surface in light surroundings shall not exceed five footcandles.
E. Flags of the United States, another country, or any state may be
illuminated from below provided such lighting is focused primarily on
the individual flag or flags so as to limit light trespass and spill into the
dark night sky.
A. Lighting used to illuminate temporary uses shall be reviewed, and if
necessary conditioned, through the temporary use permitting process.
B. The Zoning Administrator may impose specific conditions for the
lighting of temporary uses consistent with the purposes of this article.
A. Swivel-mounted luminaries.
B. Festoon lighting, "string" lighting or any light source erected in such a
manner as to be subject to noticeable periodic movement as a result of
wind pressure or atmospheric conditions.
C. Any artificial light source that creates glare within the normal range of
vision from any public walk or thoroughfare under normal weather
conditions.
D. Display of intermittent lights or flashing, blinking, moving lights except
as follows:
(1) Where such lights are required by state or federal law.
(2) Where such lighting is of a temporary nature including but not
limited to holiday displays and grand opening events.
(3) Where such lighting is part of a sign approved pursuant to Article
VI.
E. Laser source light. The use of laser source light or any similar high
intensity light is prohibited.
§ 245-148 TREES § 245-151
211:799
§ 245-152. Exceptions and exemptions.
F. Searchlights.
G. Light intended to illuminate naturally occurring environmental features
including but not limited to wetlands, rivers, lakes and dedicated open
spaces shall be prohibited except as approved as part of a conditional
use grant or public lighting project approved by the Village Board.
A. Exceptions. The Plan Commission may approve exceptions to the
provisions of this subsection where, in its opinion, strict compliance to
the regulations is impractical and the alternative would further the
public interest.
B. Exemptions. The following types of lighting shall be exempt from the
outdoor lighting regulations:
(1) Seasonal decorations are exempt from the requirements of this
article unless they constitute a public nuisance (traffic, safety, etc.).
(2) Tower lighting or any other lighting that is required by federal or
state regulations.
§ 245-151 WATERFORD CODE § 245-152
211:800
Chapter 250
EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building, plumbing, electrical and
mechanical codes — See Ch. 98.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 178.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 223.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 235.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
Shoreland-wetland zoning — See Ch. 255.
§ 245-152 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 245-152
250:801

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 250-1. Intent.
A. The intent of this chapter is to require use of best management
practices to reduce the amount of sediment and other pollutants
resulting from land-disturbing construction activities, and to reduce the
rate and amount of post-construction stormwater and associated
pollutants reaching waters of the state.
B. Use of this chapter will foster consistent, statewide application of the
construction site performance standards for new development and
redevelopment and the consistent statewide application of postconstruction
performance standards for new development and
redevelopment contained in Subchapters III and IV of Wis. Admin. Code
ch. NR 151.
§ 250-1 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-1
250:803

ARTICLE II
Construction Site Erosion Control
§ 250-2. Authority; enforcement.
§ 250-3. Findings of fact.
The Village of Waterford finds that runoff from land-disturbing construction
activity carries a significant amount of sediment and other pollutants to the
waters of the state in the Village of Waterford.
§ 250-4. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to further the maintenance of safe and
healthful conditions; prevent and control water pollution; prevent and
control soil erosion; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control
building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground
cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth, by
minimizing the amount of sediment and other pollutants carried by runoff or
discharged from land-disturbing construction activity to waters of the state
in the Village of Waterford.
§ 250-5. Applicability and jurisdiction.
A. This article is adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stat.
§ 61.354. This article supersedes all provisions of any subchapter
previously enacted under Wis. Stat. § 61.35 that relate to construction
site erosion control. Except as otherwise specified in Wis. Stat.
§ 61.354, Wis. Stat. § 61.35 applies to this article and to any
amendments to this article.
B. The provisions of this article are deemed not to limit any other lawful
regulatory powers of the Village.
C. The Village Board hereby designates the Village of Waterford to
administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
D. The requirements of this article do not preempt more stringent erosion
and sediment control requirements that may be imposed by any of the
following:
(1) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules,
permits or approvals, including those authorized under Wis. Stat.
§§ 281.16 and 283.33.
(2) Targeted nonagricultural performance standards promulgated in
rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under
Wis. Admin. Code s. NR 151.004.
A. Applicability.
§ 250-2 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-5
250:805
§ 250-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTERING AUTHORITY — A governmental employee, or a regional
planning commission empowered under Wis. Stat. § 61.354, that is
designated by the Village of Waterford to administer this article .
(1) This article applies to the following land-disturbing construction
activities except as provided under Subsection A(2):
(a) A construction site, which has one or more acres of landdisturbing
construction activity.
(2) This article does not apply to the following:
(a) Land-disturbing construction activity that includes the
construction of a building in which erosion control is regulated
by the Wisconsin Department of Commerce under Wis. Admin.
Code s. Comm 21.125.
(b) A construction project that is exempted by federal statutes or
regulations from the requirement to have a national pollutant
discharge elimination system permit issued under Chapter 40,
Code of Federal Regulations, Part 122, for land-disturbing
construction activity.
(c) Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices.
(d) Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities.
(e) Routine maintenance for project sites under five acres of land
disturbance if performed to maintain the original line and
grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility.
(3) Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in Subsection A(1),
this article applies to construction sites of any size that, in the
opinion of the Village of Waterford, are likely to carry sediment and
pollutants to downstream stormwater facilities and waters of the
state or which degrade safe and healthful conditions or endanger
property, the environment, or downstream facilities.
B. Jurisdiction. This article applies to land-disturbing construction activity
on construction sites located within the boundaries and jurisdiction of
the Village of Waterford.
C. Exclusions. This article is not applicable to activities conducted by a
state agency, as defined under Wis. Stat. § 227.01(1), but also including
the office of District Attorney, which is subject to the state plan
promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered into under
Wis. Stat. § 281.33(2).
§ 250-5 WATERFORD CODE § 250-6
250:806
AGRICULTURAL FACILITIES AND PRACTICES — Has the meaning in Wis.
Stat. § 281.16(1).
AVERAGE ANNUAL RAINFALL — A calendar year of precipitation,
excluding snow, which is considered typical.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE or BMP — Structural or nonstructural
measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize
soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state.
BUSINESS DAY — A day the office of the Village Hall is routinely and
customarily open for business.
CEASE AND DESIST ORDER — A court-issued order to halt land-disturbing
construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit.
CONSTRUCTION SITE — An area upon which one or more land-disturbing
construction activities occur, including areas that are part of a larger
common plan of development or sale where multiple separate and distinct
land-disturbing construction activities may be taking place at different
times on different schedules but under one plan.
DIVISION OF LAND — The creation from one parcel of two or more parcels
or building sites where such creation occurs at one time or through the
successive partition within a five-year period.
EROSION — The process by which the land's surface is worn away by the
action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A comprehensive plan
developed to address pollution caused by erosion and sedimentation of soil
particles or rock fragments during construction.
EXTRATERRITORIAL — The unincorporated area within 1.5 miles of the
Village.
FINAL STABILIZATION — That all land-disturbing construction activities
at the construction site have been completed and that a uniform perennial
vegetative cover has been established, with a density of at least 70% of
the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent
structures, or that employ equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
GOVERNING BODY — The Village Board.
LAND-DISTURBING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any man-made
alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or
existing vegetative or nonvegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and
lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters
of the state. Land-disturbing construction activity includes clearing and
grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading
activities.
MEP or MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — A level of implementing best
management practices in order to achieve a performance standard specified
in this article, which takes into account the best available technology, cost
effectiveness and other competing issues such as human safety and welfare,
§ 250-6 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-6
250:807
endangered and threatened resources, historic properties and geographic
features. MEP allows flexibility in the way to meet the performance
standards and may vary based on the performance standard and site
conditions.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A narrative or measurable number
specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
PERMIT — A written authorization made by the Village of Waterford to the
applicant to conduct land-disturbing construction activity or to discharge
post-construction runoff to waters of the state.
POLLUTANT — Has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. § 283.01(13).
POLLUTION — Has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. § 281.01(10).
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any entity holding fee title to the property or
performing services to meet the performance standards of this article
through a contract or other agreement.
RUNOFF — Stormwater or precipitation, including rain, snow or ice melt or
similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
SEDIMENT — Settleable solid material that is transported by runoff,
suspended within runoff or deposited by runoff away from its original
location.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER — A conveyance or system of conveyances,
including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all of the
following criteria:
SITE — The entire area included in the legal description of the land on
which the land-disturbing construction activity is proposed in the permit
application.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued by the Village of Waterford which
requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped.
TECHNICAL STANDARD — A document that specifies design, predicted
performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material,
device or method.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Has the meaning given in Wis. Stat.
§ 281.01(18).
§ 250-7. Technical standards.
A. Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff.
B. Is not part of a combined sewer system.
C. Is not draining to a stormwater treatment device or system.
D. Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
§ 250-6 WATERFORD CODE § 250-7
250:808
§ 250-8. Performance standards.
A. Design criteria, standards and specifications. All BMPs required to
comply with this article shall meet the design criteria, standards and
specifications based on any of the following:
(1) Applicable design criteria, standards and specifications as
maintained by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
Design criteria, standards and specifications may be found on the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources internet site.
(2) Other design guidance and technical standards identified or
developed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
under Subchapter V of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 151.
(3) For this article, average annual basis is calculated using the
appropriate annual rainfall or runoff factor, also referred to as the
"R factor," or an equivalent design storm using a Type II
distribution, with consideration given to the geographic location of
the site and the period of disturbance.
B. Other standards. Other technical standards not identified or developed
in Subsection A may be used, provided that the methods have been
approved by the Village Engineer.
A. Responsible party. The responsible party shall implement an erosion
and sediment control plan, developed in accordance with § 250-10, that
incorporates the requirements of this section.
B. Plan. A written plan shall be developed in accordance with § 250-10 and
implemented for each construction site.
C. Erosion and other pollutant control requirements. The plan required
under Subsection B shall include the following:
(1) BMPs that, by design, achieve, to the maximum extent practicable,
a reduction of 80% of the sediment load carried in runoff, on an
average annual basis, as compared with no sediment or erosion
controls until the construction site has undergone final
stabilization. No person shall be required to exceed an eightypercent
sediment reduction to meet the requirements of this
subsection. Erosion and sediment control BMPs may be used alone
or in combination to meet the requirements of this subsection.
Credit toward meeting the sediment reduction shall be given for
limiting the duration or area, or both, of land-disturbing
construction activity, or other appropriate mechanism.
(2) Notwithstanding Subsection C(1), if BMPs cannot be designed and
implemented to reduce the sediment load by 80%, on an average
annual basis, the plan shall include a written and site-specific
explanation as to why the eighty-percent reduction goal is not
§ 250-7 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-8
250:809
§ 250-9. Permitting requirements, procedures and fees.
attainable and the sediment load shall be reduced to the maximum
extent practicable.
(3) Where appropriate, the plan shall include sediment controls to do
all of the following to the maximum extent practicable:
(a) Prevent tracking of sediment from the construction site onto
roads and other paved surfaces.
(b) Prevent the discharge of sediment as part of site dewatering.
(c) Protect the separate storm drain inlet structure from receiving
sediment.
(4) The use, storage and disposal of chemicals, cement and other
compounds and materials used on the construction site shall be
managed during the construction period, to prevent their entrance
into waters of the state. However, projects that require the
placement of these materials in waters of the state, such as
constructing bridge footings or BMP installations, are not
prohibited by this subsection.
D. Location. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be located
prior to runoff entering waters of the state.
E. Alternate requirements. The Village of Waterford may establish
stormwater management requirements more stringent than those set
forth in this section if the Village of Waterford determines that an added
level of protection is needed for sensitive resources.
A. Permit required. No responsible party may commence a land-disturbing
construction activity subject to this article without receiving prior
approval of an erosion and sediment control plan for the site and a
permit from the Village of Waterford.
B. Permit application and fees. At least one responsible party desiring to
undertake a land-disturbing construction activity subject to this article
shall submit an application for a permit and an erosion and sediment
control plan that meets the requirements of § 250-10 and shall pay an
application fee as required in § 250-11 to the Village of Waterford. By
submitting an application, the applicant is authorizing the Village of
Waterford to enter the site to obtain information required for the review
of the erosion and sediment control plan.
C. Review and approval of permit application. The Village of Waterford,
either through its Building Inspector or its Engineer, depending upon
the type of development, shall review any permit application that is
submitted with an erosion and sediment control plan, and the required
fee. The following approval procedure shall be used:
§ 250-8 WATERFORD CODE § 250-9
250:810
(1) Within 20 business days of the receipt of a complete permit
application, as required by Subsection B, the Village of Waterford
shall inform the applicant whether the application and plan are
approved or disapproved based on the requirements of this article.
(2) If the permit application and plan are approved, the Village of
Waterford shall issue the permit.
(3) If the permit application or plan is disapproved, the Village of
Waterford shall state in writing the reasons for disapproval.
(4) The Village of Waterford may request additional information from
the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the Village of
Waterford shall have 20 business days from the date the additional
information is received to inform the applicant that the plan is
either approved or disapproved.
(5) Failure by the Village of Waterford to inform the permit applicant of
a decision within 30 business days of a required submittal shall be
deemed to mean approval of the submittal, and the applicant may
proceed as if a permit had been issued.
D. Surety bond. As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit, the
Village of Waterford may require the applicant to deposit a surety bond
or irrevocable letter of credit to guarantee a good faith execution of the
approved erosion control plan and any permit conditions.
E. Permit requirements. All permits shall require the responsible party to:
(1) Notify the Village of Waterford within 48 hours of commencing any
land-disturbing construction activity.
(2) Notify the Village of Waterford of completion of any BMPs within 14
days after their installation.
(3) Obtain permission in writing from the Village of Waterford prior to
any modification pursuant to § 250-10C of the erosion and sediment
control plan.
(4) Install all BMPs as identified in the approved erosion and sediment
control plan.
(5) Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage systems,
BMPs and other facilities identified in the erosion and sediment
control plan.
(6) Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjacent lands and
drainage ways resulting from land-disturbing construction
activities and document repairs in a site erosion control log.
(7) Inspect the BMPs within 24 hours after each rain of 0.5 inch or
more which results in runoff during active construction periods,
and at least once each week make needed repairs and document
§ 250-9 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-9
250:811
§ 250-10. Erosion and sediment control plan, statement and
amendments.
the findings of the inspections in a site erosion control log with
the date of inspection, the name of the person conducting the
inspection, and a description of the present phase of the
construction at the site.
(8) Allow the Village of Waterford to enter the site for the purpose of
inspecting compliance with the erosion and sediment control plan
or for performing any work necessary to bring the site into
compliance with the control plan. Keep a copy of the erosion and
sediment control plan at the construction site.
F. Permit conditions. Permits issued under this section may include
conditions established by the Village of Waterford in addition to the
requirements set forth in Subsection E, where needed to assure
compliance with the performance standards in § 250-8.
G. Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid for a
period of 180 days, or the length of the building permit or other
construction authorizations, whichever is longer, from the date of
issuance. The Village of Waterford may extend the period one or more
times for up to an additional 180 days. The Village of Waterford may
require additional BMPs as a condition of the extension if they are
necessary to meet the requirements of this article.
H. Maintenance. The responsible party throughout the duration of the
construction activities shall maintain all BMPs necessary to meet the
requirements of this article until the site has undergone final
stabilization.
A. Erosion and sediment control plan.
(1) An erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared and
submitted to the Village of Waterford.
(2) The erosion and sediment control plan shall be designed to meet
the performance standards in § 250-8 and other requirements of
this article.
(3) The erosion and sediment control plan shall address pollution
caused by soil erosion and sedimentation during construction and
up to final stabilization of the site. The erosion and sediment
control plan shall include, at a minimum, the following items:
(a) The name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the
site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant,
together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at
such firm. The application shall also include start and end
dates for construction.
§ 250-9 WATERFORD CODE § 250-10
250:812
(b) Description of the site and nature of the construction activity,
including representation of the limits of land disturbance on a
United States Geological Service 7.5 minute series topographic
map.
(c) A sequence of construction of the development site, including
stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities,
infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and
landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on
which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure
of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary
erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of
permanent vegetation.
(d) Estimates of the total area of the site and the total area of the
site that is expected to be disturbed by construction activities.
(e) Estimates, including calculations, if any, of the runoff
coefficient of the site before and after construction activities
are completed.
(f) Calculations to show the expected percent reduction in the
average annual sediment load carried in runoff as compared to
no sediment or erosion controls.
(g) Existing data describing the surface soil as well as subsoils.
(h) Depth to groundwater, as indicated by Natural Resources
Conservation Service soil information where available.
(i) Name of the immediate named receiving water from the United
States Geological Service 7.5 minute series topographic maps.
(4) The erosion and sediment control plan shall include a site map. The
site map shall include the following items and shall be at a scale not
greater than 100 feet per inch and at a contour interval not to
exceed two feet.
(a) Existing topography, vegetative cover, natural and engineered
drainage systems, roads and surface waters. Lakes, streams,
wetlands, channels, ditches and other watercourses on and
immediately adjacent to the site shall be shown. Any identified
one-hundred-year floodplains, flood fringes and floodways shall
also be shown.
(b) Boundaries of the construction site.
(c) Drainage patterns and approximate slopes anticipated after
major grading activities.
(d) Areas of soil disturbance.
§ 250-10 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-10
250:813
(e) Location of major structural and nonstructural controls
identified in the plan.
(f) Location of areas where stabilization practices will be
employed.
(g) Areas which will be vegetated following construction.
(h) Aerial extent of wetland acreage on the site and locations
where stormwater is discharged to a surface water or wetland.
(i) Locations of all surface waters and wetlands within one mile of
the construction site.
(j) An alphanumeric or equivalent grid overlying the entire
construction site map.
(5) Each erosion and sediment control plan shall include a description
of appropriate controls and measures that will be performed at the
site to prevent pollutants from reaching waters of the state. The
plan shall clearly describe the appropriate control measures for
each major activity and the timing during the construction process
that the measures will be implemented. The description of erosion
controls shall include, when appropriate, the following minimum
requirements:
(a) Description of interim and permanent stabilization practices,
including a practice implementation schedule. Site plans shall
ensure that existing vegetation is preserved where attainable
and that disturbed portions of the site are stabilized.
(b) Description of structural practices to divert flow away from
exposed soils, store flows or otherwise limit runoff and the
discharge of pollutants from the site. Unless otherwise
specifically approved in writing by the Village of Waterford,
structural measures shall be installed on upland soils.
(c) Management of overland flow at all sites, unless otherwise
controlled by outfall controls.
(d) Trapping of sediment in channelized flow.
(e) Staging construction to limit bare areas subject to erosion.
(f) Protection of downslope drainage inlets where they occur.
(g) Minimization of tracking at all sites.
(h) Clean up of off-site sediment deposits.
(i) Proper disposal of building and waste materials at all sites.
(j) Stabilization of drainage ways.
(k) Control of soil erosion from dirt stockpiles.
§ 250-10 WATERFORD CODE § 250-10
250:814
§ 250-11. Fee schedule.
The fees referred to in other sections of this article shall be established
by the Village of Waterford and may from time to time be modified by
resolution. A schedule of the fees established by the Village of Waterford
shall be available for review in the Village Hall. Where the review and
inspection is part of a developer's agreement pursuant to Chapter 235,
Subdivision of Land, the permit fee may be waived but the applicant shall
be liable for the engineer's costs for review and inspection.
§ 250-12. Inspection.
If land-disturbing construction activities are being carried out without a
permit required by this article, the Village of Waterford may enter the land
pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stat. §§ 66.0119(1), (2), and (3).
§ 250-13. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(l) Installation of permanent stabilization practices as soon as
possible after final grading.
(m) Minimization of dust to the maximum extent practicable.
(6) The erosion and sediment control plan shall require that velocity
dissipation devices be placed at discharge locations and along the
length of any outfall channel, as necessary, to provide a nonerosive
flow from the structure to a watercourse so that the natural
physical and biological characteristics and functions are
maintained and protected.
B. Erosion and sediment control plan statement. For each construction
site identified under § 250-5A(3), an erosion and sediment control plan
statement shall be prepared. This statement shall be submitted to the
Village of Waterford. The control plan statement shall briefly describe
the site, including a site map. Further, it shall also include the best
management practices that will be used to meet the requirements of
the article, including the site development schedule.
C. Amendments. The applicant shall amend the plan if any of the following
occur:
(1) There is a change in design, construction, operation or
maintenance at the site which has the reasonable potential for the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the state and which has not
otherwise been addressed in the plan.
(2) The actions required by the plan fail to reduce the impacts of
pollutants carried by construction site runoff.
(3) The Village of Waterford notifies the applicant of changes needed in
the plan.
§ 250-10 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-13
250:815
§ 250-14. Appeals.
A. The Village of Waterford may post a stop-work order if any of the
following occurs:
(1) Any land-disturbing construction activity regulated under this
article is being undertaken without a permit.
(2) The erosion and sediment control plan is not being implemented in
a good faith manner.
(3) The conditions of the permit are not being met.
B. If the responsible party does not cease activity as required in a stopwork
order posted under this section or fails to comply with the erosion
and sediment control plan or permit conditions, the Village of Waterford
may revoke the permit.
C. If the responsible party, where no permit has been issued, does not
cease the activity after being notified by the Village of Waterford, or if a
responsible party violates a stop-work order posted under Subsection
A, the Village of Waterford may request the Village Attorney to obtain a
cease and desist order in any court with jurisdiction.
D. The Village of Waterford may retract the stop-work order issued under
Subsection A or the permit revocation under Subsection B.
E. After posting a stop-work order under Subsection A, the Village of
Waterford may issue a notice of intent to the responsible party of its
intent to perform work necessary to comply with this article. The
Village of Waterford may go on the land and commence the work after
issuing the notice of intent. The costs of the work performed under this
subsection by the Village of Waterford, plus interest at the rate
authorized by Village of Waterford, shall be billed to the responsible
party. In the event a responsible party fails to pay the amount due, the
Clerk shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect as a special
charge or special assessment against the property pursuant to Wis.
Stat. § 66.0627 or Subch. VII of Wis. Stat. ch. 66.
F. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject
to a forfeiture of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 and the costs
of prosecution for each violation. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
G. Compliance with the provisions of this article may also be enforced by
injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to
prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting to
injunction proceedings.
A. Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals created pursuant to § 245-54 of
the Municipal Code of the Village of Waterford, pursuant to Wis. Stat.
§ 61.354(4)(b):
§ 250-13 WATERFORD CODE § 250-14
250:816
(1) Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error
in any order, decision or determination made by the Village of
Waterford in administering this article except for cease and desist
orders obtained under § 250-13A;
(2) Upon appeal, the Board may authorize variances from the
provisions of this article which are not contrary to the public
interest and where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of the article will result in
unnecessary hardship; and
(3) Shall use the rules, procedures, duties and powers authorized by
statute in hearing and deciding appeals and authorizing variances.
B. Who may appeal. Appeals to the Board may be taken by any aggrieved
person or by any office, department, board, or bureau of the Village of
Waterford affected by any decision of the Village of Waterford.
§ 250-14 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-14
250:817

ARTICLE III
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Zoning
§ 250-15. Authority.
§ 250-16. Findings of fact.
The Village Board finds that uncontrolled, post-construction runoff has a
significant impact upon water resources and the health, safety and general
welfare of the community and diminishes the public enjoyment and use of
natural resources. Specifically, uncontrolled post-construction runoff can:
A. This article is adopted by the Village of Waterford under the authority
granted by Wis. Stat. § 61.354. This article supersedes all provisions of
any ordinance previously enacted under Wis. Stat. § 61.35 that relates
to stormwater management regulations. Except as otherwise specified
in Wis. Stat. § 61.354, Wis. Stat. § 61.35 applies to this article and to
any amendments to this article.
B. The provisions of this article are deemed not to limit any other lawful
regulatory powers of the Village of Waterford.
C. The Village Board hereby designates the Village of Waterford to
administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
D. The requirements of this article do not preempt more stringent
stormwater management requirements that may be imposed by any of
the following:
(1) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules,
permits or approvals, including those authorized under Wis. Stat.
§§ 281.16 and 283.33.
(2) Targeted nonagricultural performance standards promulgated in
rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under
Wis. Admin. Code s. NR 151.004.
(3) Village of Waterford approved or adopted stormwater management
plans for specific areas or watersheds.
A. Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion,
increasing streambed scour, diminishing groundwater recharge,
diminishing stream base flows and increasing stream temperature.
B. Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life,
recreational and water supply uses by increasing pollutant loading of
sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals, bacteria,
pathogens and other urban pollutants.
C. Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by
increasing pollutant loads.
D. Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading.
§ 250-15 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-16
250:819
§ 250-17. Purpose and intent.
§ 250-18. Applicability and jurisdiction.
E. Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by
overtaxing storm sewers, drainage ways, and other minor drainage
facilities.
F. Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by
increasing major flood peaks and volumes.
G. Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence
and levels of flooding.
A. Purpose. The general purpose of this article is to establish long-term,
post-construction runoff management requirements that will diminish
the threats to public health, safety, welfare and the aquatic
environment. Specific purposes are to:
(1) Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions.
(2) Prevent and control the adverse effects of stormwater; prevent and
control soil erosion; prevent and control water pollution; protect
spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites,
placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and
scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth.
(3) Control exceedance of the safe capacity of existing drainage
facilities and receiving water bodies; prevent undue channel
erosion; control increases in the scouring and transportation of
particulate matter; and prevent conditions that endanger
downstream property.
B. Intent. It is the intent of the Village Board that this article regulates
post-construction stormwater discharges to waters of the state. This
article may be applied on a site-by-site basis. The Village Board
recognizes, however, that the preferred method of achieving the
stormwater performance standards set forth in this article is through
the preparation and implementation of comprehensive, systems-level
stormwater management plans that cover hydrologic units, such as
watersheds, on a municipal and regional scale. Such plans may
prescribe regional stormwater devices, practices or systems, any of
which may be designed to treat runoff from more than one site prior to
discharge to waters of the state. Where such plans are in conformance
with the performance standards developed under Wis. Stat. § 281.16
for regional stormwater management measures and have been
approved by the Village Board, it is the intent of this article that the
approved plan be used to identify post-construction management
measures acceptable for the community.
A. Applicability.
§ 250-16 WATERFORD CODE § 250-18
250:820
§ 250-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
(1) Where not otherwise limited by law, this article applies after final
stabilization to a site of land-disturbing construction activity
meeting any of the criteria in this Subsection A(1), unless the site is
otherwise exempt under Subsection A(2):
(a) A post-development construction site that has one or more
acres of land-disturbing construction activity.
(2) A site that meets any of the criteria in this Subsection A(2) is
exempt from the requirements of this article:
(a) A redevelopment post-construction site with no increase in
exposed impervious surface area.
(b) A post-construction site with less than 10% connected
imperviousness based on complete development of the postconstruction
site, provided the cumulative area of all parking
lots and rooftops is less than one acre.
(c) Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices.
(d) Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities.
(e) Routine maintenance for project sites under five acres of land
disturbance if performed to maintain the original line and
grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility.
(f) Underground utility construction such as water, sewer and
fiberoptic lines. This exemption does not apply to the
construction of any aboveground structures associated with
utility construction.
(3) Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in Subsection A(1),
this article applies to a post-construction site of any size that, in the
opinion of the Village of Waterford, is likely to result in runoff that
exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or
receiving body of water, that causes undue channel erosion, that
increases water pollution by scouring or the transportation of
particulate matter or that endangers property or public safety.
B. Jurisdiction. This article applies to post-construction sites within the
boundaries and jurisdiction of the Village of Waterford.
C. Exclusions. This article is not applicable to activities conducted by a
state agency, as defined under Wis. Stat. § 227.01(1), but also including
the office of District Attorney, which is subject to the state plan
promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered into under
Wis. Stat. § 281.33(2).
§ 250-18 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-19
250:821
ADMINISTERING AUTHORITY — A governmental employee or designee, or
a regional planning commission empowered under Wis. Stat. § 61.354, that
is designated by the Village Board to administer this article.
AGRICULTURAL FACILITIES AND PRACTICES — Has the meaning given in
Wis. Stat. § 281.16.
AVERAGE ANNUAL RAINFALL — A calendar year of precipitation,
excluding snow, which is considered typical.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE or BMP — Structural or nonstructural
measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize
sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state.
BUSINESS DAY — A day the offices of the Village Hall is routinely and
customarily open for business.
CEASE AND DESIST ORDER — A court-issued order to halt land-disturbing
construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit.
COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM — A system for conveying both sanitary
sewage and stormwater runoff.
CONNECTED IMPERVIOUSNESS — An impervious surface that is directly
connected to a separate storm sewer or water of the state via an impervious
flow path.
DESIGN STORM — A hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a
specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency,
and total depth of rainfall.
DEVELOPMENT — Residential, commercial, industrial or institutional land
uses and associated roads.
DIVISION OF LAND — The creation from one parcel of two or more parcels
or building sites where such creation occurs at one time or through the
successive partition within a five-year period.
EFFECTIVE INFILTRATION AREA — The area of the infiltration system that
is used to infiltrate runoff and does not include the area used for site access,
berms or pretreatment.
EROSION — The process by which the land's surface is worn away by the
action of the wind, water, ice or gravity.
EXCEPTIONAL RESOURCE WATERS — Waters listed in Wis. Admin. Code
s. NR 102.11.
EXTRATERRITORIAL — The unincorporated area within 1.5 miles of the
Village.
FINAL STABILIZATION — That all land-disturbing construction activities at
the construction site have been completed and that a uniform, perennial,
vegetative cover has been established, with a density of at least 70% of
the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent
structures, or employment of equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
§ 250-19 WATERFORD CODE § 250-19
250:822
FINANCIAL GUARANTEE — A performance bond, maintenance bond,
surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantees submitted
to the Village of Waterford by the responsible party to assure that
requirements of the article are carried out in compliance with the
stormwater management plan.
GOVERNING BODY — The Village Board.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — An area that releases as runoff all or a large
portion of the precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen soil. Rooftops,
sidewalks, driveways, parking lots and streets are examples of areas that
typically are impervious.
IN-FILL AREA — An undeveloped area of land located within existing
development.
INFILTRATION — The entry of precipitation or runoff into or through the
soil.
INFILTRATION SYSTEM — A device or practice such as a basin, trench, rain
garden or swale designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but does not
include natural infiltration in pervious surfaces such as lawns, redirecting
of rooftop downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration from practices,
such as swales or roadside channels, designed for conveyance and pollutant
removal only.
KARST FEATURE — An area or surficial geologic feature subject to bedrock
dissolution so that it is likely to provide a conduit to groundwater, and may
include caves, enlarged fractures, mine features, exposed bedrock surfaces,
sinkholes, springs, seeps or swallets.
LAND-DISTURBING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any man-made
alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or
existing vegetative or nonvegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and
lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters
of the state. Land-disturbing construction activity includes clearing and
grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading
activities.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legal document that provides for longterm
maintenance of stormwater management practices.
MEP or MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — A level of implementing best
management practices in order to achieve a performance standard specified
in this article which takes into account the best available technology, cost
effectiveness and other competing issues such as human safety and welfare,
endangered and threatened resources, historic properties and geographic
features. MEP allows flexibility in the way to meet the performance
standards and may vary based on the performance standard and site
conditions.
NEW DEVELOPMENT — Development resulting from the conversion of
previously undeveloped land or agricultural land uses.
§ 250-19 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-19
250:823
OFF-SITE — Located outside the property boundary described in the permit
application.
ON-SITE — Located within the property boundary described in the permit
application.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — Has the meaning given in Wis. Admin.
Code s. NR 115.03(6).
OUTSTANDING RESOURCE WATERS — Waters listed in Wis. Admin. Code
s. NR 102.10.
PERCENT FINES — The percentage of a given sample of soil, which passes
through a #200 sieve.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A narrative or measurable number
specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
PERMIT — A written authorization made by the Village of Waterford to the
applicant to conduct land-disturbing construction activity or to discharge
post-construction runoff to waters of the state.
PERMIT ADMINISTRATION FEE — A sum of money paid to the Village
of Waterford by the permit applicant for the purpose of recouping the
expenses incurred by the authority in administering the permit.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — An area that releases as runoff a small portion of
the precipitation that falls on it. Lawns, gardens, parks, forests or other
similar vegetated areas are examples of surfaces that typically are pervious.
POLLUTANT — Has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. § 283.01(13).
POLLUTION — Has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. § 281.01(10).
POST-CONSTRUCTION SITE — A construction site following the completion
of land-disturbing construction activity and final site stabilization.
PRE-DEVELOPMENT CONDITION — The extent and distribution of land
cover types present before the initiation of land-disturbing construction
activity, assuming that all land uses prior to development activity are
managed in an environmentally sound manner.
PREVENTATIVE ACTION LIMIT — Has the meaning given in Wis. Admin.
Code s. NR 140.05(17).
REDEVELOPMENT — Areas where development is replacing older
development.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any entity holding fee title to the property or
other person contracted or obligated by other agreement to implement and
maintain post-construction stormwater BMPs.
RUNOFF — Stormwater or precipitation, including rain, snow or ice melt or
similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER — A conveyance or system of conveyances,
including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutter,
ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all of the
following criteria:
§ 250-19 WATERFORD CODE § 250-19
250:824
SITE — The entire area included in the legal description of the land on
which the land-disturbing construction activity occurred.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued by the Village of Waterford which
requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A comprehensive plan designed
to reduce the flow rate, runoff volume, and discharge of pollutants from
stormwater after the site has under gone final stabilization following
completion of the construction activity.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM PLAN — A comprehensive plan
designed to reduce the discharge of runoff and pollutants from hydrologic
units on a regional or municipal scale.
TECHNICAL STANDARD — A document that specifies design, predicted
performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material,
device or method.
TOP OF THE CHANNEL — An edge, or point on the landscape, landward
from the ordinary high-water mark of a surface water of the state, where
the slope of the land begins to be less than 12% continually for at least 50
feet. If the slope of the land is 12% or less continually for the initial 50 feet,
landward from the ordinary high-water mark, the top of the channel is the
ordinary high-water mark.
TR-55 — The United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service), Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Second Edition, Technical Release 55,
June 1986.
TYPE II DISTRIBUTION — A rainfall type curve as established in the United
States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Technical
Paper 149, published 1973. Rainfall depths shall be consistent with
Technical Report 40, Rainfall Frequency in the Southeastern Wisconsin
Region, SEWRPC, April, 2000.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Has the meaning given in Wis. Stat.
§ 281.01(18).
§ 250-20. Technical standards.
The following methods shall be used in designing and meeting the
performance standards for the stormwater management plan:
A. Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff.
B. Is not part of a combined sewer system.
C. Is not draining to a stormwater treatment device or system.
D. Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
A. Technical standards identified, developed or disseminated by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under Subchapter V of
Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 151.
§ 250-19 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-20
250:825
§ 250-21. Performance standards.
B. Where technical standards have not been identified or developed by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, other technical standards
may be used, provided that the methods have been approved by the
Village of Waterford.
C. Technical engineering standards administered and/or approved by the
Village of Waterford.
D. Technical standards described in The Wisconsin Stormwater Manual,
WDNR for Wet Detention Basins.
E. In this article, the following year and location has been selected as
average annual rainfall: Milwaukee 1969 (March 28 through December
6).
A. Responsible party. The responsible party shall implement a postconstruction
stormwater management plan that incorporates the
requirements of this section.
B. Plan. A written stormwater management plan in accordance with
§ 250-23 shall be developed and implemented for each postconstruction
site.
C. Requirements. The plan required under Subsection B shall include the
following:
(1) Total suspended solids. BMPs shall be designed, installed and
maintained to control total suspended solids carried in runoff from
the post-construction site as follows:
(a) For new development, by design, reduce, to the maximum
extent practicable, the total suspended solids load by 80%,
based on the average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff
management controls. No person shall be required to exceed
an 80% total suspended solids reduction to meet the
requirements of this subsection.
(b) For redevelopment, by design, reduce, to the maximum extent
practicable, the total suspended solids load by 40%, based on
the average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff
management controls. No person shall be required to exceed a
forty-percent total suspended solids reduction to meet the
requirements of this subsection.
(c) For in-fill development under five acres that occurs within 10
years after October 1, 2002, by design, reduce, to the
maximum extent practicable, the total suspended solids load
by 40%, based on an average annual rainfall, as compared to
no runoff management controls. No person shall be required to
§ 250-20 WATERFORD CODE § 250-21
250:826
exceed a forty-percent total suspended solids reduction to
meet the requirements of this subsection.
(d) For in-fill development that occurs 10 or more years after
October 1, 2002, by design, reduce, to the maximum extent
practicable, the total suspended solids load by 80%, based on
an average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff
management controls. No person shall be required to exceed
an eighty-percent total suspended solids reduction to meet the
requirements of this subsection.
(e) Notwithstanding Subsection C(1)(a) to (d), if the design cannot
achieve the applicable total suspended solids reduction
specified, the stormwater management plan shall include a
written and site-specific explanation why that level of
reduction is not attained, and the total suspended solids load
shall be reduced to the maximum extent practicable.
(2) Peak discharge.
(a) By design, stormwater management practices shall be
employed to reduce the twenty-four-hour, post-development
runoff rate to the twenty-four-hour, pre-development runoff
rate for all storm events. Pre-development conditions shall
assume "good hydrologic conditions" for appropriate land
covers as identified in TR-55 or an equivalent methodology. The
meaning of "hydrologic soil group" and "runoff curve number"
are as determined in TR-55. However, when pre-development
land cover is cropland, rather than using TR-55 values for
cropland, the runoff curve numbers in Table 1 shall be used.
Table 1 — Maximum Pre-Development Runoff Curve
Numbers for Cropland Areas
Hydrologic Soil Group A B C D
Runoff Curve Number 56 70 79 83
(b) By design, stormwater management practices shall be
employed to meet peak discharge requirements of Village
adopted stormwater management plans for specific areas or
watersheds where applicable.
(c) This Subsection C(2) of the section does not apply to any of the
following:
[1] A redevelopment post-construction site, if the impervious
surface area of the redevelopment is not increased from
existing conditions.
[2] An in-fill development area less than five acres, unless
determined otherwise by the Village per § 250-18A(3).
§ 250-21 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-21
250:827
(3) Infiltration. BMPs shall be designed, installed, and maintained to
infiltrate runoff to the maximum extent practicable in accordance
with the following, except as provided in Subsection C(3)(e)
through (g).
(a) For residential developments one of the following shall be met:
[1] Infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the postdevelopment
infiltration volume shall be at least 90% of
the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an
average annual rainfall. However, when designing
appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement,
no more than 1% of the project site is required as an
effective infiltration area.
[2] Infiltrate 25% of the post-development runoff from the
two-year, twenty-four-hour design storm with a Type II
distribution. Separate curve numbers for pervious and
impervious surfaces shall be used to calculate runoff
volumes and not composite curve numbers as defined in
TR-55. However, when designing appropriate infiltration
systems to meet this requirement, no more than 1% of the
project site is required as an effective infiltration area.
(b) For nonresidential development, including commercial,
industrial and institutional development, one of the following
shall be met:
[1] Infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the postdevelopment
infiltration volume shall be at least 60% of
the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an
average annual rainfall. However, when designing
appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement,
no more than 2% of the project site is required as an
effective infiltration area.
[2] Infiltrate 10% of the runoff from the two-year, twenty-fourhour
design storm with a Type II distribution. Separate
curve numbers for pervious and impervious surfaces shall
be used to calculate runoff volumes, and not composite
curve numbers as defined in TR-55. However, when
designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this
requirement, no more than 2% of the project site is
required as an effective infiltration area.
(c) Pre-development condition shall be the same as in Subsection
C(2).
(d) Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for
parking lot runoff and for runoff from new road construction in
commercial, industrial and institutional areas that will enter an
infiltration system. The pretreatment shall be designed to
§ 250-21 WATERFORD CODE § 250-21
250:828
protect the infiltration system from clogging prior to scheduled
maintenance and to protect groundwater quality in accordance
with Subsection C(3)(g). Pretreatment options may include,
but are not limited to, oil/grease separation, sedimentation,
biofiltration, filtration, swales or filter strips.
(e) Exclusions. The runoff from the following areas are prohibited
from meeting the requirements of this Subsection C(3):
[1] Areas associated with Tier 1 industrial facilities identified
in Wis. Admin. Code s. NR 216.21(2)(a), including storage,
loading, rooftop and parking.
[2] Storage and loading areas of Tier 2 industrial facilities
identified in Wis. Admin. Code s. NR 216.21(2)(b).
[3] Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas.
[4] Areas within 1,000 feet upgradient or within 100 feet
downgradient of karst features.
[5] Areas with less than three feet separation distance from
the bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of
seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock, except
this Subsection C(3)(e)[5] does not prohibit infiltration of
roof runoff.
[6] Areas with runoff from industrial, commercial and
institutional parking lots and roads and residential arterial
roads with less than five feet separation distance from the
bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of
seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock.
[7] Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as
specified in Wis. Admin. Code s. NR 811.16(4), or within
100 feet of a private well as specified in Wis. Admin. Code
s. NR 812.08(4), for runoff infiltrated from commercial,
industrial and institutional land uses or regional devices
for residential development.
[8] Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in Wis.
Admin. Code s. NR 720.03(2), are present in the soil
through which infiltration will occur.
[9] Any area where the soil does not exhibit one of the
following soil characteristics between the bottom of the
infiltration system and the seasonal high groundwater and
top of bedrock: at least a three-foot soil layer with 20%
fines or greater; or at least a five-foot soil layer with 10%
fines or greater. This does not apply where the soil medium
within the infiltration system provides an equivalent level
§ 250-21 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-21
250:829
of protection. This Subsection C(3)(e)[9] does not prohibit
infiltration of roof runoff.
(f) Exemptions. The following are not required to meet the
requirements of this Subsection C(3):
[1] Areas where the infiltration rate of the soil is less than 0.6
inch/hour measured at the site.
[2] Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet
for commercial and industrial development.
[3] Redevelopment post-construction sites.
[4] In-fill development areas less than five acres.
[5] Infiltration areas during periods when the soil on the site is
frozen.
[6] Roads in commercial, industrial and institutional land
uses, and arterial residential roads.
(g) Groundwater protection.
[1] Infiltration systems designed in accordance with this
Subsection C(3) shall, to the extent technically and
economically feasible, minimize the level of pollutants
infiltrating to groundwater and shall maintain compliance
with the preventative action limit at a point of standards
application in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR
140. However, if site-specific information indicates that
compliance with a preventative action limit is not
achievable, the infiltration BMP may not be installed or
shall be modified to prevent infiltration to the maximum
extent practicable.
[2] Notwithstanding Subsection C(3)(g)[1], the discharge
from BMPs shall remain below the enforcement standard
at the point of standards application.
(4) Protective areas. The following are minimum standards for
protective areas, however, the Village may impose greater limits
based on site-specific information.
(a) "Protective area" means an area of land that commences at the
top of the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the
delineated boundary of wetlands, and that is the greatest of the
following widths, as measured horizontally from the top of the
channel or delineated wetland boundary to the closest
impervious surface. However, in this subsection, "protective
area" does not include any area of land adjacent to any stream
enclosed within a pipe or culvert, such that runoff cannot enter
the enclosure at this location.
§ 250-21 WATERFORD CODE § 250-21
250:830
[1] For outstanding resource waters and exceptional resource
waters, and for wetlands in areas of special natural
resources interest as specified in Wis. Admin. Code s. NR
103.04: 75 feet.
[2] For perennial and intermittent streams identified on a
United States geological survey 7.5-minute series
topographic map, or a county soil survey map, whichever
is more current: 50 feet.
[3] For lakes: 50 feet.
[4] For highly susceptible wetlands: 50 feet. Highly
susceptible wetlands include the following types: fens,
sedge meadows, bogs, low prairies, conifer swamps, shrub
swamps, other forested wetlands, fresh wet meadows,
shallow marshes, deep marshes and seasonally flooded
basins. Wetland boundary delineations shall be made in
accordance with Wis. Admin. Code s. NR 103.08(1m). This
subsection does not apply to wetlands that have been
completely filled in accordance with all applicable state
and federal regulations. The protective area for wetlands
that have been partially filled in accordance with all
applicable state and federal regulations shall be measured
from the wetland boundary delineation after fill has been
placed.
[5] For less susceptible wetlands: 10% of the average wetland
width, but no less than 10 feet nor more than 30 feet. Less
susceptible wetlands include degraded wetlands
dominated by invasive species such as reed canary grass.
[6] In Subsection C(4)(a)[1], [4] and [5], determinations of the
extent of the protective area adjacent to wetlands shall be
made on the basis of the sensitivity and runoff
susceptibility of the wetland in accordance with the
standards and criteria in Wis. Admin. Code s. NR 103.03.
[7] For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas
greater than 130 acres: 20 feet.
(b) This Subsection C(4) applies to post-construction sites located
within a protective area, except those areas exempted
pursuant to Subsection C(4)(d).
(c) The following requirements shall be met:
[1] Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective
area to the maximum extent practicable. The stormwater
management plan shall contain a written site-specific
explanation for any parts of the protective area that are
disturbed during construction.
§ 250-21 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-21
250:831
[2] Where land-disturbing construction activity occurs within
a protective area, and where no impervious surface is
present, adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover
of 70% or greater shall be established and maintained. The
adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover shall be
sufficient to provide for bank stability, maintenance of fish
habitat and filtering of pollutants from upslope overland
flow areas under sheet flow conditions. Nonvegetative
materials, such as rock riprap, may be employed on the
bank as necessary to prevent erosion, such as on steep
slopes or where high-velocity flows occur.
[3] Best management practices such as filter strips, swales, or
wet detention basins, that are designed to control
pollutants from nonpoint sources may be located in the
protective area.
(d) This subsection does not apply to:
[1] Redevelopment post-construction sites, if meeting the
protective area standards is deemed impractical by the
Village.
[2] In-fill development areas less than five acres, if meeting
the protective area standards is deemed impractical by the
Village.
[3] Structures that cross or access surface waters such as
boat landings, bridges and culverts.
[4] Structures constructed in accordance with Wis. Stat.
§ 59.692(1v).
[5] Post-construction sites from which runoff does not enter
the protective area's surface water, except to the extent
that vegetative ground cover is necessary to maintain bank
stability and is deemed acceptable to the Village.
(5) Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Fueling and vehicle
maintenance areas shall, to the maximum extent practicable, have
BMPs designed, installed and maintained to reduce petroleum
within runoff, such that the runoff that enters waters of the state
contains no visible petroleum sheen.
(6) Swale treatment for transportation facilities.
(a) Applicability. Except as provided in Subsection C(6)(b),
transportation facilities that use swales for runoff conveyance
and pollutant removal meet all of the requirements of this
section, if the swales are designed to the maximum extent
practicable to do all of the following:
§ 250-21 WATERFORD CODE § 250-21
250:832
[1] Be vegetated. However, where appropriate, nonvegetative
measures may be employed to prevent erosion or provide
for runoff treatment, such as rock riprap stabilization or
check dams.
[2] Carry runoff through a swale for 200 feet or more in length
that is designed with a flow velocity no greater than 1.5
feet per second for the peak flow generated using either a
two-year, twenty-four-hour design storm or a two-year
storm with a duration equal to the time of concentration as
appropriate. If a swale of 200 feet in length cannot be
designed with a flow velocity of 1.5 feet per second or less,
then the flow velocity shall be reduced to the maximum
extent practicable.
(b) Exemptions. The Village of Waterford may, consistent with
water quality standards, require other provisions of this
section be met on a transportation facility with an average
daily travel of vehicles greater than 2,500 and where the initial
surface water of the state that the runoff directly enters is any
of the following:
[1] An outstanding resource water.
[2] An exceptional resource water.
[3] Waters listed in Section 303(d) of the Federal Clean Water
Act that are identified as impaired in whole or in part, due
to nonpoint source impacts.
[4] Waters where targeted performance standards are
developed under Wis. Admin. Code s. NR 151.004 to meet
water quality standards.
(7) Storm sewers and culverts.
(a) Storm sewers and culverts shall be designed for a ten-year
storm event as defined by the Southeastern Wisconsin
Planning Commission (SEWRPC).
(b) Storm sewers shall be designed to be self cleaning with a
minimum velocity of two feet/second and a maximum velocity
of 12 feet/second.
D. General considerations for on-site and off-site stormwater management
measures. The following considerations shall be observed in managing
runoff.
(1) Natural topography and land cover features such as natural swales,
natural depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity, and natural
groundwater recharge areas shall be preserved and used, to the
extent possible, to meet the requirements of this section.
§ 250-21 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-21
250:833
(2) Emergency overland flow routes for all stormwater facilities shall
be provided to prevent exceeding the safe capacity of downstream
drainage facilities and prevent endangerment of downstream
property or public safety.
E. Location and regional treatment option.
(1) All BMPs may be located on-site or off-site as part of a regional
stormwater device, practice or system.
(2) Post-construction runoff within a non-navigable surface water that
flows into a regional BMP, such as a wet detention pond, is not
required to meet the performance standards of this article. Postconstruction
BMPs may be located in non-navigable surface waters.
(3) Except as allowed under Subsection E(4), post-construction runoff
from new development shall meet the post-construction
performance standards prior to entering a navigable surface water.
(4) Post-construction runoff from any development within a navigable
surface water that flows into a BMP is not required to meet the
performance standards of this article if:
(a) The BMP was constructed prior to the effective date of this
article and the BMP either received a permit issued under Wis.
Stat. ch. 30, or the BMP did not require a Wis. Stat. ch. 30
permit; and
(b) The BMP is designed to provide runoff treatment from future
upland development.
(5) Runoff from existing development, redevelopment and in-fill areas
shall meet the post-construction performance standards in
accordance with this subsection.
(a) To the maximum extent practicable, BMPs shall be located to
treat runoff prior to discharge to navigable surface waters.
(b) Post-construction BMPs for such runoff may be located in a
navigable surface water if allowable under all other applicable
federal, state and local regulations such as Wis. Admin. Code
ch. NR 103 and Wis. Stat. ch. 30.
(6) The discharge of runoff from a BMP, such as a wet detention pond,
or after a series of such BMPs is subject to this chapter.
(7) The Village of Waterford may approve off-site management
measures provided that all of the following conditions are met:
(a) The Village of Waterford determines that the post-construction
runoff is covered by a stormwater management system plan
that is approved by the Village of Waterford and that contains
§ 250-21 WATERFORD CODE § 250-21
250:834
§ 250-22. Permitting requirements, procedures and fees.
management requirements consistent with the purpose and
intent of this article.
(b) The off-site facility meets all of the following conditions:
[1] The facility is in place.
[2] The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a
level of stormwater control equal to or greater than that
which would be afforded by on-site practices meeting the
performance standards of this article.
[3] The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its
long-term operation and maintenance.
(8) Where a regional treatment option exists such that the Village of
Waterford exempts the applicant from all or part of the minimum
on-site stormwater management requirements, the applicant shall
be required to pay a fee in an amount determined in negotiation
with the Village of Waterford. In determining the fee for postconstruction
runoff, the Village of Waterford shall consider an
equitable distribution of the cost for land, engineering design,
construction, and maintenance of the regional treatment option.
F. Alternate requirements. The Village of Waterford may establish
stormwater management requirements more stringent than those set
forth in this section if the Village of Waterford determines that an added
level of protection is needed to protect sensitive resources.
A. Permit required. No responsible party may undertake a land-disturbing
construction activity without receiving a post-construction runoff
permit from the Village of Waterford prior to commencing the proposed
activity.
B. Permit application and fees. Unless specifically excluded by this article,
any responsible party desiring a permit shall submit to the Village of
Waterford a permit application made on a form provided by the Village
of Waterford for that purpose.
(1) Unless otherwise excepted by this article, a permit application
must be accompanied by a stormwater management plan, a
maintenance agreement and a nonrefundable permit
administration fee.
(2) The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the
requirements of §§ 250-20 and 250-21, the maintenance agreement
shall be prepared to meet the requirements of § 250-24, the
financial guarantee shall meet the requirements of § 250-25, and
fees shall be those established by the Village of Waterford as set
forth in § 250-26.
§ 250-21 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-22
250:835
C. Review and approval of permit application. The Village of Waterford
shall review any permit application that is submitted with a stormwater
management plan, maintenance agreement, and the required fee. The
following approval procedure shall be used:
(1) Within 20 business days of the receipt of a complete permit
application, including all items as required by Subsection B, the
Village of Waterford shall inform the applicant whether the
application, plan and maintenance agreement are approved or
disapproved based on the requirements of this article.
(2) If the stormwater permit application, plan and maintenance
agreement are approved, or if an agreed-upon payment of fees in
lieu of stormwater management practices is made, the Village of
Waterford shall issue the permit.
(3) If the stormwater permit application, plan or maintenance
agreement is disapproved, the Village of Waterford shall detail in
writing the reasons for disapproval.
(4) The Village of Waterford may request additional information from
the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the Village of
Waterford shall have 20 business days from the date the additional
information is received to inform the applicant that the plan and
maintenance agreement are either approved or disapproved.
(5) Failure by the Village of Waterford to inform the permit applicant of
a decision within 30 business days of a required submittal shall be
deemed to mean approval of the submittal, and the applicant may
proceed as if a permit had been issued.
D. Permit requirements. All permits issued under this article shall be
subject to the following conditions, and holders of permits issued under
this article shall be deemed to have accepted these conditions. The
Village of Waterford may suspend or revoke a permit for violation of a
permit condition, following written notification of the responsible party.
An action by the Village of Waterford to suspend or revoke this permit
may be appealed in accordance with § 250-28.
(1) Compliance with this permit does not relieve the responsible party
of the responsibility to comply with other applicable federal, state,
and local laws and regulations.
(2) The responsible party shall design and install all structural and
nonstructural stormwater management measures in accordance
with the approved stormwater management plan and this permit.
(3) The responsible party shall notify the Village of Waterford at least
five business days before commencing any work in conjunction
with the stormwater management plan, and within five business
days upon completion of the stormwater management practices. If
required as a special condition under Subsection E, the responsible
§ 250-22 WATERFORD CODE § 250-22
250:836
party shall make additional notification according to a schedule set
forth by the Village of Waterford so that practice installations can
be inspected during construction.
(4) Practice installations required as part of this article shall be
certified "as built" by a licensed professional engineer. Completed
stormwater management practices must pass a final inspection by
the Village of Waterford or its designee to determine if they are in
accordance with the approved stormwater management plan and
article. The Village of Waterford or its designee shall notify the
responsible party in writing of any changes required in such
practices to bring them into compliance with the conditions of this
permit.
(5) The responsible party shall notify the Village of Waterford of any
significant modifications it intends to make to an approved
stormwater management plan. The Village of Waterford may
require that the proposed modifications be submitted for approval
prior to incorporation into the stormwater management plan and
execution by the responsible party.
(6) The responsible party shall maintain all stormwater management
practices in accordance with the stormwater management plan
until the practices either become the responsibility of the Village of
Waterford, or are transferred to subsequent private owners as
specified in the approved maintenance agreement.
(7) If the responsible party fails to maintain all stormwater
management practices, the Village of Waterford may perform any
work or operations necessary to bring stormwater management
measures into conformance with the approved stormwater
management plan, and make a special assessment or charge
against the property as authorized under Wis. Stat. § 66.0627 or
Subch. VII of Wis. Stat. ch. 66, or charge such costs against the
financial guarantee posted under § 250-25.
(8) If so directed by the Village of Waterford, the responsible party
shall repair, at the responsible party's own expense, all damage to
adjoining municipal facilities and drainage ways caused by runoff,
where such damage is caused by activities that are not in
compliance with the approved stormwater management plan.
(9) The responsible party shall permit property access to the Village of
Waterford or its designee for the purpose of inspecting the property
for compliance with the approved stormwater management plan
and this permit.
(10) Where site development or redevelopment involves changes in
direction, increases in peak rate and/or total volume of runoff from
a site, the Village of Waterford may require the responsible party to
make appropriate legal arrangements with affected property
§ 250-22 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-22
250:837
§ 250-23. Stormwater management plan.
owners concerning the prevention of endangerment to property or
public safety.
(11) The responsible party is subject to the enforcement actions and
penalties detailed in § 250-27, if the responsible party fails to
comply with the terms of this permit.
E. Permit conditions. Permits issued under this section may include
conditions established by the Village of Waterford in addition to the
requirements needed to meet the performance standards in § 250-21 or
a financial guarantee as provided for in § 250-25.
F. Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from
the date of issuance through the date the Village of Waterford notifies
the responsible party that all stormwater management practices have
passed the final inspection required under Subsection D(4).
A. Plan requirements. The stormwater management plan required under
§ 250-22B shall contain at a minimum the following information:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number for the following or their
designees: landowner; developer; project engineer for practice
design and certification; person(s) responsible for installation of
stormwater management practices; and person(s) responsible for
maintenance of stormwater management practices prior to the
transfer, if any, of maintenance responsibility to another party.
(2) A proper legal description of the property proposed to be
developed, referenced to the U.S. Public Land Survey system or to
block and lot numbers within a recorded land subdivision plat.
(3) Pre-development site conditions, including:
(a) One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 100 feet. The site maps shall show the following: site
location and legal property description; predominant soil types
and hydrologic soil groups; existing cover type and condition;
topographic contours of the site at a scale not to exceed 100
feet; topography and drainage network, including enough of
the contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto,
through, and from the site; watercourses that may affect or be
affected by runoff from the site; flow path and direction for all
stormwater conveyance sections; watershed boundaries used
in hydrology determinations to show compliance with
performance standards; lakes, streams, wetlands, channels,
ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent
to the site; limits of the one-hundred-year floodplain; location
of wells and wellhead protection areas covering the project
area and delineated pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code s. NR
811.16.
§ 250-22 WATERFORD CODE § 250-23
250:838
(b) Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to
show compliance with performance standards. All major
assumptions used in developing input parameters shall be
clearly stated. The geographic areas used in making the
calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required
map(s).
(4) Post-development site conditions, including:
(a) Explanation of the provisions to preserve and use natural
topography and land cover features to minimize changes in
peak flow runoff rates and volumes to surface waters and
wetlands.
(b) Explanation of any restrictions on stormwater management
measures in the development area imposed by wellhead
protection plans and subchapters.
(c) One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 100 feet showing the following: post-construction
pervious areas, including vegetative cover type and condition;
impervious surfaces, including all buildings, structures, and
pavement; post-construction topographic contours of the site
at a scale not to exceed 100 feet; post-construction drainage
network, including enough of the contiguous properties to
show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site;
locations and dimensions of drainage easements; locations of
maintenance easements specified in the maintenance
agreement; flow path and direction for all stormwater
conveyance sections; location and type of all stormwater
management conveyance and treatment practices, including
the on-site and off-site tributary drainage area; location and
type of conveyance system that will carry runoff from the
drainage and treatment practices to the nearest adequate
outlet such as a curbed street, storm drain, or natural drainage
way; watershed boundaries used in hydrology and pollutant
loading calculations and any changes to lakes, streams,
wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and
immediately adjacent to the site.
(d) Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to
show compliance with performance standards. The
computations shall be made for each discharge point in the
development, and the geographic areas used in making the
calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required
map(s).
(e) Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required for
the placement and design of stormwater management
measures; detailed drawings, including cross-sections and
§ 250-23 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-23
250:839
§ 250-24. Maintenance agreement.
profiles of all permanent stormwater conveyance and
treatment practices.
(5) Construction specifications, description and installation schedule
for the stormwater management practices needed to meet the
performance standards in § 250-21.
(6) A maintenance plan developed for the life of each stormwater
management practice, including the required maintenance
activities and maintenance activity schedule.
(7) Cost estimates for the construction, operation, and maintenance of
each stormwater management practice.
(8) Typed written narrative for BMP design(s), including a description
design procedures, software used and computer model schematics,
flow rates, design results, and any relative information or
assumptions used for the design.
(9) Other information requested in writing by the Village of Waterford
to determine compliance of the proposed stormwater management
measures with the provisions of this article.
(10) All site investigations, plans, designs, computations, and drawings
shall be certified by a licensed Wisconsin professional engineer to
be prepared in accordance with accepted engineering practice and
requirements of this article.
B. Alternate requirements. The Village of Waterford may prescribe
alternative submittal requirements for applicants seeking an exemption
to on-site stormwater management performance standards under
§ 250-21E.
A. Maintenance agreement required. The maintenance agreement
required under § 250-22B for stormwater management practices shall
be an agreement between the Village of Waterford and the responsible
party to provide for maintenance of stormwater practices beyond the
duration period of this permit. The maintenance agreement shall be
filed with the County Register of Deeds as a property deed restriction so
that it is binding upon all subsequent owners of the land served by the
stormwater management practices.
B. Agreement provisions. The maintenance agreement shall contain the
following information and provisions and be consistent with the
maintenance plan required by § 250-23A(6):
(1) Identification of the stormwater facilities and designation of the
drainage area served by the facilities.
§ 250-23 WATERFORD CODE § 250-24
250:840
§ 250-25. Financial guarantee.
(2) A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the
stormwater management system consistent with the stormwater
management plan required under § 250-22B.
(3) Identification of the responsible party(s), organization or city,
county, or village responsible for long-term inspection and
maintenance of the stormwater management practices identified in
the stormwater management plan required under § 250-22B.
(4) Requirement that the responsible party(s), organization or city,
county, or village shall maintain stormwater management practices
in accordance with the schedule included in Subsection B(2).
(5) Authorization for the Village of Waterford to access the property to
conduct inspections of stormwater management practices as
necessary to ascertain that the practices are being maintained and
operated in accordance with the agreement.
(6) Agreement that the party designated under Subsection B(3) as
responsible for long-term inspection and maintenance of the
stormwater management practices, if notified by the Village of
Waterford of maintenance problems which require correction,
undertake corrective within a reasonable time frame as set by the
Village of Waterford.
(7) Authorization of the Village of Waterford to perform the corrected
actions identified in the Village notification under Subsection B(6)
if the responsible party designated under Subsection B(3) does not
make the required corrections in the specified time period. The
Village of Waterford shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and
collect the money as a special charge against the property pursuant
to Wis. Stat. § 66.0627 or Subch. VII of Wis. Stat. ch. 66.
A. Establishment of the guarantee. The Village of Waterford may require
the submittal of a financial guarantee, the form and type of which shall
be acceptable to the Village of Waterford. The financial guarantee shall
be in an amount determined by the Village of Waterford to be the
estimated cost of construction and the estimated cost of maintenance of
the stormwater management practices during the period which the
designated party in the maintenance agreement has maintenance
responsibility. The financial guarantee shall give the Village of
Waterford the authorization to use the funds to complete the
stormwater management practices, or restore the project site as
deemed fit by the Village, if the responsible party defaults or does not
properly implement the approved stormwater management plan, upon
written notice to the responsible party by the administering authority
that the requirements of this article have not been met. Said financial
guarantee may be incorporated into the terms of a developer's
agreement under Chapter 235, Subdivision of Land.
§ 250-24 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-25
250:841
§ 250-26. Fee schedule.
The fees referred to in other sections of this article shall be established
by the Village of Waterford and may from time to time be modified by
resolution. A schedule of the fees established by the Village of Waterford
shall be available for review in the Village Hall. Where the review and
inspection is part of a developer's agreement pursuant to Chapter 235,
Subdivision of Land, the permit fee may be waived but the applicant shall
be liable for all related costs under the terms of the developer's agreement.
§ 250-27. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
B. Conditions for release. Conditions for the release of the financial
guarantee are as follows:
(1) The Village of Waterford shall release the portion of the financial
guarantee established under this section, less any costs incurred by
the Village of Waterford to complete installation of practices, upon
submission of "as built" plans by a licensed professional engineer.
The Village of Waterford may make provisions for a partial pro-rata
release of the financial guarantee based on the completion of
various development stages.
(2) The Village of Waterford shall release the portion of the financial
guarantee established under this section to assure maintenance of
stormwater practices, less any costs incurred by the Village of
Waterford, at such time that the responsibility for practice
maintenance is passed on to another entity via an approved
maintenance agreement.
A. Any land-disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff
initiated after the effective date of this article by any person, firm,
association, or corporation subject to the article provisions shall be
deemed a violation unless conducted in accordance with the
requirements of this article.
B. The Village of Waterford shall notify the responsible party by certified
mail of any noncomplying land-disturbing construction activity or postconstruction
runoff. The notice shall describe the nature of the
violation, remedial actions needed, a schedule of remedial action, and
additional enforcement action which may be taken.
C. Upon receipt of written notification from the Village of Waterford under
Subsection B, the responsible party shall correct work that does not
comply with the stormwater management plan or other provisions of
this permit. The responsible party shall make corrections as necessary
to meet the specifications and schedule set forth by the Village of
Waterford in the notice.
D. If the violations to a permit issued pursuant to this article are likely to
result in damage to properties, public facilities, or waters of the state,
§ 250-25 WATERFORD CODE § 250-27
250:842
§ 250-28. Appeals.
the Village of Waterford may enter the land and take emergency actions
necessary to prevent such damage. The costs incurred by the Village
of Waterford, plus interest and legal costs, shall be billed to the
responsible party.
E. The Village of Waterford is authorized to post a stop-work order on all
land-disturbing construction activity that is in violation of this article, or
to request the Village Attorney to obtain a cease and desist order in any
court with jurisdiction.
F. The Village of Waterford may revoke a permit issued under this article
for noncompliance with article provisions.
G. Any permit revocation, stop-work order, or cease and desist order shall
remain in effect unless retracted by the Village of Waterford or by a
court with jurisdiction.
H. The Village of Waterford is authorized to refer any violation of this
article, or of a stop-work order or cease and desist order issued
pursuant to this article, to the Village Attorney for the commencement
of further legal proceedings in any court with jurisdiction.
I. Any person, firm, association, or corporation who does not comply with
the provisions of this article shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less
than $500 or more than $1,000 per offense, together with the costs of
prosecution. Each day that the violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense.
J. Compliance with the provisions of this article may also be enforced by
injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to
prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting to
injunctional proceedings.
K. When the Village of Waterford determines that the holder of a permit
issued pursuant to this article has failed to follow practices set forth in
the stormwater management plan, or has failed to comply with
schedules set forth in said stormwater management plan, the Village of
Waterford or a party designated by the Village of Waterford may enter
upon the land and perform the work or other operations necessary to
bring the condition of said lands into conformance with requirements of
the approved plan. The Village of Waterford shall keep a detailed
accounting of the costs and expenses of performing this work. These
costs and expenses shall be deducted from any financial security posted
pursuant to § 250-25 of this article. Where such a security has not been
established, or where such a security is insufficient to cover these costs,
the costs and expenses shall be entered on the tax roll as a special
charge against the property and collected with any other taxes levied
thereon for the year in which the work is completed.
§ 250-27 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-28
250:843
A. Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals created pursuant to § 245-54 of
the Municipal Code of the Village of Waterford, pursuant to Wis. Stat.
§ 61.354(4)(b), shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that
there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the
Village of Waterford in administering this article. The Board shall also
use the rules, procedures, duties, and powers authorized by statute in
hearing and deciding appeals. Upon appeal, the Board may authorize
variances from the provisions of this article that are not contrary to the
public interest, and where owing to special conditions a literal
enforcement of the article will result in unnecessary hardship.
B. Who may appeal. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any
aggrieved person or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the
Village of Waterford affected by any decision of the Village of Waterford.
§ 250-28 WATERFORD CODE § 250-28
250:844
Chapter 255
SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boating — See Ch. 93.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 235.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
Erosion control and stormwater
management— See Ch. 250.
§ 250-28 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 250-28
250:845

ARTICLE I
General
§ 255-1. Statutory authorization, findings of fact; statement of
purpose. [Amended 6-9-2014 by Ord. No. 617]
§ 255-2. Compliance required; conflict with other laws;
interpretation; annexed areas. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No.
489; 6-9-2014 by Ord. No. 617]
A. Statutory authorization. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the
authorization in §§ 61.35, 61.351, 61.353, 62.23 and 281.31, Wis. Stats.
B. Findings of fact and purpose. Uncontrolled use of the shorelandwetlands
and shorelands, and pollution of the navigable waters of the
Village would adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience
and general welfare and impair the tax base. The Legislature of
Wisconsin has delegated responsibility to all municipalities to:
(1) Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare.
(2) Maintain the storm- and floodwater storage capacity of wetlands.
(3) Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which
filter or store sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic
compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters.
(4) Protect fish, their spawning grounds, other aquatic life and wildlife
by preserving wetlands and other aquatic habitat.
(5) Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area.
(6) Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal
of natural shoreland cover and controlling shoreland-wetland
excavation, filling and other earth-moving activities.
A. Compliance. The use of wetlands and shorelands, and the alteration of
wetlands within the shoreland area of the Village, shall be in full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable local,
state or federal regulations. The provisions of this chapter are in
addition to, and not instead of, the underlying zoning for the land and
the Floodplain Zoning in Chapter 256. (See § 255-8 of this chapter for
the standards applicable to nonconforming uses.) All permitted
development shall require the issuance of a zoning permit, unless
otherwise expressly excluded by a provision of this chapter.
B. Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically
exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns and counties are required to
comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits. State
agencies are required to comply if § 13.48(13), Wis. Stats. applies. The
construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways
§ 255-1 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 255-2
250:847
§ 255-3. Definitions.
and bridges by the Department of Transportation may be exempt
pursuant to § 30.2022, Wis. Stats.
C. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
(1) This chapter supersedes all the provisions of any Village zoning
ordinance enacted under §§ 61.35, 62.23 or 87.30, Wis. Stats.,
which relate to shorelands in the Shoreland District and shorelandwetlands,
except that where another Village ordinance is more
restrictive, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to
the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
(2) This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However,
where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of
this chapter shall prevail.
D. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, shall be
liberally construed in favor of the Village and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin
Statutes. Where a shoreland-wetland provision of this chapter is
required by a standard in Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 117, and where the
provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the
Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 117 standards in effect on the date of the
adoption of or most recent text amendment to this chapter.
E. Severability. Should any portion of this chapter be declared invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of
this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
A. For the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter, the terms
or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: Words used in the
present tense include the future; words in the singular number include
the plural number; and words in the plural number include the singular
number. The word "shall" is mandatory, not permissive. All distances,
unless otherwise specified, shall be measured horizontally.
B. The following terms used in this chapter have the following meanings:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A detached subordinate
structure or a use which is clearly incidental to and customarily found
in connection with the principal structure or use to which it is related
and which is located on the same lot as that of the principal structure
or use.
BOATHOUSE — As defined in Wis. Stat. § 30.01(1d); a structure used
for the storage of watercraft and associated materials, which has one
or more walls or sides.
§ 255-2 WATERFORD CODE § 255-3
250:848
CLASS 2 PUBLIC NOTICE — Publication of a public hearing notice
under Wis. Stat. ch. 985, in a newspaper of circulation in the affected
area. Publication is required on two consecutive weeks, the last at least
seven days prior to the hearing.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which is permitted by this chapter,
provided that certain conditions specified in this chapter are met and
that a permit is granted by the Board of Appeals or, where appropriate,
the Plan Commission designated by the Village Board.
DEPARTMENT — The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings,
structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or
substantial alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures;
the placement of buildings or structures; ditching, lagooning, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and the
deposition or extraction of earthen materials.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — One or more artificial ditches, tile drains or
similar devices which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey
it to a point of discharge.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL FACILITY — Any facility, temporary or
permanent, which is reasonably expected to abate, reduce or aid in
the prevention, measurement, control or monitoring of noise, air or
water pollutants, solid waste and thermal pollution, radiation or other
pollutants, including facilities installed principally to supplement or
to replace existing property or equipment not meeting or allegedly
not meeting acceptable pollution control standards or which are to be
supplemented or replaced by other pollution control facilities.
FIXED HOUSEBOAT — As defined in Wis. Stat. § 30.01(1r); a structure
not actually used for navigation which extends beyond the ordinary
high watermark of a navigable waterway and is retained in place either
by cables to the shoreline or by anchors or spudpoles attached to the
bed of the waterway.
NAVIGABLE WATERS —
Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within
Wisconsin and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other
waters within the territorial limits of this state, including the
Wisconsin portion of boundary waters which are navigable under
the laws of this state. Under Wis. Stat. § 281.31, notwithstanding
any other provision of law or administrative rule promulgated
thereunder, shoreland ordinances required under Wis. Stat.
§ 61.351 or 62.231 and Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 117 do not apply
to lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches if:
Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or
river.
(a)
(1)
§ 255-3 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 255-3
250:849
ORDINARY HIGH WATERMARK — The point on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention
of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other
easily recognized characteristics.
PLAN COMMISSION — The Village Plan Commission created under
Wis. Stat. § 62.23(1); a commission of the Village Board which acts on
matters pertaining to planning and zoning.
SHORELANDS — Lands within the following distances from the
ordinary high watermark of navigable waters: 1,000 feet from a lake,
pond or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream or to the landward
side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
SHORELAND-WETLAND DISTRICT — The zoning district created in
this chapter, comprised of shorelands that are designated as wetlands
on the wetland inventory maps which have been adopted and made a
part of this chapter.
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP — That circumstance where special
conditions which were not self-created affect a particular property
and make strict conformity with restrictions governing area, setbacks,
frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable
in light of the purposes of this chapter.
VARIANCE — An authorization granted by the Board of Appeals to
construct or alter a building or structure in a manner that deviates from
the dimensional standards of this chapter.
WETLAND ALTERATION — Any filling, flooding, draining, dredging,
ditching, tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization
measures or dike and dam construction in a wetland area.
WETLANDS — Those areas where water is at, near or above the land
surface long enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and
which have soils indicative of wet conditions.
Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands
were not navigable streams before ditching.
(b)
(c) Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use.
Wisconsin's Supreme Court has declared navigable bodies of water
that have a bed differentiated from adjacent uplands and levels or
flow sufficient to support navigation by a recreational craft of the
shallowest draft on an annually recurring basis [Muench v. Public
Service Commission, 261 Wis. 492 (1952) and DeGaynor and Co.
Inc. v. Department of Natural Resources, 70 Wis.2d 936 (1975)].
For example, a stream which is navigable by skiff or canoe during
normal spring high water is navigable, in fact, under the laws of
this state though it may be dry during other seasons.
(2)
§ 255-3 WATERFORD CODE § 255-4
250:850
§ 255-4. Zoning maps. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489;
6-9-2014 by Ord. No. 617]
The following maps are hereby adopted and made part of this chapter and
are on file in the office of the Village Clerk:
A. Wisconsin Wetland maps shown on the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources (DNR) Surface Water Data Viewer at
http://dnr.wi.gov/topic/surfacewater/swdv/ (as may be amended from
time to time) in effect on the date of the application for a permit under
this Chapter.
B. United States Geological Survey (USGS) 7.5-minute quadrangle maps
that cover the Village of Waterford.
C. Zoning and Floodplain Maps of the Village of Waterford adopted in
Chapters 245 and 256 in effect on the date of application for a permit
hereunder.
D. Chapter 255 Appendix A, Lands Subject to Shoreland Zoning District
Regulations.159
159. Editor's Note: Appendix A of Chapter 255 is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 255-4 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 255-4
250:851

ARTICLE II
Shoreland-Wetland District
§ 255-5. District boundaries.
A. The Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District includes all wetlands in the
Village which are five acres or more and are shown on the final wetland
inventory map that has been adopted and made a part of this chapter
and which are:
(1) Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high watermark of navigable
lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages in the Village
shall be presumed to be navigable if they are shown on the United
States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base
maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part
of this chapter.
(2) Within 300 feet of the ordinary high watermark of navigable rivers
or streams or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever
distance is greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be
navigable if they are designated as either continuous or
intermittent waterways on the United States Geological Survey
quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have been
incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter.
Floodplain zoning maps adopted in § 256-1E(2) shall be used to
determine the extent of floodplain areas. [Amended 12-11-2006
by Ord. No. 505]
B. Determinations of navigability and ordinary high watermark location
shall initially be made by the Zoning Administrator. When questions
arise, the Zoning Administrator shall contact the appropriate district
office of the Department for a final determination of navigability or
ordinary high watermark.
C. When an apparent discrepancy exists between the Shoreland-Wetland
District boundary shown on the official zoning maps and actual field
conditions at the time the maps were adopted, the Zoning
Administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the
Department to determine if the Shoreland-Wetland District boundary as
mapped is in error. If Department staff concur with the Zoning
Administrator that a particular area was incorrectly mapped as a
wetland, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to
immediately grant or deny a zoning permit in accordance with the
regulations applicable to the correct zoning district. In order to correct
wetland mapping errors or acknowledge exempted wetlands
designated in Subsections D and E, the Zoning Administrator shall be
responsible for initiating a map amendment within a reasonable period.
D. Wetlands which are filled prior to March 19, 1990, the date on which
the Village received final wetland inventory maps, in a manner which
§ 255-5 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 255-5
250:853
§ 255-6. Permitted uses. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 489]
The following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of Wis. Stat.
Chs. 30 and 31, and the provisions of other local, state and federal laws, if
applicable, and as may be further limited by Wis. Admin. Code s. NR 117.05:
affects their wetland characteristics to the extent that the area can no
longer be defined as wetland are not subject to this chapter.
E. Wetlands located between the original ordinary high watermark and a
bulkhead line established prior to May 7, 1982, under Wis. Stat.
§ 30.11, are not subject to this chapter.
A. Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning
permit, provided that no wetland alteration occurs:
(1) Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling and
boating.
(2) The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild
rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not
injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops.
(3) The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and
harvesting of timber.
(4) The pasturing of livestock.
(5) The cultivation of agricultural crops.
(6) The construction and maintenance of duck blinds.
(7) The maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems to restore
preexisting levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of
filling necessary to dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the
filling is otherwise permissible and that dredged spoil is placed on
existing spoil banks where possible.
B. Uses which require the issuance of a zoning permit under other
chapters of this Code and which may involve wetland alterations only to
the extent specifically provided in Wis. Admin. Code s. NR 117.05:
(1) The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of
livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary for
such construction or maintenance.
(2) The construction and maintenance of piers, docks, walkways,
observation decks and trail bridges built on pilings, including
limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or
maintenance.
(3) The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of
draining lands outside the Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District,
provided that such installation or maintenance is done in a manner
§ 255-5 WATERFORD CODE § 255-6
250:854
designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions
of the shoreland-wetland listed in § 255-17C of this chapter.
(4) The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of
existing highways and bridges, including limited excavating and
filling necessary for such maintenance, repair, replacement or
reconstruction.
C. Uses which are allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit
and which may include wetland alterations only to the extent
specifically provided below and only to the extent specifically provided
in Wis. Admin. Code s. NR 117.05:
(1) The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for
the continuity of the Village street system, the provision of
essential utility and emergency services or to provide access to
uses permitted under this section, provided that:
(a) The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the
wetland.
(b) The road is designed and constructed to minimize adverse
impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in
§ 255-17C of this chapter.
(c) The road is designed and constructed with the minimum crosssectional
area practical to serve the intended use.
(d) Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate
area of the roadbed only.
(e) Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction
or maintenance of the road.
(2) The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings,
provided that:
(a) The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted
in the Shoreland-Wetland District or for the raising of
waterfowl, minnows or other wetland or aquatic animals.
(b) The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside
the wetland.
(c) The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area.
(d) Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide
structural support for the building is allowed.
(3) The establishment and development of public and private parks
and recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural
and scientific areas, game refuges and closed areas, fish and
wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms,
wildlife preserves and public boat launching ramps, provided that:
§ 255-6 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 255-6
250:855
§ 255-7. Prohibited uses.
(a) Any private development allowed under this subsection shall
be used exclusively for the permitted purpose.
(b) Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the
development of public boat launching ramps, swimming
beaches or the construction of park shelters or similar
structures is allowed.
(c) The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the
uses permitted under this subsection are allowed only where
such construction and maintenance meets the criteria in
Subsection C(1).
(d) Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and
wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal
farms and wildlife preserves shall be for the purpose of
improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland
values.
(4) The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone
transmission lines, water and gas distribution lines, sewage
collection lines and related facilities and the construction and
maintenance of railroad lines, provided that:
(a) The utility transmission and distribution facilities and railroad
lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the
wetland.
(b) Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such
construction or maintenance is allowed.
(c) Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner
designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural
functions of the wetland listed in § 255-17C of this chapter.
A. Any use not listed in § 255-6 is prohibited, unless the wetland or a
portion of the wetland has been rezoned by amendment of this chapter
in accordance with § 255-17 of this chapter.
B. The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or
placement of a boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary high
watermark of any navigable waters are prohibited.
§ 255-6 WATERFORD CODE § 255-7
250:856
ARTICLE III
Shoreland District
§ 255-7.1. Shoreland district regulations. [Added 6-9-2014 by Ord.
No. 617]
A. Applicability. The Shoreland Zoning District regulations do not apply to
the lands lying within the corporate boundaries of the Village of
Waterford as it existed on May 7, 1982. The remainder of the Village is
subject to the shoreland regulations set forth in this chapter, including
lands annexed after the date of the adoption of these provisions.
B. District boundaries. See Appendix A to this chapter.160 The Shoreland
District areas regulated by this chapter include all the lands (referred
to herein as shorelands) in the Village of Waterford which are not
located in the area of land legally described as the Corporate Limits of
the Village of Waterford as the Village existed on May 7, 1982 (by
reference, the complete legal description of the boundaries on that date
may be found in the Annexation and Plat Map and Corporate Limits
filed with the Secretary of State on January 23, 1984), and are:
(1) Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high watermark of navigable
lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages shall be
presumed to be navigable if they are listed in the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources Surface Water Data viewer
available on the DNR website, or are shown on United States
Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps; or
(2) Within 300 feet of the ordinary high watermark of navigable rivers
or streams, or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever
distance is greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be
navigable if they are designated as continuous waterways or
intermittent waterways on United States Geological Survey
quadrangle maps. Flood hazard boundary maps, flood insurance
rate maps, flood boundary-floodway maps, county soil survey maps
or other existing county floodplain zoning maps shall be used to
delineate floodplain areas.
(3) Determinations of navigability and ordinary high watermark
location shall initially be made by the Zoning Administrator. When
questions arise, the Zoning Administrator shall contact the
appropriate district office of the Department for a final
determination of navigability or ordinary high watermark.
(4) Pursuant to § 61.353(7), Wis. Stats., this Shoreland Zoning District
does not apply to lands adjacent to an artificially constructed
drainage ditch, pond, or retention basin if the drainage ditch, pond
or retention basin is not hydrologically connected to a natural
navigable water body.
160. Editor's Note: Appendix A of Chapter 255 is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 255-7.1 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 255-7.1
250:857
C. Effect of existing land division, sanitary, zoning and other regulations.
The lands within the Shoreland Zoning District are subject to all
applicable provisions of this Municipal Code. If the provisions of this
chapter are more restrictive than other regulations in the Code, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. If land subject to this chapter is
also regulated by Chapter 256, Floodplain Zoning, the more restrictive
uses, area and other regulations of Chapter 256 apply.
D. Setbacks from the water; lot coverage.
(1) Principal building setbacks.
(a) All principal buildings shall be set back at least 50 feet from
the ordinary high watermark.
(b) Adjustment of shore yards. A setback less than that required by
Subsection D(1)(a) may be allowed in residence districts if all
of the following apply:
[1] The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or
parcel of land that is immediately adjacent on each side to
a lot or parcel of land containing a principal building; and
[2] The principal building is constructed or placed within a
distance equal to the average setback of the principal
building on the adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary
high watermark, whichever distance is greater.
(2) Boathouses. Boathouses accessory to permitted and conditional
uses may be located within a shoreyard, but:
(a) Boathouses shall not be closer than 20 feet to the average
annual high water elevation of a stream, lake, river, pond or
wetland; shall not exceed one boathouse per shoreyard lot;
shall not exceed 15 feet in height above the ordinary high
watermark; shall not exceed 250 square feet in horizontal area
covered; and shall not be closer than 15 feet to any side lot
line. In no case, however, shall boathouses be allowed to
project beyond the shoreline. Boathouses shall be constructed
in such a manner as to orient the main opening of the boat
house toward the body of water and shall be used strictly for
the storage of boats and water-related recreational
accessories. The use of a boat house for human habitation is
prohibited. No plumbing, heating or cooking faculties may be
provided in or for a boathouse.
(b) Boathouses shall not be located in the vegetative buffer zone
required in Subsection E.
(3) Other accessory buildings. One accessory building may be placed
in each shoreyard, but:
§ 255-7.1 WATERFORD CODE § 255-7.1
250:858
(a) Shall not be placed in the vegetative buffer zone required in
Subsection E;
(b) Shall not be placed closer than 35 feet to the average annual
high watermark;
(c) Shall be limited in size to 200 square feet or less in area
(except uncovered pools), must be at least 10 feet from the
principal structure, must be at least three feet from any side lot
line, may not be used for human habitation or animal shelter,
and may not be greater than 15 feet in height.
(4) Accessory structures meeting the size requirements of the
underlying zoning district and the provisions for accessory
structures in Chapter 245 may be placed in side and street yards
provided that the setbacks for those yards are met.
(5) Lot coverage. Lots should be configured to minimize the amount of
impervious surfaces. Maximum lot coverage equals 30% (includes
buildings and other impervious surfaces).
(6) Pyramiding.
(a) Pyramiding means the act of obtaining or providing access to
public bodies of water across private lots or lands in a manner
that increases the number of families that have access to that
water to a degree greater than what would occur with
individual riparian owners having individual lots fronting on
the water. The effect of pyramiding is to funnel backlot
development from offshore lots or residences via a narrow
parcel of land to provide access to the water. Publicly owned
access points or publicly owned easements do not fall within
this definition.
(b) No pyramiding is allowed on any lands fronting a public body
of water except as may be specifically permitted accessory to a
marina or resort or which may be allowed under the terms of a
conditional use permit or which may be approved as part of a
subdivision plat review.
E. Vegetative buffer zone. Pursuant to § 61.353(3), Wis. Stats., the
landowner must maintain a vegetative buffer zone, as follows:
(1) A person who owns shoreland property that contains vegetation
must maintain that vegetation in a vegetative buffer zone along the
entire shoreline of the property and extending 35 feet inland from
the ordinary high watermark of the navigable water, except as
provided in Subsection E(2).
(2) If the vegetation in a vegetative buffer zone contains invasive
species or dead or diseased vegetation, the owner of the shoreland
property may remove the vegetation, except that if the owner
§ 255-7.1 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 255-7.1
250:859
removes all of the vegetation in the vegetative buffer zone, the
owner shall establish a vegetative buffer zone with new vegetation.
(3) A person who is required to maintain or establish a vegetative
buffer zone under Subsection E(1) may remove all of the vegetation
in a part of that zone in order to establish a viewing or access
corridor that is no greater than 30 feet wide for every 100 feet of
shoreline frontage.
§ 255-7.1 WATERFORD CODE § 255-7.1
250:860
ARTICLE IV
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
§ 255-8. Nonconforming structures and uses. [Amended 6-9-2014
by Ord. No. 617]
A. Nonconforming uses in Shoreland-Wetland and Shoreland Districts.
The lawful use of a building, structure or property which existed at the
time this chapter or an applicable amendment to this chapter took
effect and which is not in conformity with the provisions of the chapter,
including the routine maintenance of such a building or structure, may
be continued, subject to the following conditions, exceptions and
regulations:
(1) If a nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months,
any future use of the building, structure or property shall conform
to this chapter.
(2) Any legal nonconforming use of property that does not involve the
use of a structure which existed at the time of the adoption or
subsequent amendment of this chapter may be continued although
such use does not conform with the provisions of the chapter;
however, such nonconforming use may not be extended.
(3) The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses which
extend beyond the ordinary high watermark of any navigable
waters shall be required to comply with § 30.121, Wis. Stats.
(4) Uses which are nuisances shall not be permitted to continue as
nonconforming uses.
(5) Except as otherwise set forth by law, as set forth in § 62.23(7)(h),
Wis. Stats. the total structural repairs or alterations in a building,
premises, structure, or fixture that does not conform to the use
provisions of this chapter shall not during its life exceed 50% of the
assessed value of the building, premises, structure, or fixture
unless permanently changed to a conforming use. If the
nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 12 months, any
future use of the building, premises, structure, or fixture shall
conform to this chapter.
B. Nonconforming structures in the Shoreland-Wetland District. Repair
and expansion of existing structures are permitted. Notwithstanding
§ 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats., the repair, reconstruction, renovation,
remodeling or expansion of a nonconforming structure in existence on
the effective date of this chapter or any environmental control facility in
existence on the effective date of this chapter is permitted. The
provisions of Chapter 256, Floodplain Zoning, are applicable and
additional restrictions may apply.
C. Nonconforming structures in the shoreland district.
§ 255-8 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 255-8
250:861
(1) Maintenance and repair.
(a) The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses that
extend waterward beyond the ordinary high watermark of any
navigable waters shall comply with the requirements of
§ 30.121, Wis. Stats.
(b) Maintenance and repair of nonconforming principal structure.
An existing principal structure that was lawfully placed when
constructed but that does not comply with the required
building setback under § 255-7.1 may be maintained and
repaired within its existing building envelope. Maintenance
and repair includes such activities as interior remodeling,
plumbing, insulation, and replacement of windows, doors,
siding, or roof.
(c) Vertical expansion of nonconforming principal structure. An
existing principal structure that was lawfully placed when
constructed but that does not comply with the required
building setback under § 255-7.1 may be expanded vertically,
provided that all of the following requirements are met:
[1] The use of the structure is a permitted or conditional use
in the underlying district.
[2] The existing principal structure is at least 35 feet from the
ordinary high watermark.
[3] Vertical expansion is limited to the height of 35 feet,
provided that a vertical expansion will not be permitted if
it will block sunlight to a neighboring property.
(2) Expansion of nonconforming principal structure beyond setback.
An existing principal structure that was lawfully placed when
constructed but that does not comply with the required building
setback under § 255-7.1 may be expanded horizontally or landward
provided that the expanded area meets the building setback
requirements in § 255-7.1 and that all other provisions of the
shoreland requirements ordinance are met.
(3) Replacement or relocation of nonconforming principal structure.
An existing principal structure that was lawfully placed when
constructed but that does not comply with the required building
setback under § 255-7.1 may be replaced or relocated on the
property provided all of the following requirements are met:
(a) The use of the structure is a permitted or conditional use in the
underlying district.
(b) The existing principal structure is at least 35 feet from the
ordinary high watermark.
§ 255-8 WATERFORD CODE § 255-8
250:862
(c) No portion of the replaced or relocated structure is located any
closer to the ordinary high water mark than the closest point of
the existing principal structure.
(d) The Village determines that no other location is available on
the property to build a principal structure of a comparable size
to the structure proposed for replacement or relocation that
will result in compliance with the shoreland setback
requirement in § 255-7.1.
D. Certain structures may be replaced, repaired and maintained.
(1) Pursuant to § 62.23(7)(hc), Wis. Stats., nonconforming structures
that are destroyed by violent wind, vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow,
mold, or infestation on or after March 2, 2006, may be restored to
the size (or a larger size if necessary to comply with state or federal
regulations), location and use that it had immediately before the
damage or destruction occurred.
(2) Repair and maintenance of certain nonconforming structures.
(a) In this subsection:
[1] Development regulations means the part of this chapter
that applies to elements including setback, height, lot
coverage, and side yard.
[2] Nonconforming structure means a dwelling or other
building that existed lawfully before the current zoning
ordinance was enacted or amended, but that does not
conform with one or more of the development regulations
in this chapter.
(b) Pursuant to § 62.23(7)(hb), Wis. Stats., this chapter does not
prohibit, or limit based on cost, the repair, maintenance,
renovation, or remodeling of a nonconforming structure.
§ 255-8 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 255-8
250:863

ARTICLE V
Administration
§ 255-9. Zoning Administrator.
The Zoning Administrator appointed pursuant to Chapter 245 of this
Municipal Code is appointed Zoning Administrator for the purpose of
administering and enforcing this chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall
have the following powers and duties:
§ 255-10. Zoning permits.
A. Advise applicants as to the provisions of this chapter and assist them in
preparing permit applications and appeal forms.
B. Issue permits and certificates of compliance and inspect properties for
compliance with this chapter.
C. Keep records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved
and other official actions.
D. Have access to any structure or premises between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m. for the purpose of performing these duties.
E. Submit copies of decisions on variances, conditional use permits,
appeals for a map or text interpretation and map or text amendments
within 10 days after they are granted or denied to the appropriate
district office of the Department.
F. Investigate and report violations of this chapter to the appropriate
Village planning agency and the District Attorney, Corporation Counsel
or Village Attorney.
A. When required. Unless another section of this chapter specifically
exempts certain types of development from this requirement, a zoning
permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Administrator before any new
development, as defined in § 255-3B, or any change in the use of an
existing building or structure is initiated.
B. Application. An application for a zoning permit shall be made to the
Zoning Administrator upon forms furnished by the Village and shall
include, for the purpose of proper enforcement of these regulations, the
following information:
(1) General information.
(a) Name, address and telephone number of applicant, property
owner and contractor, where applicable.
(b) Legal description of the property and a general description of
the proposed use or development.
(c) Whether or not a private water supply is to be installed.
§ 255-9 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 255-10
250:865
§ 255-11. Certificates of compliance.
(2) Site development plan. The site development plan shall be
submitted as a part of the permit application and shall contain the
following information drawn to scale:
(a) Dimensions and area of the lot.
(b) Location of any structures, with distances measured from the
lot lines and center line of all abutting streets or highways.
(c) Description of any existing on-site sewage systems or any
existing or proposed private water supply systems.
(d) Location of the ordinary high watermark of any abutting
navigable waterways.
(e) Boundaries of all wetlands.
(f) Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and
vegetative cover.
(g) Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property as
determined from floodplain zoning maps.
(h) Location of existing or future access roads.
(i) Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland
alteration.
C. Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this chapter shall
expire six months from the date of issuance.
A. Except where no zoning permit or conditional use permit is required, no
land shall be occupied or used and no building which is hereafter
constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced shall be
occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the Zoning
Administrator, subject to the following provisions:
(1) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or
premises or part thereof and the proposed use thereof conform to
the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a zoning or conditional use permit.
(3) The certificate of compliance shall be issued within 10 days after
notification of the completion of the work specified in the zoning or
conditional use permit, providing the building or premises and
proposed use thereof conforms with all the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 255-10 WATERFORD CODE § 255-11
250:866
§ 255-12. Conditional use permits.
§ 255-13. Fees.
§ 255-14. Recording.
Where a zoning permit or conditional use permit is approved, an
appropriate record shall be made by the Zoning Administrator of the land
use and structures permitted.
B. The Zoning Administrator may issue a temporary certificate of
compliance for a building, premises or part thereof, pursuant to rules
and regulations established by the Village Board.
C. Upon written request from the owner, the Zoning Administrator shall
issue a certificate of compliance for any building or premises existing at
the time of ordinance adoption, certifying after inspection the extent
and type of use made of the building or premises and whether or not
such use conforms to the provisions of this chapter.
A. Application. Any use listed as a conditional use in this chapter shall be
permitted only after an application has been submitted to the Zoning
Administrator and a conditional use permit has been granted by the
Board of Appeals following the procedures in § 255-10 of this chapter.
B. Conditions. Upon consideration of the permit application and the
standards applicable to the conditional uses designated in § 255-6 of
this chapter, the Board of Appeals shall attach such conditions to a
conditional use permit, in addition to those required elsewhere in this
chapter, as are necessary to further the purposes of this chapter as
listed in § 255-1. Such conditions may include specifications for, without
limitation because of specific enumeration: type of shore cover; erosion
controls; increased setbacks; specific water supply facilities;
landscaping and planting screens; period of operation; operational
control; sureties; deed restrictions; location of piers, docks, parking
areas and signs; and type of construction. To secure information upon
which to base its determination, the Board of Appeals may require the
applicant to furnish, in addition to the information required for a zoning
permit, other pertinent information which is necessary to determine if
the proposed use is consistent with the purpose of this chapter.
A. The fees for proceedings held pursuant to this chapter are as found in
the Fee Schedule established by the Village and as amended from time
to time.161
B. In addition to the above fees, the applicant shall pay the cost of legal
publication.
161. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 255-11 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 255-15
250:867
§ 255-15. Revocation of permits.
Where the conditions of a zoning permit or conditional use permit are
violated, the permit shall be revoked by the Board of Appeals.
§ 255-16. Appeals.
The Board of Appeals established under Chapter 245 of this Municipal Code
shall hear appeals under Wis. Stat. § 62.23.
A. Powers and duties. The Board of Appeals:
(1) Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.
(2) Shall hear and decide applications for conditional use permits.
(3) May authorize, upon appeal, a variance from the dimensional
standards of this chapter where an applicant convincingly
demonstrates that:
(a) Literal enforcement of the terms of this chapter will result in
unnecessary hardship for the applicant.
(b) The hardship is due to special conditions unique to the
property and is not self-created or based solely on economic
gain or loss.
(c) Such variance is not contrary to the public interest as
expressed by the purpose of this chapter.
(d) Such variance will not grant or increase any use of property
which is prohibited in the zoning district.
B. Appeals to the Board. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by
any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of
the community affected by any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Zoning Administrator or other administrative
official. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time as
provided by the rules of the Board by filing with the official whose
decision is in question and with the Board of Appeals a notice of appeal
specifying the reasons for the appeal. The Zoning Administrator or
other official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the Board
all the papers constituting the record on the matter appealed.
C. Public hearings.
(1) Before making a decision on an appeal or application, the Board of
Appeals shall, within a reasonable period of time, hold a public
hearing. The Board shall give public notice of the hearing by
publishing a Class 2 notice under Wis. Stat. ch. 985, specifying the
§ 255-15 WATERFORD CODE § 255-16
250:868
§ 255-17. Amendments.
The Village Board may alter, supplement or change the district boundaries
and the regulations contained in this chapter in accordance with the
requirements of Wis. Stat. § 62.23(7)(d)2, Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 117, and
the following:
date, time and place of the hearing and the matters to come before
the Board. At the public hearing, any party may present testimony
in person, by agent or attorney.
(2) A copy of such notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and
the appropriate district office of the Department at least 10 days
prior to all public hearings on issues involving shoreland-wetland
zoning.
D. Decisions.
(1) The final disposition of an appeal or application for a conditional
use permit before the Board of Appeals shall be in the form of a
written decision, made within a reasonable time after the public
hearing and signed by the Board Chairperson. Such decision shall
state the specific facts which are the basis of the Board's
determination and shall either affirm, reverse or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed in whole or in
part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or prosecution or
grant the application for a conditional use.
(2) A copy of such decision shall be mailed to the parties in interest and
the appropriate district office of the Department within 10 days
after the decision is issued.
A. A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted to
the appropriate district office of the Department within five days of the
submission of the proposed amendment to the Village Plan Commission.
B. All proposed text and map amendments to the shoreland-wetland
zoning regulations shall be referred to the Village Plan Commission,
and a public hearing shall be held after Class 2 notice as required by
Wis. Stat. § 62.23(7)(d)2. The appropriate district office of the
Department shall be provided with written notice of the public hearing
at least 10 days prior to such hearing.
C. In order to ensure that this chapter will remain consistent with the
shoreland protection objectives of Wis. Stat. § 281.31, the Village Board
may not rezone a wetland in a Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District or any
portion thereof where the proposed rezoning may result in a significant
adverse impact upon any of the following wetland functions:
(1) Storm- and floodwater storage capacity.
§ 255-16 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 255-17
250:869
§ 255-18. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Any development, building or structure or accessory building or structure
constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced or any use
or accessory use established after the effective date of this chapter in
(2) Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of
groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a
wetland to another area or the flow of groundwater through a
wetland.
(3) Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or
organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable
waters.
(4) Shoreline protection against erosion.
(5) Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds.
(6) Wildlife habitat.
(7) Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including
scarce wetland types and habitat of endangered species.
D. Where the district office of the Department determines that a proposed
rezoning may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria
listed in Subsection C, the Department shall so notify the Village of its
determination either prior to or during the public hearing held on the
proposed amendment.
E. The appropriate district office of the Department shall be provided
with:
(1) A copy of the recommendation and report, if any, of the Plan
Commission on a proposed text or map amendment within 10 days
after the submission of those recommendations to the Village
Board.
(2) Written notice of the action on the proposed text or map
amendment within 10 days after the action is taken.
F. If the Department notifies the Plan Commission in writing that a
proposed amendment may have a significant adverse impact upon any
of the criteria listed in Subsection C, that proposed amendment, if
approved by the Village Board, shall not become effective until more
than 30 days have elapsed since written notice of Village approval was
mailed to the Department as required by § 255-9E. If, within the thirtyday
period, the Department notifies the Village that the Department
intends to adopt a superseding shoreland-wetland zoning ordinance for
the Village as provided by Wis. Stat. §§ 62.231(6) and 61.351(6), the
proposed amendment shall not become effective until the ordinance
adoption procedure under Wis. Stat. § 62.231(6) or 61.351(6) is
completed or otherwise terminated.
§ 255-17 WATERFORD CODE § 255-18
250:870
violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person, including building
contractors or their agents, shall be deemed a violation. The Zoning
Administrator shall refer violations to the Plan Commission and Village
Attorney, who shall prosecute such violations. Any person who violates or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of this Municipal Code.
§ 255-18 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 255-18
250:871
Chapter 256
FLOODPLAIN ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management — See Ch. 17.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 235.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
Erosion control and stormwater
management — See Ch. 250.
Shoreland-wetland zoning — See Ch. 255.
§ 256-1. Statutory authorization, findings of fact, statement of
purpose, title and general provisions.
A. Statutory authorization. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the
authorization in Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35 and 62.23 and the requirements in
Wis. Stats. § 87.30.
B. Finding of fact. Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains
and rivers of this municipality would impair the public health, safety,
convenience, general welfare and tax base.
C. Statement of purpose. This chapter is intended to regulate floodplain
development to:
(1) Protect life, health and property;
(2) Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood-control projects;
(3) Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the
taxpayers;
(4) Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
(6) Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the
floodplain;
(7) Discourage the victimization of unwary land and home buyers;
(8) Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage
and result in conflicts between property owners; and
(9) Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable
alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the
floodplain.
D. Title. This chapter shall be known as the "Floodplain Zoning Chapter for
the Village of Waterford, Wisconsin."
E. General provisions.
§ 255-18 WATERFORD CODE § 256-1
250:872
(1) Areas to be regulated. This chapter regulates all areas that would
be covered by the regional flood or base flood as shown on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or other maps approved by DNR.
Base flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and are shown as AE, A1-30, and AH
Zones on the FIRM. Other regulatory zones are displayed as A and
AO Zones. Regional flood elevations (RFE) may be derived from
other studies. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the
most-restrictive information shall apply.
(2) Official maps and revisions. The boundaries of all floodplain
districts are designated as A, AE, AH, AO or A1-30 on the maps
based on the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) listed below. Any change
to the base flood elevations (BFE) or any changes to the boundaries
of the floodplain or floodway in the FIS or on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by the DNR and
FEMA through the letter of map change process (see § 256-8,
Amendments) before it is effective. No changes to RFEs on non-
FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These
maps and revisions are on file in the office of the Village Clerk of
the Village of Waterford. If more than one map or revision is
referenced, the most-restrictive information shall apply.
(a) Official maps: based on the FIS.
[1] Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), panel numbers:
55101C0036D, dated May 2, 2012, 55101C0038D, dated
May 2, 2012, 55101C0039D, dated May 2, 2012,
55101C0151D, dated May 2, 2012, with corresponding
profiles that are based on the Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
dated May 2, 2012, Volume Nos. 55101CV001A and
55101CV002A; approved by: the DNR and FEMA.
[2] (Reserved)
(b) Official maps: based on other studies. Any maps referenced in
this section must be approved by the DNR and be more
restrictive than those based on the FIS at the site of the
proposed development. (Letters of map amendment not
required to be adopted by ordinance shall be adopted by
resolution of the Village Board.) [Amended 6-24-2013 by
Ord. No. 607]
[1] Letter of map revision: LOMR-F, Case No. 13-05-0290A,
issued 10-18-2012 (Panel No. 55101C0039D) approved by:
the DNR and FEMA.
[2] Waterford Dam (One-Hundred-Year) Dam Failure
Floodplain Map (titled "Hydraulic Shadow Map Waterford
Dam"), dated January 29, 2013. Map prepared by GRAEFUSA,
Inc., for Racine County, Wisconsin. Dam Failure
§ 256-1 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 256-1
250:873
Analysis (DFA) prepared by GRAEF-USA, Inc., dated
February, 2013. DNR approval of DFA dated March 7,
2013.
[a] Areas shown as "floodway" on the Dam Failure
Floodplain Map are required to abide by the Floodway
District regulations of this chapter. Areas outside of
the floodway and shown as part of the hydraulic
shadow are required to abide by the Floodplain Fringe
Overlay District regulations of this chapter; provided,
however, that for lands that lie within the dam failure
hydraulic shadow but outside of the FEMA floodplain
shown on the maps adopted in this chapter, no input
from FEMA and no letter of map change from FEMA is
required. If a letter of map change for a property has
been approved by FEMA, the DNR and the Village, the
Village shall consider that LOMC in making
determinations under this section.
(3) Establishment of floodplain zoning districts. The regional floodplain
areas are divided into three districts as follows:
(a) The Floodway District (FW) is the channel of a river or stream
and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel
required to carry the regional floodwaters and contained
within AE Zones as shown on the FIRM.
(b) The Floodplain Fringe Overlay District (FFO) is that portion
between the regional flood limits and the floodway and
displayed as AE Zones on the FIRM.
(c) The General Floodplain District (GFP) is those areas that may
be covered by floodwater during the regional flood and do not
have a BFE or floodway boundary determined, including A, AH
and AO Zones on the FIRM.
(4) Locating floodplain boundaries. Discrepancies between boundaries
on the official Floodplain Zoning Map and actual field conditions
shall be resolved using the criteria in Subsection E(4)(a) or (b)
below. If a significant difference exists, the map shall be amended
according to § 256-8, Amendments. The Zoning Administrator can
rely on a boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny
a land use floodplain land use permit, whether or not a map
amendment is required. The Zoning Administrator shall be
responsible for documenting actual predevelopment field
conditions and the basis upon which the district boundary was
determined and for initiating any map amendments required under
this section. Disputes between the Zoning Administrator and an
applicant over the district boundary line shall be settled according
to § 256-7C(3) and the criteria in Subsection E(4)(a) or (b) below.
Where the flood profiles are based on established base flood
§ 256-1 WATERFORD CODE § 256-1
250:874
elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must approve any map amendment
or revision pursuant to § 256-8, Amendments.
(a) If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations
shall determine the district boundary. The regional or base
flood elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies.
(b) Where flood profiles do not exist for projects, the location of
the boundary shall be determined by the map scale.
(5) Removal of lands from floodplain. Compliance with the provisions
of this chapter shall not be grounds for removing land from the
floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or
base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the
floodplain, and the map is amended pursuant to § 256-8,
Amendments.
(6) Compliance. Any development or use within the areas regulated by
this chapter shall be in compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable local, state, and federal regulations.
(7) Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically
exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are
required to comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary
permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats.
§ 13.48(13) applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance
and repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation is exempt when Wis. Stats.
§ 30.2022 applies.
(8) Abrogation and greater restrictions.
(a) This chapter supersedes all the provisions of any municipal
Zoning ordinance enacted under Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35 and
62.23; or Wis. Stats. § 87.30, which relates to floodplains. A
more-restrictive ordinance shall continue in full force and
effect to the extent of the greater restrictions but not
otherwise.
(b) This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this
chapter shall prevail.
(9) Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this chapter are the minimum requirements liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and are not a limitation on
or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. If
a provision of this chapter, required by Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR
116, is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the
standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this chapter or in
§ 256-1 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 256-1
250:875
§ 256-2. General standards applicable to all floodplain districts.
effect on the date of the most-recent text amendment to this
chapter.
(10)Warning and disclaimer of liability. The flood protection standards
in this chapter are based on engineering experience and research.
Larger floods may occur, or the flood height may be increased by
man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply or
guarantee that nonfloodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses
will be free from flooding and flood damages. This chapter does not
create liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the
Village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that
may result from reliance on this chapter.
(11) Severability. Should any portion of this chapter be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this chapter shall not be affected.
(12) Annexed areas for cities and villages. The Racine County floodplain
zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in
effect and shall be enforced by the Village for all annexed areas
until the Village adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets the
requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116 and 44 CFR 59-72,
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed lands
are described on the Village's Official Zoning Map. County
floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the
purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of
the Municipal Zoning Administrator. All plats or maps of
annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and the floodway
location.
A. The Village shall review all permit applications to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall be designed and anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with floodresistant
materials; and be constructed to minimize flood damages and
to ensure that utility and mechanical equipment is designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
equipment during conditions of flooding.
B. Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above
standards. All subdivision proposals (including manufactured home
parks) shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data for any
development that meets the subdivision definition of this chapter and
all other requirements in § 256-7A(2). Adequate drainage shall be
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and all public utilities
and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, are
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
§ 256-1 WATERFORD CODE § 256-2
250:876
C. Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses.
(1) No floodplain development shall:
(a) Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the
conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development,
causing any increase in the regional flood height; or
(b) Cause any increase in the regional flood height due to
floodplain storage area lost.
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the
proposed development will obstruct flow or cause any increase in
the regional flood height, based on the officially adopted FIRM or
other adopted map, unless the provisions of § 256-8, Amendments,
are met.
D. Watercourse alterations.
(1) No floodplain land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in
a mapped floodplain shall be issued until the local official has
notified, in writing, all adjacent municipalities, the Department and
FEMA regional offices and required the applicant to secure all
necessary state and federal permits. The standards of § 256-2C
must be met, and the flood-carrying capacity of any altered or
relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
(2) As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the
date of the watercourse alteration or relocation and pursuant to
§ 256-8, Amendments, the Village shall apply for a letter of map
revision (LOMR) from FEMA. Any such alterations must be
reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR through the LOMC
process.
E. Wis. Stats. Chs. 30 and 31 development. Development which requires a
permit from the Department under Wis. Stats. Chs. 30 and 31, such as
docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids,
may be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and amendments
to the Floodplain Zoning Chapter are made according to § 256-8,
Amendments.
F. Public or private campgrounds. Public or private campgrounds shall
have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the following
provisions:
(1) The campground is approved by the Department of Health
Services;
(2) A floodplain land use permit for the campground is issued by the
Zoning Administrator;
§ 256-2 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 256-2
250:877
(3) The character of the river system and the campground elevation
are such that a seventy-two-hour warning of an impending flood
can be given to all campground occupants;
(4) There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground
that offers the minimum notice required under this section to all
persons in the campground. This procedure shall include a written
agreement between the campground owner, the municipal
emergency government coordinator and the chief law enforcement
official which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall
occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types
of warning systems to be used and the procedures for notifying atrisk
parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for
conducting the evacuation;
(5) This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at
which time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated - by the
officials identified in Subsection B(4)(d) - to remain in compliance
with all applicable regulations, including those of the State
Department of Health Services and all other applicable regulations;
(6) Only camping units that are fully licensed, if required, and ready
for highway use are allowed;
(7) The camping units shall not occupy any site in the campground for
more than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit
must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours;
(8) All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be
issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a
written copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such
authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period
not to exceed 180 days and shall ensure compliance with all the
provisions of this section;
(9) The Village shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the
campground operator to assure compliance with the terms of this
section;
(10) All camping units that remain in place for more than 180
consecutive days must meet the applicable requirements in either
§ 256-3, 256-4 or 256-5 for the floodplain district in which the
structure is located;
(11) The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances
warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation
when a flood warning is issued; and
(12) All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse collection,
electrical service, gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and
wells, shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to
the flood protection elevation.
§ 256-2 WATERFORD CODE § 256-3
250:878
§ 256-3. Floodway District (FW).
A. Applicability. This section applies to all floodway areas on the
Floodplain Zoning Maps and those identified pursuant to § 256-5D.
B. Permitted uses. The following open space uses are allowed in the
Floodway District and the floodway areas of the General Floodplain
District if: they are not prohibited by any other ordinance, they meet
the standards in § 256-3C and D, and all permits or certificates have
been issued according to § 256-7A:
(1) Agricultural uses, such as: farming, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting.
(2) Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading
areas, parking areas and airport landing strips.
(3) Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis
courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming
areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing
areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill
limitations of § 256-3C(4).
(4) Uses or structures accessory to open space uses or classified as
historic structures that comply with § 256-3C and D.
(5) Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that complies with
§ 256-3C(4).
(6) Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or
wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river
crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with Wis.
Stats. chs. 30 and 31.
(7) Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with § 256-3C(3).
C. Standards for developments in the floodway.
(1) General.
(a) Any development in the floodway shall comply with § 256-2 and
have a low flood damage potential.
(b) Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the
effects of the proposal according to § 256-2A:
[1] A cross-section elevation view of the proposal,
perpendicular to the watercourse, showing if the proposed
development will obstruct flow; or
[2] An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on
regional flood height.
§ 256-3 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 256-3
250:879
(c) The Zoning Administrator shall deny the permit application if
the project will cause any increase in the flood elevations
upstream or downstream, based on the data submitted for
Subsection C(1)(b) above.
(2) Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or
functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by
permit if the structures comply with the following criteria:
(a) Not designed for human habitation, do not have a high flood
damage potential and are constructed to minimize flood
damage;
(b) Shall have a minimum of two openings on different walls
having a total net area not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area, and the bottom of all such
openings being no higher than one foot above grade. The
openings shall be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters;
(c) Must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement;
(d) Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the flood-protection elevation; and
(e) They must not obstruct flow of floodwaters or cause any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional
flood.
(3) Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and
bridges may be allowed by permit if:
(a) Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the floodprotection
elevation; and
(b) Construction meets the development standards of § 256-2C.
(4) Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may
be allowed by permit if:
(a) The requirements of § 256-2C are met;
(b) No material is deposited in navigable waters unless a permit is
issued by the Department pursuant to Wis. Stats. Ch. 30 and a
permit pursuant to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, has been
issued, if applicable, and all other requirements have been
met;
(c) The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by
riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and
§ 256-3 WATERFORD CODE § 256-3
250:880
§ 256-4. Floodplain Fringe Overlay District (FFO).
(d) The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
D. Prohibited uses. All uses not listed as permitted uses in § 256-3B are
prohibited, including the following uses:
(1) Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential,
or those not associated with permanent open-space uses;
(2) Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or
injurious to property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or
other aquatic life;
(3) Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the
adjoining districts;
(4) Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that
are removed prior to flooding and systems associated with
recreational areas and Department-approved campgrounds that
meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and Wis. Admin.
Code ch. SPS 383;
(5) Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water,
except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of
local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812;
(6) Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
(7) Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those
permitted under Wis. Admin. Code § NR 110.15(3)(b); and
(8) Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service
existing or proposed development located outside the floodway
which complies with the regulations for the floodplain area
occupied.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all floodfringe areas shown on the
Floodplain Zoning Maps and those identified pursuant to § 256-5D.
B. Permitted uses. Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in
the Floodplain Fringe Overlay District if the standards in § 256-4C are
met, the use is not prohibited by this chapter or any other ordinance or
regulation, and all permits or certificates specified in § 256-7A have
been issued.
C. Standards for development in the Floodplain Fringe Overlay District.
Section 256-2C shall apply in addition to the following requirements
according to the use requested. Any existing structure in the
floodfringe must meet the requirements of § 256-6, Nonconforming
uses.
§ 256-3 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 256-4
250:881
(1) Residential uses. Any structure, including a manufactured home,
which is to be newly constructed or moved into the floodfringe shall
meet or exceed the following standards. Any existing structure in
the floodfringe must meet the requirements of § 256-6,
Nonconforming uses.
(a) The elevation of the lowest floor shall be at or above the floodprotection
elevation on fill unless the requirements of
§ 256-4C(1)(b) can be met. The fill shall be one foot or more
above the regional flood elevation extending at least 15 feet
beyond the limits of the structure.
(b) The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional
flood elevation if it is dry floodproofed to the flood-protection
elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the
regional flood elevation.
(c) Contiguous dryland access shall be provided from a structure
to land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in
Subsection C(1)(d).
(d) In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations
make compliance with Subsection C(1)(c) impractical, the
Village may permit new development and substantial
improvements where roads are below the regional flood
elevation if:
[1] The Village has written assurance from police, fire and
emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided
to the structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during a regional
flood event; or
[2] The Village has a DNR-approved emergency evacuation
plan.
(2) Accessory structures or uses. Accessory structures shall be
constructed on fill with the lowest floor at or above the regional
flood elevation.
(3) Commercial uses. Any commercial structure which is erected,
altered or moved into the floodfringe shall meet the requirements
of § 256-4C(1) Subject to the requirements of § 256-4C(5), storage
yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at
lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect
life and property.
(4) Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or
industrial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the
floodfringe shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the
flood-protection elevation or meet the floodproofing standards in
§ 256-7E. Subject to the requirements of § 256-4C(5), storage
yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at
§ 256-4 WATERFORD CODE § 256-4
250:882
lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect
life and property.
(5) Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal,
plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood
protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with § 256-7E.
Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials
will not enter the water body during flooding.
(6) Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges
shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain
development plans and:
(a) When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would
endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities are
deemed essential, construction or repair of such facilities shall
only be permitted if they are designed to comply with § 256-7E.
(b) Minor roads or nonessential utilities may be constructed at
lower elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces
to the regional flood elevation.
(7) Sewage systems. All sewage disposal systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system,
pursuant to § 256-7E(3), to the flood-protection elevation and meet
the provisions of all local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS
383.
(8) Wells. All wells shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system, pursuant to § 256-7E(3),
to the flood-protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of
Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812.
(9) Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is
prohibited in floodfringe areas.
(10) Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the
provisions of this chapter.
(11) Manufactured homes.
(a) Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to
minimize flood damage and prepare, secure approval and file
an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and escape
routes, with local emergency management authorities.
(b) In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes,
replacement homes on existing pads, and substantially
improved homes shall:
§ 256-4 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 256-4
250:883
§ 256-5. General Floodplain District (GFP).
[1] Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood-protection
elevation; and
[2] Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally
during a flood.
(c) Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new
manufactured home parks and all single units outside of
existing parks, all new, replacement and substantially
improved manufactured homes shall meet the residential
development standards for the floodfringe in § 256-4C(1).
(12) Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that
are on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully
licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and
anchoring requirements in § 256-4C(1)(b) and (c). A mobile
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
A. Applicability. The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains
mapped as A, AO or AH Zones.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Pursuant to § 256-5D, it shall be determined whether the proposed
use is located within the floodway or floodfringe.
(2) Those uses permitted in the Floodway (§ 256-3B) and Floodplain
Fringe Overlay (§ 256-4B) Districts are allowed within the General
Floodplain District, according to the standards of § 256-5C,
provided that all permits or certificates required under § 256-7A
have been issued.
C. Standards for development in the General Floodplain District. Section
256-3 applies to floodway areas; § 256-4 applies to floodfringe areas.
The rest of this chapter applies to either district.
(1) In AO/AH Zones, the structure's lowest floor must meet one of the
conditions listed below, whichever is higher:
(a) At or above the flood-protection elevation; or
(b) Two feet above the highest adjacent grade around the
structure; or
(c) The depth as shown on the FIRM.
(2) In AO/AH Zones, provide plans showing adequate drainage paths to
guide floodwaters around structures.
§ 256-4 WATERFORD CODE § 256-5
250:884
§ 256-6. Nonconforming uses.
D. Determining floodway and floodfringe limits. Upon receiving an
application for development within the General Floodplain District, the
Zoning Administrator shall:
(1) Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph
or a plan which shows the proposed development with respect to
the General Floodplain District limits, stream channel, and existing
floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the
property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and
floodproofing measures; and the flood zone as shown on the FIRM.
(2) Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information
deemed necessary by the Department to evaluate the effects of the
proposal upon flood height and flood flows and regional flood
elevation and to determine floodway boundaries:
(a) A hydrologic and hydraulic study as specified in § 256-7A(2)(c).
(b) A plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size,
location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on
the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and
sanitary facilities; soil types; and other pertinent information.
(c) Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage,
water supply and sanitary facilities.
A. General.
(1) Applicability. If these standards conform with Wis. Stats.
§ 62.23(7)(h), they shall apply to all modifications or additions to
any nonconforming use or structure and to the use of any structure
or premises which was lawful before the passage of this chapter or
any amendment thereto.
(2) The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is
not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter may continue,
subject to the following conditions:
(a) No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or
structure shall be permitted unless they comply with this
chapter. The words "modification" and "addition" include, but
are not limited to, any alteration, addition, modification,
structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such
existing use, structure or accessory structure or use.
[1] Maintenance is not considered a modification; this
includes painting, decorating, paneling and other
nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or
§ 256-5 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 256-6
250:885
replacement of existing private sewage or water supply
systems or connections to public utilities. Any costs
associated with the repair of a damaged structure are not
considered maintenance.
[2] The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200
square feet and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a
principal structure is not an extension, modification or
addition. The roof of the structure may extend over a
portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and
egress to the principal structure.
(b) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure
is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer
permitted, and any future use of the property, and any
structure or building thereon, shall conform to the applicable
requirements of this chapter.
(c) The Village shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming
uses and nonconforming structures, their present equalized
assessed value, the cost of all modifications or additions which
have been permitted, and the percentage of the structure's
total current value those modifications represent.
(d) No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or
any structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of
the structure would equal or exceed 50% of its present
equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire
structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure
with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable
requirements of this chapter. Contiguous dry land access must
be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance
with § 256-4C(1). The costs of elevating the lowest floor of a
nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming
use to the flood-protection elevation are excluded from the
50% provisions of this subsection.
(e) No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use, the cost of which would
equal or exceed 50% of its present equalized assessed value,
shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently
changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in
compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter.
Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential
and commercial uses in compliance with § 256-4C(1).
(f) If, on a per-event basis, the total value of the work being done
under Subsection A(2)(d) and (e) equals or exceeds 50% of the
present equalized assessed value, the work shall not be
permitted unless the entire structure is permanently changed
to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance
§ 256-6 WATERFORD CODE § 256-6
250:886
with the applicable requirements of this chapter. Contiguous
dry land access must be provided for residential and
commercial uses in compliance with § 256-4C(1).
(g) Except as provided in Subsection A(2)(h), if any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is
destroyed or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced,
reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet
the current chapter requirements. A structure is considered
substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure
to its predamaged condition equals or exceeds 50% of the
structure's present equalized assessed value.
(h) For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or
destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction
of any such nonconforming building shall be permitted in order
to restore it to the size and use in effect prior to the damage
event, provided that the minimum federal code requirements
below are met and all required permits have been granted
prior to the start of construction.
[1] Residential structures:
[a] Shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the base flood elevation using fill,
pilings, columns, posts or perimeter walls. Perimeter
walls must meet the requirements of § 256-7E(2).
[b] Shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy, and shall be constructed with
methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
[c] Shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or
elevated so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
[d] In A Zones, shall obtain, review and utilize any flood
data available from a federal, state or other source.
[e] In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, meet the
standards in § 256-5C(1).
[f] In AO Zones, shall have adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters
around and away from the structure.
§ 256-6 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 256-6
250:887
[2] Nonresidential structures:
[a] Shall meet the requirements of § 256-6A(2)(h)[1][a],
[b], [e] and [f].
[b] Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the regional flood elevation or,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
shall meet the standards in § 256-7E(1)or (2).
[c] In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, meet the
standards in § 256-5C(1).
(3) A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure, the alteration will comply with § 256-3C(1),
flood-resistant materials are used, and construction practices and
floodproofing methods that comply with § 256-7E are used. Repair
or rehabilitation of historic structures shall be exempt from the
development standards of § 256-6A(2)(h)[1] if it is determined that
the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure and is
the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
B. Floodway District.
(1) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in the
Floodway District, unless such modification or addition:
(a) Has been granted a floodplain land use permit or variance
which meets all chapter requirements;
(b) Meets the requirements of § 256-6A;
(c) Shall not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional
flood height;
(d) Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed,
pursuant to § 256-7E, by means other than the use of fill, to the
flood-protection elevation; and
(e) If any part of the foundation below the flood-protection
elevation is enclosed, the following standards shall apply:
[1] The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered
architect or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and
exit of floodwaters without human intervention. A
minimum of two openings must be provided with a
minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one
square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the
§ 256-6 WATERFORD CODE § 256-6
250:888
opening can be no more than 12 inches above the adjacent
grade;
[2] The parts of the foundation located below the floodprotection
elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant
materials;
[3] Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the flood-protection elevation;
and
[4] The use must be limited to parking, building access or
limited storage.
(2) No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing
on-site sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been
ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public
health, shall be allowed in the Floodway District. Any replacement,
repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal
system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements
of all municipal ordinances, § 256-7E(3) and Wis. Admin. Code ch.
SPS 383.
(3) No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain
potable water shall be allowed in the Floodway District. Any
replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in the
Floodway District shall meet the applicable requirements of all
municipal ordinances, § 256-7E(3) and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR
811 and NR 812.
C. Floodplain Fringe Overlay District.
(1) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such
modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by
the Village and meets the requirements of § 256-4C, except where
§ 256-6C(2) is applicable.
(2) Where compliance with the provisions of Subsection C(1) would
result in unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will
not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood
damage potential, the Board of Appeals, using the procedures
established in § 256-7C, may grant a variance from those provisions
of Subsection C(1) for modifications or additions using the criteria
listed below. Modifications or additions which are protected to
elevations lower than the flood-protection elevation may be
permitted if:
(a) No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for
residential or commercial structures;
(b) Human lives are not endangered;
§ 256-6 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 256-6
250:889
§ 256-7. Administration.
Where a Zoning Administrator, planning agency or a board of adjustment/
appeals has already been appointed to administer a zoning ordinance
adopted under Wis. Stats. § 59.69, 59.692 or 62.23(7), these officials shall
also administer this chapter.
(c) Public facilities, such as water or sewer, shall not be installed;
(d) Flood depths shall not exceed two feet;
(e) Flood velocities shall not exceed two feet per second; and
(f) The structure shall not be used for storage of materials as
described in § 256-4C(5).
(3) All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to,
replacement, repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal
system, shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local
ordinances, § 256-7E(3) and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383.
(4) All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of
a well, shall meet the applicable provisions of this chapter,
§ 256-7E(3) and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812.
A. Zoning Administrator.
(1) Duties and Powers. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to
administer this chapter and shall have the following duties and
powers:
(a) Advise applicants of the chapter provisions, assist in preparing
permit applications and appeals, and assure that the regional
flood elevation for the proposed development is shown on all
permit applications.
(b) Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with
provisions of this chapter and issue certificates of compliance
where appropriate.
(c) Inspect and assess all damaged floodplain structures to
determine if substantial damage to the structures has
occurred.
(d) Keep records of all official actions, such as:
[1] All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved.
[2] Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood
elevations.
[3] Floodproofing certificates.
§ 256-6 WATERFORD CODE § 256-7
250:890
[4] Water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and
ordinances, and nonconforming uses and structures,
including changes, appeals, variances and amendments.
[5] All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain
structures.
[6] List of nonconforming structures and uses.
(e) Submit copies of the following items to the Department
regional office:
[1] Within 10 days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on
variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and
map or text amendments.
[2] Copies of case-by-case analyses and other required
information, including an annual summary of floodplain
zoning actions taken.
[3] Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and
all related correspondence concerning the assessments.
(f) Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this
chapter to the Municipal Plan Commission and Attorney for
prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the
Department regional office.
(g) Submit copies of amendments and biennial reports to the
FEMA regional office.
(2) Floodplain land use permit. A floodplain land use permit shall be
obtained before any new development; repair, modification or
addition to an existing structure, or change in the use of a building
or structure, including sewer and water facilities, may be initiated.
Application to the Zoning Administrator shall include:
(a) General Information:
[1] Name and address of the applicant, property owner and
contractor.
[2] Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new
construction or a modification.
(b) Site development plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be
submitted with the permit application form and shall contain:
[1] Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot.
[2] Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting
navigable waterways.
§ 256-7 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 256-7
250:891
[3] Location of any structures, with distances measured from
the lot lines and street center lines.
[4] Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage
systems or private water supply systems.
[5] Location and elevation of existing or future access roads.
[6] Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined
from the Official Floodplain Zoning Maps.
[7] The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and
any fill using the vertical datum from the adopted study -
either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD).
[8] Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in
NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to
determine whether or not the requirements of § 256-3 or
256-4 are met.
[9] Data to determine if the proposed development will cause
an obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood
height or discharge according to § 256-2C. This may
include any of the information noted in § 256-3C(1).
(c) Hydraulic and hydrologic studies to analyze development. All
hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be completed under the
direct supervision of a professional engineer registered in the
state. The study contractor shall be responsible for the
technical adequacy of the study. All studies shall be reviewed
and approved by the Department.
[1] Zone A floodplains:
[a] Hydrology. The appropriate method shall be based on
the standards in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 116.07(3),
Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood
Discharge.
[b] Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall
be based on the standards in Wis. Admin. Code § NR
116.07(4), Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of
Regional Flood Elevation, and the following:
[i] Determination of the required limits of the
hydraulic model shall be based on detailed study
information for downstream structures (dam,
bridge, culvert) to determine adequate starting
WSEL for the study.
[ii] Channel sections must be surveyed.
§ 256-7 WATERFORD CODE § 256-7
250:892
[iii] Minimum four-foot contour data in the overbanks
shall be used for the development of cross-section
overbank and floodplain mapping.
[iv] A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross
sections is allowed in developed areas, with
additional intermediate cross sections required at
transitions in channel bottom slope, including a
survey of the channel at each location.
[v] The most-current version of HEC-RAS shall be
used.
[vi] A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the
top of road is required at each structure.
[vii] Additional cross sections are required at the
downstream and upstream limits of the proposed
development and any necessary intermediate
locations based on the length of the reach if
greater than 500 feet.
[viii] Standard accepted engineering practices shall be
used when assigning parameters for the base
model such as flow, Manning's N values,
expansion and contraction coefficients or effective
flow limits. The base model shall be calibrated to
past flooding data such as high-water marks to
determine the reasonableness of the model
results. If no historical data is available, adequate
justification shall be provided for any parameters
outside standard accepted engineering practices.
[ix] The model must extend past the upstream limit of
the difference in the existing and proposed flood
profiles in order to provide a tie-in to existing
studies. The height difference between the
proposed flood profile and the existing study
profiles shall be no more than 0.00 feet.
[c] Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be
provided, showing all cross-section locations,
floodway/floodplain limits based on best available
topographic data, geographic limits of the proposed
development and whether the proposed development
is located in the floodway.
[i] If the proposed development is located outside of
the floodway, then it is determined to have no
impact on the regional flood elevation.
§ 256-7 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 256-7
250:893
[ii] If any part of the proposed development is in the
floodway, it must be added to the base model to
show the difference between existing and
proposed conditions. The study must ensure that
all coefficients remain the same as in the existing
model, unless adequate justification based on
standard accepted engineering practices is
provided.
[2] Zone AE Floodplains.
[a] Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the
existing study, the appropriate method to be used shall
be based on Wis. Admin. Code § NR 116.07(3),
Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood
Discharge.
[b] Hydraulic model. The regional flood elevation shall be
based on the standards in Wis. Admin. Code § NR
116.07(4), Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of
Regional Flood Elevation, and the following:
[i] Duplicate Effective Model. The Effective Model
shall be reproduced to ensure correct
transference of the model data and to allow
integration of the revised data to provide a
continuous FIS model upstream and downstream
of the revised reach. If data from the Effective
Model is available, models shall be generated that
duplicate the FIS profiles and the elevations
shown in the Floodway Data Table in the FIS
report to within 0.1 foot.
[ii] Corrected Effective Model. The Corrected
Effective Model shall not include any man-made
physical changes since the Effective Model date
but shall import the model into the most-current
version of HEC-RAS for Department review.
[iii] Existing (Pre-Project Conditions) Model. The
Existing Model shall be required to support
conclusions about the actual impacts of the
project associated with the Revised (Post-Project)
Model or to establish more up-to-date models on
which to base the Revised (Post-Project) Model.
[iv] Revised (Post-Project Conditions) Model. The
Revised (Post-Project Conditions) Model shall
incorporate the Existing Model and any proposed
changes to the topography caused by the
proposed development. This model shall reflect
proposed conditions.
§ 256-7 WATERFORD CODE § 256-7
250:894
[v] All changes to the Duplicate Effective Model and
subsequent models must be supported by
certified topographic information, bridge plans,
construction plans and survey notes.
[vi] Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited
to the stream reach for which the revision is being
requested. Cross sections upstream and
downstream of the revised reach shall be identical
to those in the Effective Model and result in water
surface elevations and topwidths computed by the
revised models matching those in the Effective
Models upstream and downstream of the revised
reach as required. The Effective Model shall not
be truncated.
[c] Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall
be submitted to the Department for review which
meet the following conditions:
[i] Consistency between the revised hydraulic
models, the revised floodplain and floodway
delineations, the revised flood profiles,
topographic work map, annotated FIRMs and/or
Flood Boundary Floodway Maps (FBFMs),
construction plans, and bridge plans.
[ii] Certified topographic map of suitable scale,
contour interval, and a planimetric map showing
the applicable items. If a digital version of the
map is available, it may be submitted in order that
the FIRM may be more easily revised.
[iii] Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised onepercent
and two-tenths-percent annual chance
floodplains and floodway boundaries.
[iv] If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital
mapping data (GIS or CADD) are used, then all
supporting documentation or metadata must be
included with the data submission, along with the
Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) projection
and State Plane Coordinate System in accordance
with FEMA mapping specifications.
[v] The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into
the effective floodplain boundaries.
[vi] All cross sections from the Effective Model shall
be labeled in accordance with the effective map,
and a cross section lookup table shall be included
to relate to the model input numbering scheme.
§ 256-7 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 256-7
250:895
[vii] Both the current and proposed floodways shall be
shown on the map.
[viii] The stream center line or profile baseline used to
measure stream distances in the model shall be
visible on the map.
(d) Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this
chapter shall expire no more than 180 days after issuance. The
floodplain land use permit may be extended for a maximum of
180 days for good and sufficient cause.
(3) Certificate of compliance. No land shall be occupied or used, and
no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to,
modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied, until a
certificate of compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator,
except where no permit is required, subject to the following
provisions:
(a) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or
premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the
provisions of this chapter.
(b) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a permit.
(c) If all chapter provisions are met, the certificate of compliance
shall be issued within 10 days after written notification that the
permitted work is completed.
(d) The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a
registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor
that the fill, lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are in
compliance with the permit issued. Floodproofing measures
also require certification by a registered professional engineer
or architect that the requirements of § 256-7E are met.
(4) Other permits. Prior to obtaining a floodplain land use permit, the
applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state,
and local agencies, including but not limited to those required by
the United States Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33
U.S.C. § 1344.
B. Plan Commission.
(1) The Plan Commission shall:
(a) Oversee the functions of the office of the Zoning Administrator;
and
(b) Review and advise the governing body on all proposed
amendments to this chapter, maps and text.
§ 256-7 WATERFORD CODE § 256-7
250:896
(2) The Plan Commission shall not:
(a) Grant variances to the terms of the chapter in place of action
by the Board of Appeals; or
(b) Amend the text or Zoning Maps in place of official action by the
governing body.
C. Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals, created under Wis. Stats.
§ 62.23(7)(e), is hereby authorized or shall be appointed to act for the
purposes of this chapter. The Board of Appeals shall exercise the
powers conferred by Wisconsin Statutes and adopt rules for the
conduct of business. The Zoning Administrator shall not be the
Secretary of the Board of Appeals.
(1) Powers and duties. The Board of Appeals shall:
(a) Appeals: hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by an administrative official in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter;
(b) Boundary disputes: hear and decide disputes concerning the
district boundaries shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning
Map; and
(c) Variances: hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the
chapter standards.
(2) Appeals to the Board of Appeals.
(a) Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person
aggrieved, or by any officer or department of the Village
affected, by any decision of the Zoning Administrator or other
administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30
days unless otherwise provided by the rules of the Board of
Appeals, by filing with the official whose decision is in
question, and with the Board of Appeals, a notice of appeal,
specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose
decision is in question shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all
records regarding the matter appealed.
(b) Notice and Hearing for Appeals Including Variances.
[1] Notice. The Board of Appeals shall:
[a] Fix a reasonable time for the hearing;
[b] Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin
Statutes, specifying the date, time, place and subject
of the hearing; and
§ 256-7 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 256-7
250:897
[c] Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in
interest and the Department regional office at least 10
days in advance of the hearing.
[2] Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent. The
Board of Appeals shall:
[a] Resolve boundary disputes according to § 256-7C(3);
[b] Decide variance applications according to
§ 256-7C(4); and
[c] Decide appeals of permit denials according to
§ 256-7D.
(c) Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance
application shall:
[1] Be made within a reasonable time;
[2] Be sent to the Department regional office within 10 days of
the decision;
[3] Be a written determination signed by the Chairman or
Secretary of the Board of Appeals;
[4] State the specific facts which are the basis for the Board of
Appeals' decision;
[5] Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole
or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or
grant or deny the variance application; and
[6] Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the
hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a
variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the
Board of Appeals proceedings.
(3) Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the
Board of Appeals in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district
boundaries:
(a) If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate
or detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles
shall prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other
evidence may be examined;
(b) The person contesting the boundary location shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical
evidence to the Board of Appeals; and
(c) If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Board of Appeals
should inform the Plan Commission or the person contesting
§ 256-7 WATERFORD CODE § 256-7
250:898
the boundary location to petition the governing body for a map
amendment according to § 256-8, Amendments.
(4) Variance.
(a) The Board of Appeals may, upon appeal, grant a variance from
the standards of this chapter if an applicant convincingly
demonstrates that:
[1] Literal enforcement of the chapter will cause unnecessary
hardship;
[2] The hardship is due to adoption of the Floodplain Chapter
and unique property conditions not common to adjacent
lots or premises. In such case, the chapter or map must be
amended;
[3] The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
[4] The variance is consistent with the purpose of this chapter
in § 256-1C.
(b) In addition to the criteria in Subsection C(4)(a), to qualify for a
variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must
be met:
[1] The variance shall not cause any increase in the regional
flood elevation;
[2] Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than 1/
2 acre and are contiguous to existing structures
constructed below the RFE; and
[3] Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good
and sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief
necessary, shall not cause increased risks to public safety
or nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue and relief
efforts and shall not be contrary to the purpose of the
chapter.
(c) A variance shall not:
[1] Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning
district;
[2] Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic
gain or loss;
[3] Be granted for a hardship which is self-created;
[4] Damage the rights or property values of other persons in
the area;
§ 256-7 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 256-7
250:899
[5] Allow actions without the amendments to this chapter or
map(s) required in § 256-8, Amendments; and
[6] Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its
use, which would preclude its continued designation as an
historic structure.
(d) When a floodplain variance is granted, the Board of Appeals
shall notify the applicant, in writing, that it may increase risks
to life and property and flood insurance premiums could
increase up to $25 per $100 of coverage. A copy shall be
maintained with the variance record.
D. To review appeals of permit denials.
(1) The Plan Commission (§ 256-7B) or Board of Appeals shall review
all data related to the appeal. This may include:
(a) Permit application data listed in § 256-7A(2);
(b) Floodway/floodfringe determination data in § 256-5D;
(c) Data listed in § 256-3C(1)(b) where the applicant has not
submitted this information to the Zoning Administrator; and
(d) Other data submitted with the application or submitted to the
Board of Appeals with the appeal.
(2) For appeals of all denied permits, the Board of Appeals shall:
(a) Follow the procedures of § 256-7C;
(b) Consider Plan Commission recommendations; and
(c) Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal.
(3) For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation, the
Board of Appeals shall:
(a) Uphold the denial where the Board of Appeals agrees with the
data showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases may
only be allowed after amending the flood profile and map and
all appropriate legal arrangements are made with all adversely
affected property owners as per the requirements of § 256-8,
Amendments; and
(b) Grant the appeal where the Board of Appeals agrees that the
data properly demonstrates that the project does not cause an
increase, provided no other reasons for denial exist.
E. Floodproofing standards for nonconforming structures or uses.
(1) No permit or variance shall be issued for a nonresidential structure
designed to be watertight below the regional flood elevation until
the applicant submits a plan, certified by a registered professional
§ 256-7 WATERFORD CODE § 256-7
250:900
§ 256-8. Amendments.
engineer or architect, that the floodproofing measures will protect
the structure or development to the flood-protection elevation and
submits a FEMA floodproofing certificate.
(2) For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no
permit or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan
either:
(a) Certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or
(b) Which meets or exceeds the following standards:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided;
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves,
or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit
the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(3) Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to:
(a) Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact
forces and other regional flood factors;
(b) Protect structures to the flood-protection elevation;
(c) Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral
movement;
(d) Minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters; and
(e) Minimize or eliminate discharges into floodwaters.
F. Public Information.
(1) Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during
the regional flood.
(2) All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and
widely distributed.
(3) Real estate transfers should show what floodplain district any real
property is in.
A. Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments are
made to this chapter, the Official Floodplain Zoning Maps, floodway
lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with § 256-8D:
§ 256-7 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 256-8
250:901
B. In AE Zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases shall
be permitted unless the applicant receives a conditional letter of map
revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this chapter, the
official Floodplain Zoning Maps, floodway lines and water surface
profiles, in accordance with § 256-8D. Any such alterations must be
reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR.
C. In A Zones, increases equal to or greater than 1.0 foot may only be
permitted if the applicant receives a conditional letter of map revision
from FEMA and amendments are made to this chapter, the Official
Floodplain Maps, floodway lines, and water surface profiles, in
accordance with § 256-8D.
D. Procedures.
(1) General. The governing body shall change or supplement the
floodplain zoning district boundaries and this chapter in the
manner outlined in § 256-8D(2) below. Actions which require an
amendment to the chapter and/or submittal of a letter of map
change (LOMC) include, but are not limited to, the following:
(a) Any fill or floodway encroachment that obstructs flow causing
any increase in the regional flood height;
(b) Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse
alterations on the FIRM;
(c) Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain maps
listed in § 256-1E(2)(b);
(d) Any floodplain fill which raises the elevation of the filled area to
a height at or above the flood-protection elevation and is
contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain;
(e) Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles
and floodplain maps;
(f) Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by
Wis. Admin. Code § NR 116.05, or otherwise required by law,
or for changes by the Village; and
(g) All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter
floodway lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the
floodfringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a FIRM
requires prior approval by FEMA.
(2) Procedures. Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of
any party according to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23 and
Chapter 245 of this Code. The petitions shall include all data
required by § 256-5D and 256-7A(2). The floodplain land use permit
shall not be issued until a letter of map revision is issued by FEMA
for the proposed changes.
§ 256-8 WATERFORD CODE § 256-8
250:902
§ 256-9. Fees, enforcement and penalties.
§ 256-10. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined, words and phrases in this chapter shall have
their common law meanings and shall be applied in accordance with their
common usage. Words used in the present tense include the future; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory and is not
discretionary.
AH ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A facility, structure, building or use
which is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure
or building.
(a) The proposed amendment shall be referred to the Plan
Commission for a public hearing and recommendation to the
governing body. The amendment and notice of public hearing
shall be submitted to the Department regional office for review
prior to the hearing. The amendment procedure shall comply
with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23.
(b) No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and
approved by the Department.
(c) All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs
flow causing any increase in the regional flood height shall
obtain flooding easements or other appropriate legal
arrangements from all adversely affected property owners and
notify local units of government before the amendment can be
approved by the governing body.
A. Fees. All applications for a floodplain land use permit, certificate of
compliance, Board of Appeals review, ordinance amendment or other
review or action by the Village under this chapter shall be accompanied
by a fee in an amount determined by the Village Board and set forth in
the Fee Schedule for this chapter or Chapter 245.
B. Enforcement and penalties. Any violation of the provisions of this
chapter by any person shall be unlawful and shall be referred to the
Village Attorney, who shall expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A
violator shall, upon conviction, forfeit to the Village a penalty of not less
than $10 and not more than $50, together with a taxable cost of such
action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate
offense. Every violation of this chapter is a public nuisance, and the
creation may be enjoined and the maintenance may be abated by action
at suit of the Village, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to Wis.
Stats. § 87.30.
§ 256-8 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 256-10
250:903
ALTERATION — An enhancement, upgrading or substantial change or
modifications other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical,
plumbing, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other systems within a
structure.
AO ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or
VO Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), with a onepercent
or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one feet
to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flood may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
A ZONES — Those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map
which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be
numbered or unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may or may not be
reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given
area.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of an FIS and
depicted on a FIRM.
BASEMENT — Any enclosed area of a building having its floor subgrade,
i.e., below ground level, on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
BULKHEAD LINE — A geographic line along a reach of navigable water
that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the
Department pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 30.11, and which allows limited filling
between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high-water mark,
except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this
chapter.
CAMPGROUND — Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained,
intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent
overnight use by four or more camping units, or which is advertised or
represented as a camping area.
CAMPING UNIT — Any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in
area, used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a camping
trailer, motor home, bus, van, pick-up truck, or tent, that is fully licensed, if
required, and ready for highway use.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A certification that the construction and
the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a
structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks
to confine and conduct the normal flow of water.
CRAWLWAYS or CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area below the first usable
floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to
plumbing and electrical utilities.
§ 256-10 WATERFORD CODE § 256-10
250:904
DECK — An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides but has
a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation.
DEPARTMENT — The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
DEVELOPMENT — Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings,
structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or
alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of
any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure,
regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of
buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the
storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the
installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems
or water supply facilities.
DRYLAND ACCESS — A vehicular access route which is above the regional
flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land
outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above the regional
flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
ENCROACHMENT — Any fill, structure, equipment, use or development in
the floodway.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD FREQUENCY — The probability of a flood occurrence which is
determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood
event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in a specified
number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in any given year.
FLOODFRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway
which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood and associated
with standing water rather than flowing water.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP — A map designating approximate flood
hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A Zones
and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map
forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a Flood
Insurance Study and a Flood Insurance Rate Map.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — A map of a community on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the floodplain and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be
amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — A technical engineering examination,
evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides
maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides
both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide
floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and
unnumbered A Zones. Flood Insurance Rate Maps, that accompany the
§ 256-10 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 256-10
250:905
Flood Insurance Study, form the basis for both the regulatory and the
insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the
following conditions:
FLOODPLAIN — Land which has been or may be covered by floodwater
during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the floodfringe and
may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes.
FLOODPLAIN ISLAND — A natural geologic land formation within the
floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the
regional flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — Policy and procedures to ensure wise use
of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education,
and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations.
FLOOD PROFILE — A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the
relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of
land surface elevations along a stream or river.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and
contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or
eliminating flood damage.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION — An elevation of two feet of freeboard
above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood.
(Also see "freeboard.")
FLOOD STORAGE — Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters
has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood
discharge.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood
discharge.
FREEBOARD — A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number
of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any
factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice
A. The overflow or rise of inland waters;
B. The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake
Superior; or
C.
The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a
natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an
unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly
unusual event.
D.
§ 256-10 WATERFORD CODE § 256-10
250:906
jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and
floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas
due to development and aggregation of the river or stream bed.
HABITABLE STRUCTURE — Any structure or portion thereof used or
designed for human habitation.
HEARING NOTICE — Publication or posting meeting the requirements
of Wis. Stats. Ch. 985. For appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at
least one week (seven days) before the hearing, is required. For all zoning
ordinances and amendments, a Class 2 notice, published twice, once each
week consecutively, the last at least a week (seven days) before the hearing.
Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice exceeding these
minimums.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL — Damage that could result from
flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant
economic loss to a structure or building and its contents.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is either:
INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT — A calculated upward rise in
the regional flood elevation greater than 0.00 foot, based on a comparison of
existing conditions and proposed conditions, which is directly attributable
to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of
mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and
contraction coefficients and discharge.
LAND USE — Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real
estate. (Also see "development.")
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE — The elevation of the lowest ground surface
that touches any of the exterior walls of a building.
Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by
an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
D.
§ 256-10 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 256-10
250:907
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MAINTENANCE — The act or process of restoring to original soundness,
including redecorating, refinishing, nonstructural repairs, or the
replacement of existing fixtures, systems or equipment with equivalent
fixtures, systems or structures.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does
not include a "mobile recreational vehicle."
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, EXPANSION TO EXISTING —
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This
includes installation of utilities, construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, EXISTING —
A parcel of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for
rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
is completed before the effective date of this chapter. At a minimum, this
would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single
chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by
a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is
required, and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land
but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model
homes, do not fall within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicles."
MODEL, CORRECTED EFFECTIVE — A hydraulic engineering model that
corrects any errors that occur in the Duplicate Effective Model, adds any
additional cross sections to the Duplicate Effective Model, or incorporates
more-detailed topographic information than that used in the current
Effective Model.
MODEL, DUPLICATE EFFECTIVE — A copy of the hydraulic analysis used
in the effective FIS and referred to as the "Effective Model."
§ 256-10 WATERFORD CODE § 256-10
250:908
MODEL, EFFECTIVE — The hydraulic engineering model that was used to
produce the current effective Flood Insurance Study.
MODEL, EXISTING (PRE-PROJECT) — A modification of the Duplicate
Effective Model or Corrected Effective Model to reflect any man-made
modifications that have occurred within the floodplain since the date of the
Effective Model but prior to the construction of the project for which the
revision is being requested. If no modification has occurred since the date
of the Effective Model, then this model would be identical to the Corrected
Effective Model or Duplicate Effective Model.
MODEL, REVISED (POST-PROJECT) — A modification of the Existing or Pre-
Project Conditions Model, Duplicate Effective Model or Corrected Effective
Model to reflect revised or post-project conditions.
MUNICIPALITY or MUNICIPAL — The county, city or village governmental
units enacting, administering and enforcing this Zoning Chapter.
NAVD or NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations referenced
to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For floodplain management purposes, structures
for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective
date of floodplain zoning regulations adopted by this Village, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For the purpose of
determining flood insurance rates, it includes any structures for which the
"start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial
FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
NGVD or NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations
referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — An existing lawful structure or
building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural
requirements of this chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies.
(For example, an existing residential structure in the Floodfringe District
is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the floodprotection
elevation, the structure is nonconforming.)
NONCONFORMING USE — An existing lawful use or accessory use of a
structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies (such as a residence
in the floodway).
OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW — Any development which blocks the conveyance
of floodwaters such that this development, alone or together with any future
development will cause an increase in the regional flood height.
OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP — That map, adopted and made
part of this chapter, as described in § 256-1E(2), which has been approved
by the Department and FEMA.
OPEN SPACE USE — Those uses having a relatively low flood damage
potential and not involving structures.
§ 256-10 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 256-10
250:909
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The point on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to
leave a distinctive mark, such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of
terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily
recognized characteristic.
PERSON — An individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, municipality or state agency.
PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage treatment and disposal system
serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located
on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage
system approved by the Department of Commerce, including a substitute
for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving
more than one structure or a system located on a different parcel than the
structure.
PUBLIC UTILITIES — Those utilities using underground or overhead
transmission lines, such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and
distribution and collection systems, such as water, sanitary sewer and storm
sewer.
REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING — Base floodwaters will not
inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the floodplain
and any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing
or proposed buildings.
REGIONAL FLOOD — A flood determined to be representative of large
floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with
a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year; and
if depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the first placement
of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For
an alteration, the "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object with form, shape and utility, either
permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground,
stream bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled
buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts.
§ 256-10 WATERFORD CODE § 256-10
250:910
SUBDIVISION — Has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 236.02(12).
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure,
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the equalized assessed value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the equalized assessed value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure
has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial
improvement regardless of the work preformed. The term does not,
however, include either any project for the improvement of a building
required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations
identified by the Building Official and that are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or any alteration of an historic structure,
provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure.
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP — Where special conditions affecting a
particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict
conformity with restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage, height or
density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes
of the chapter.
VARIANCE — An authorization by the Board of Appeals for the construction
or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is inconsistent
with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in the Floodplain Zoning
Chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the Floodplain Zoning Chapter. A structure or other
development without required permits, lowest floor elevation
documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway
encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as
that documentation is provided.
WATERSHED — The entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a
watercourse or body of water.
WATER SURFACE PROFILE — A graphical representation showing the
elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a
reach of a river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of
the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas.
WELL — An excavation opening in the ground, made by digging, boring,
drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater, regardless of its
intended use.162
Chapter 260
162. Editor's Note: Floodplain Exhibit Map of Chapter 256 (Ord. No. 585), which was included
at the end of the ordinance, is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 256-10 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 256-10
250:911
PIERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boating — See Ch. 93. Zoning — See Ch. 245.
§ 260-1. Definitions.
The definitions contained in Wis. Stat. § 30.01, as the same may be amended
from time to time, shall apply to all terms contained in this chapter, unless
otherwise specifically set forth in this section. For purposes of this chapter,
the following terms are defined as follows:
LINE OF NAVIGATION — The three-foot depth or a greater depth contour, if
required, for boats in use or appropriate for the use on the waterway, based
on the normal summertime low levels on the waterway or summer minimum
levels where established by the DNR.
ORDINARY HIGH WATERMARK — The point on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of the water is so continuous as to leave
a distinct mark, either by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation or predomination of aquatic vegetation or other easily
recognized characteristics.
PIER — Any structure extending into navigable waters from the shore of
such navigable waters, built or maintained for the purpose of providing a
berth for watercraft or for loading or unloading cargo or passengers onto or
from the watercraft and may include a temporary boat hoist without roof or
walls.
RIPARIAN — An owner of land abutting a stream or lake.
SIMILAR OR RELATED STRUCTURES AND FACILITIES — Includes
seasonal or permanent boat shelters or boat hoists.
WETLAND — An area where water is at, near or above the land surfaces
long enough to be capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation
and which has soils indicative of wet conditions.
WHARF — Any structure in navigable waters, extending along the shore and
generally connected with uplands throughout its length, built or maintained
for the purpose of providing a berth for watercraft or for loading or
unloading cargo or passengers onto or from the watercraft.
§ 260-2. Establishment of pierhead line.
A. Until such time that the Village establishes and the DNR approves a
pierhead line on the Fox River within the Village which meets the
requirements of Wis. Stat. §§ 30.11 and 30.13, and this chapter can be
amended accordingly, no pier, wharf or similar or related structure or
facility may exist beyond the greater of:
§ 256-10 WATERFORD CODE § 260-2
250:912
§ 260-3. Construction procedure.
Any person desiring to construct any pier, wharf or similar or related
structures or facilities on the Fox River within the Village shall follow the
procedures as follows.
§ 260-4. Permit required; cancellation or revocation.
(1) Boat length;
(2) A three-foot water depth contour; or
(3) A greater depth contour if required for the watercraft berthed.
B. Piers, wharves and similar or related structures or facilities may not in
any case interfere with public rights on the waterways and the rights of
other riparian owners.
A. No person may hereinafter construct, place or extend, enlarge or
replace a pier, wharf or similar or related structure or facility or multipier
development on the Fox River within the Village without first
applying for and obtaining a permit from the Village for that portion of
the river within the Village. Piers, wharves and similar or related
structures or facilities which are legally placed as of October 14, 1991
(the date of the adoption of this chapter), which are removed and
replaced seasonally, are not subject to permits or permit fees so long as
any nonconformity with the requirements of this chapter are not
expanded pursuant to § 260-5R.
B. Any person, developer, firm or corporation desiring to erect, construct,
place, extend, replace or repair any pier, wharf or similar or related
structure or facility or multi-pier development below the ordinary high
watermark of the Fox River within the Village shall make and file in the
office of the Village Clerk a written application for permit.
Developments with conceptual approval shall not be exempt from this
requirement. The application shall describe the real estate, pier, wharf
or similar or related structure or facility or multi-pier development or
extension thereof in detail, together with its location in regard to the
shoreline, pierhead line and bulkhead line if established, ordinary high
watermark location, water depth contours, extent of wetland vegetation
and with the distance to all property lines of the abutting neighboring
riparian lands, giving the details of the dimensions and kinds of
materials, details of fueling and any sewage disposal facilities or other
accessory construction, if applicable, together with drawings and any
additional details and specifications that the Village Plan Commission
may require. The application shall contain the name, residence, post
office address, telephone number and the signature of the riparian
owner of the shoreline on whose behalf the application is made and
shall also state the name, residence, post office address and telephone
number of the applicant, if different. The riparian owner and/or
applicant shall also provide the Village Clerk with the names and
§ 260-2 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 260-4
250:913
addresses of the abutting neighboring riparian owners with this
application for permit.
C. Upon filing of such application for permit, the Village Clerk shall refer it
immediately to the Village Plan Commission for investigation and report
at its next regular meeting, which Commission, after considering the
application and all evidence presented and hearing all parties desiring
to be heard, may recommend approval of or deny such application. The
Village Clerk shall notify abutting neighboring riparian owners by mail
no less than seven days prior to the Plan Commission meeting during
which this permit application will be presented.
D. No permit shall be granted by the Village Board unless it determines
that such construction will comply with the requirements of this
chapter and will be consistent with the following Village interests. The
fee for such permit shall be as described in the Village permit fee
schedule.163
(1) To preserve and protect the property and property values within
the Village.
(2) To preserve and protect the Fox River.
(3) To protect and clarify public interests and riparian rights on the Fox
River within the Village by:
(a) Prohibiting piers and similar structures in environmentally
sensitive aquatic habitats.
(b) Limiting the number and location of piers and similar
structures so as to avoid conflicting uses of adjacent
properties.
(c) Preventing safety hazards and controlling pier construction so
as to promote uniformity and preserve natural shoreline
aesthetics.
E. In the event the pier, wharf or similar or related structure or facility or
multi-pier development for which a permit has been granted shall not
be erected, constructed, placed, extended or maintained in accordance
with the plans, specifications, details and drawings submitted or in
accordance with any conditions imposed on the permit or in the event
such pier, wharf or similar or related structure or facility or multi-pier
development shall not be used, it is used in a manner detrimental to the
general public or interferes with the rights of the neighboring riparian
owners, or adversely affects a critical or significant fish or wildlife
habitat area, the Village Board may cancel and revoke the permit,
provided it shall first hold a hearing after fixing a time and place of
hearing and shall cause a written notice thereof to be issued and
delivered or mailed to the holder of such permit and also to the abutting
163. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 260-4 WATERFORD CODE § 260-4
250:914
§ 260-5. Construction and use requirements; existing piers and
wharfs.
neighboring riparian owners not less than seven days before the time
fixed for such hearing.
A. Riparian owners may construct, place, extend, enlarge or replace piers,
wharves or similar or related structures or facilities or multi-pier
developments in the waters of the Fox River within the Village in aid of
navigation, provided that such piers, wharves, similar or related
structures and facilities or multi-pier developments do not interfere
with public rights and safety in the waters or with the rights of
neighboring riparian owners or occupants and do not adversely affect a
critical or significant fish or wildlife habitat area, are subject to any
established pierhead line and other requirements of this chapter and
must be consistent with the permit and objectives as specified above.
B. Piers and wharves shall not exceed six feet in width.
C. Extensions or appurtenances to piers must comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter, including all permit requirements.
D. Construction shall be of materials of white, natural or earthtone colors,
aluminum or shall be visually inconspicuous as viewed against the
shoreline. Aluminum piers are permissible.
E. Lighting on a pier, wharf or similar or related structure or facility or
multi-pier development shall be down-focused white or yellow lights for
safety and to facilitate docking. Intermittent lighting, strobe or similar
lighting is prohibited.
F. New and existing piers, wharves or similar or related structures or
facilities or multi-pier developments shall include reflective white or
amber safety markers no more than five inches square placed on the
farthest corners of the structures.
G. Any pier, wharf or similar or related structure or facility or multi-pier
development extending beyond the natural shore or established
bulkhead line shall be so constructed as to allow the free movement of
water underneath and in such manner as will not cause the formation of
land on the bed of the Fox River within the Village.
H. Mooring structures and watercraft moored shall be set back a minimum
of 10 feet from common riparian rights lines and any additional
distance required to confine approach and docking of watercraft to the
owner's riparian zone.
I. There shall be a maximum of four permanently moored, registered
watercraft per pier, including lifts. For purposes of this subsection,
"permanently moored" is defined as being moored longer than seven
consecutive days.
§ 260-4 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 260-5
250:915
J. Subdivisions, multi-unit developments and planned unit developments
which share a common waterfront lot, parcel or common area may not
place more than one pier or wharf per 100 feet of shoreline. All multipier
developments and similar or related structures and facilities
serving subdivisions, multi-unit developments, planned unit
developments, condominiums and homeowners' associations shall be
constructed no less than 100 feet from any abutting neighboring lot
line.
K. No easements of access shall be granted over existing lots, and no such
easement shall be shown on a subdivision plat, multi-unit development
plat, planned unit development plat, condominium plat or in a
condominium agreement or homeowners' association agreement, which
provides greater access than provided above.
L. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 236.16, subdivisions with water frontage are
required to dedicate a public access to waterways which, under this
chapter, shall meet with Village, county and DNR approval or be waived
by the same.
M. Piers, wharves and similar or related structures and facilities may be
placed and maintained only by riparian owners.
N. Electrical, fueling and waste disposal facilities for business or
commercial facilities shall comply with all applicable state laws,
Wisconsin Administrative Codes, DNR and Village codes and any other
applicable safety and environmental protection laws. In addition, fuel
and waste holding tanks shall be set back from the ordinary high
watermark per applicable DNR regulations.
O. Such pier, wharf and similar or related structure or facility or multi-pier
development shall be subject to the pierhead line which may be
established pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 30.13(3).
P. All piers, wharves and similar or related structures and facilities or
multi-pier developments extending beyond the natural shore or
established bulkhead line shall be so maintained as to prevent any part
or parts thereof from floating free into the waters of the Fox River and
as to prevent the structures from becoming unsafe, unserviceable or
unsightly.
Q. The respective rights of neighboring riparian owners shall be
determined so as to give each riparian owner his due proportion of the
line of navigation by the extension of lot lines from the shoreline to the
line of navigation, by drawing a chord between each pair of property
lines at the point where each line meets the shoreline and bisecting the
resulting angle (coterminous riparian rights line extension) or by other
DNR-approved methods of determining riparian zones. All structures
shall be confined within each riparian owner's respective zone.
R. Every pier, wharf and similar or related structure, facility or multi-pier
development constructed, placed, extended or replaced on the Fox
§ 260-5 WATERFORD CODE § 260-5
250:916
§ 260-6. Prohibitions and exceptions. [Amended 1-24-2011 by Ord.
No. 567]
River within the Village in violation of this chapter is declared to be a
public nuisance, and the construction thereof may be enjoined and the
maintenance may be abated by action initiated by the Village.
S. Any pier, wharf, similar or related structure, facility or multi-pier
development existing in place as of October 14, 1991 (the date of
adoption of this chapter), and registered with the Village Clerk on or
before June 30, 1992, shall be considered to meet the requirements of
this chapter. Such structure may be repaired or replaced as long as any
nonconformity with the requirements of this chapter is not expanded.
T. Any person or developer who owns real estate abutting the shoreline of
the Fox River within the Village shall register the length, width,
construction and side yard setbacks of any of his or her or its piers,
wharves or similar or related structures or facilities or multi-pier
developments with the Village Clerk on or before June 30, 1992, along
with a color photograph of the structure. Any such structure in place as
of October 14, 1991, and registered before June 30, 1992, shall be
considered to meet the requirements of this chapter. Any pier, wharf or
similar or related structure or facility or multi-pier development not
registered by June 30, 1992, shall be required to comply with the terms
of this chapter.
U. Any pier, wharf or similar or related structure or facility or multi-pier
development which is legally placed as of October 14, 1991, and which
does not conform to this chapter shall be considered permissible and
preexisting and shall not constitute an unlawful obstruction of
navigable waters so long as the structures are registered as provided
herein before June 30, 1992, and are otherwise consistent with
applicable Village and DNR regulations and laws.
A. Any pier, wharf and similar or related structure or facility or multi-pier
development extending into navigable waters beyond the limits set
forth herein constitutes an unlawful obstruction of navigable waters.
B. Beyond the requirements within this chapter, riparian owners shall
further comply with any requirements of Wis. Stats. Ch. 30 and Wis.
Admin. Code Ch. NR 326, administered by the DNR.
C. Notwithstanding noncompliance with any requirement or limitation set
forth in § 260-5, the Plan Commission may recommend, and the Village
Board may approve, a pier permit for an applicant who obtains a pier
permit from the DNR pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 30 and Wis. Admin.
Code ch. NR 326 if the applicant grants a permanent easement to the
Village that provides public access to and allows public use of the
pier(s) permitted by the DNR. Under this subsection, the applicant may
reserve the number of permanent slips for the applicant’s private use
§ 260-5 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § 260-6
250:917
§ 260-7. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person found in violation of any
provision of this chapter or any order, rule or regulation made hereunder
shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of this
Municipal Code.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
488 4-24-2006 Subdivision of land
amendment
(impact fees)
Ch. 235
489 1-23-2006 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. III
490 1-23-2006 Peace and good order
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 174 and 245
491 2-27-2006 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 207
492 2-27-2006 Direct sellers amendment Ch. 120
493 3-27-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
494 4-10-2006 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 178
495 3-27-2006 Officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 50
496 4-24-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
497 6-12-2006 Burning Ch. 100
498 6-12-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
499 6-12-2006 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 174
500 7-24-2006 Zoning amendment
(Single-Family Residence
District-B)
Ch. 245
approved by the DNR and the Village Board. [Amended 6-27-2011 by
Ord. No. 576]
§ 260-6 WATERFORD CODE § DL-1
250:918
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
501 6-26-2006 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 28
502 9-11-2006 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 207
503 10-9-2006 Direct sellers repealer;
sales
Ch. 120, reference
only; Ch. 182
504 12-11-2006 Dances and dance halls
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 115 and 245
505 12-11-2006 Subdivision of land
amendment; zoning
amendment; shorelandwetland
zoning amendment
Chs. 235, 245, 255
Floodplain zoning Repealed by Ord.
No. 585
506 12-11-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
507 1-8-2007 Burning amendment Ch. 100
508 1-22-2007 Specific boards and
commissions amendment
Ch. 5, Art. I
509 1-22-2007 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 207
510 2-12-2007 Finance and taxation
amendment
Ch. 23
511 4-23-2007 Streets and sidewalks
amendment; subdivision of
land amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 191, 235 and
245
512 4-23-2007 Special events Ch. 188
513 4-23-2007 Subdivision of land
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 235 and 245
514 4-23-2007 Officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 50
515 8-13-2007 Snowmobiles; all-terrain
vehicles
Ch. 218, Arts. II, IV
516 6-25-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
517 Not adopted
518 9-24-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
§ DL-1 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § DL-1
250:919
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
519 9-24-2007 Parks and recreation;
direct sellers amendment;
special events amendment
Chs. 170; 182; 188
520 10-8-2007 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 28
521 11-12-2007 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 174
522 12-7-2007 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 28
523 1-28-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
524 1-28-2008 Mutual aid box alarm
system agreement
amendment
Ch. 28, footnote
only
525 2-25-2008 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 174
526 2-25-2008 Nuisances amendment Ch. 165
527 2-25-2008 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 207
528 3-24-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
529 6-23-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
530 6-23-2008 Health and Sanitation
Committee amendment
Chs. 76, 87, 115
531 6-23-2008 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment
Ch. 148
532 9-22-2008 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 207
533 10-13-2008 Officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 50
534 11-10-2008 Building, plumbing,
electrical and mechanical
code amendment
Ch. 98
535 11-24-2008 Finance and taxation
amendment
Ch. 23
536 1-12-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
537 3-9-2009 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 207
538 3-9-2009 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 223
§ DL-1 WATERFORD CODE § DL-1
250:920
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
539 3-23-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
540 4-13-2009 Fair and open housing Ch. 126
541 5-11-2009 Fireworks; zoning
amendment
Chs. 132; 245
542 5-11-2009 Police Department
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 544
543 6-22-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
544 9-14-2009 Police Department
amendment
Repealer only
545 10-26-2009 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 28
546 12-14-2009 Solid waste: garbage and
refuse amendment;
recycling amendment
Ch. 186, Arts. I and
II
547 1-11-2010 Fire Department
amendment; fireworks
amendment
Chs. 28; 132
548 1-11-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
549 3-22-2010 Annexation NCM
550 3-22-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
551 4-26-2010 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 28
552 5-24-2010 Finance and taxation
amendment
Ch. 23
553 5-9-2010 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 235
554 5-9-2010 Solid waste: solid waste
and recycling storage and
placement regulations
Ch. 186, Art. III
555 5-24-2010 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 207
556 6-28-2010 Animals: licensing and
control amendment
Ch. 87, Art. I
557 1-10-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
558 7-12-2010 Tobacco products: use and
sale restrictions
amendment
Ch. 202, Art. I
559 7-26-2010 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 207
§ DL-1 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § DL-1
250:921
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
560 10-11-2010 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 28
561 1-10-2011 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 235
562 11-22-2010 Penalties amendment;
officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. II; Ch.
50, Arts. I, II
563 12-13-2010 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 191
564 12-13-2010 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 207
565 1-24-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
566 1-24-2011 Tobacco products: use and
sale restrictions
amendment
Ch. 202, Art. I
567 1-24-2011 Piers amendment Ch. 260
568 2-28-2011 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 235
569 2-28-2011 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment; licensing
amendment
Chs. 148; 154
570 3-14-2011 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 59
571 3-14-2011 Brush, noxious weeds and
rank growth of vegetation;
nuisances amendment;
property maintenance
amendment
Chs. 95; 165; 178
572 4-11-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
573 4-25-2011 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 207
574 5-9-2011 Water and Sewer
Commission amendments
Chs. 5, Art. I; 76;
98; 170; 188; 191;
207; 223
575 7-11-2011 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 235
576 6-27-2011 Piers amendment Ch. 260
577 8-22-2011 Officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 50
§ DL-1 WATERFORD CODE § DL-1
250:922
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
578 Not adopted
579 10-24-2011 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment
Ch. 148
580 Not adopted
581 11-14-2011 Firearms and explosives
amendment
Ch. 131
582 11-14-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
583 12-12-2011 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 223
584 2-13-2012 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment
Ch. 148
585 4-9-2012 Zoning amendment;
floodplain zoning
Ch. 245; Ch. 256
586 4-23-2012 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 235
587 5-14-2012 Officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 50
588 5-14-2012 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 59
589 6-11-2012 Village Board amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 76; Ch. 245
590 7-23-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
591 7-23-2012 Fire Department elections Temporary
measure
592 9-10-2012 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 28
593 9-24-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
594 11-12-2012 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 207
595 11-26-2012 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 191
596 12-10-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
597 12-10-2012 Vehicles: snowmobiles Ch. 218, Art. II
598 12-10-2012 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 207
599 12-10-2012 Animals: licensing and
control amendment
Ch. 87, Art. II
§ DL-1 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § DL-1
250:923
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
600 1-14-2013 Fire and Police Commission
amendments
Ch. 5, Art. I; Ch.
28; Ch. 50; Ch. 59
601 4-8-2013 Building, Plumbing,
Electrical and Mechanical
Code amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 98; Ch. 245
602 1-28-2013 Building, Plumbing,
Electrical and Mechanical
Code amendment
Ch. 98
603 1-28-2013 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 207
604 1-28-2013 Fire Department elections
amendment
Temporary
measure
605 2-25-2013 Animals: licensing and
control amendment
Ch. 87, Art. II
606 4-22-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
607 6-24-2013 Floodplain zoning
amendment
Ch. 256
608 7-22-2013 Subdivision of land
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 235; Ch. 245
609 7-22-2013 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 223
610 11-11-2013 Building, Plumbing,
Electrical and Mechanical
Code amendment;
swimming pools
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 98; Ch. 195;
Ch. 245
611 10-28-2013 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 207
612 1-13-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
613 12-16-2013 Municipal deposit schedule
amendment
NCM
614 2-10-2014 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 191
615 3-10-2014 Sales amendment Ch. 182
616 4-28-2014 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment
Ch. 148
§ DL-1 WATERFORD CODE § DL-1
250:924
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
617 6-9-2014 Shoreland-wetland zoning
amendment
Ch. 255
618 6-23-2014 General provisions:
penalties amendment;
finance and taxation
amendment; traffic and
parking amendment
Ch. 1, Art. II; Ch.
23; Ch. 207
619 7-28-2014 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment
Ch. 148
620 7-28-2014 Animals: licensing and
control amendment
Ch. 87, Art. II
621 9-22-2014 General provisions:
penalties amendment;
specific boards and
commissions amendment;
officers and employees
amendment; animals:
licensing and control
amendment; building,
plumbing, electrical and
mechanical code
amendment; health and
sanitation repealer;
property maintenance
amendment; sales
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. II; Ch.
5, Art. I; Ch. 50;
Ch. 87, Art. II; Ch.
98; Ch. 142
(repealed by Ord.
No. 642); Ch. 178;
Ch. 182
622 12-22-2014 Building, plumbing,
electrical and mechanical
code amendment
Ch. 98
623 1-26-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
624 4-13-2015 Land Use Map amendment NCM
625 5-11-2015 Property maintenance
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 178; Ch. 245
626 5-11-2015 Cross-connection control;
water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 112; Ch. 223
627 5-11-2015 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 223
628 7-27-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
§ DL-1 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § DL-1
250:925
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
629 7-27-2015 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 207
630 8-10-2015 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 207
631 9-28-2015 Authorities, boards and
commissions: specific
boards and commissions
amendment; Fire
Department amendment;
officers and employees
amendment; police
protective services
Ch. 5, Art. I; Ch.
28; Ch. 50; Ch. 59
632 3-14-2016 Cross-connection control
amendment
Ch. 112
633 4-24-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
634 5-9-2016 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 207
635 6-13-2016 Land Use Map amendment NCM
636 5-23-2016 Finance and taxation
amendment
Ch. 23
637 6-13-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
638 8-22-2016 Solid waste: garbage and
refuse amendment;
recycling amendment
Ch. 186, Art. I; Ch.
186, Art. II
639 8-8-2016 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 174
640 9-25-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
641 12-12-2016 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment; licensing
amendment
Ch. 148; Ch. 154
642 9-26-2016 Health Department Ch. 142
643 11-28-2016 Zoning amendment
644 11-28-2016 Solid waste: garbage and
refuse amendment
Ch. 186, Art. I
645 12-12-2016 Specific boards and
commissions amendment;
finance and taxation
amendment
Ch. 5, Art. I; Ch. 23
§ DL-1 WATERFORD CODE § DL-1
250:926
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
646 12-27-2016 Animals: general provisions
amendment; licensing and
control amendment
Ch. 87, Art. I; Ch.
87, Art. II
647 12-27-2016 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 191
648 1-9-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
649 3-13-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
650 3-13-2017 Building, plumbing,
electrical and mechanical
code amendment;
subdivision of land
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 98; Ch. 235;
Ch. 245
651 2-27-2017 Boating amendment Ch. 93
652 5-8-2017 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 191
653 7-24-2017 Peace and Good Order
Amendment
Ch. 174
653a 7-24-2017 Designated Sex Offender
Prohibited Locations
NCM
654 8-28-2017 Emergency Management
Amendment; Officers and
Employees Amendment;
Hazardous Materials
Repealer
Ch. 17; Ch. 50; Ch.
137, reference only
655 8-28-2017 Animals: Licensing and
Control Amendment
Ch. 87, Art. II
656 10-9-2017 Animals: General
Provisions Amendment
Ch. 87, Art. I
657 Not adopted
658 7-23-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 245
659 2-26-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 245
660 3-12-2018 Finance and Taxation
Amendment; Village Board
Amendment
Ch. 23; Ch. 76
661 4-23-2018 Officers and Employees
Amendment
Ch. 50
662 6-11-2018 Subdivision of Land
Amendment
Ch. 235
§ DL-1 EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER § DL-1
250:927
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
663 5-14-2018 Finance and Taxation
Amendment
Ch. 23
664 7-9-2018 Fire Department
Amendment
Ch. 28
665 8-13-2018 Master Plan Amendment NCM
666 8-13-2018 Brush, Noxious Weeds and
Rank Growth of Vegetation
Amendment
Ch. 95
667 8-29-2018 Building, Plumbing,
Electrical and Mechanical
Code Amendment
Ch. 98
668 9-10-2018 Peace and Good Order
Amendment
Ch. 174
669 1-14-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 245
670 1-14-2019 Temporary Boating
Regulations
NCM
§ DL-1 WATERFORD CODE § DL-1
250:928