CODE OF ORDINANCES VILLAGE OF WAUNAKEE, WISCONSIN 
____________ 
Published in 2016 by Order of the Village Board 
____________ 

> 
WAUNAKEE VILLAGE OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Sam Ballweg, Trustee 
Gary Herzberg, Trustee 
Stephen Kraus, Trustee 
Bill Ranum, Trustee 
Sue Springman, Trustee 
Phil Willems, Trustee 
Chris Zellner, President 
Village Board 
____________ 
Todd Schmidt 
Village Administrator 
____________ 
Bryan Kleinmaier 
Village Attorney 
____________ 
Julee R. Helt, MMC 
Village Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Village of Waunakee, Wisconsin. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1998 Code, as supplemented through February 16, 2015, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the village board. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1998 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Amy Norton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Julee R. Helt, MMC, Village Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the Village readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the Village's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Waunakee, Wisconsin. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Waunakee, Wisconsin. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Waunakee, Wisconsin. 2016. 
ORDINANCE 16-12 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE VILLAGE OF WAUNAKEE, WISCONSIN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
The Village Board of the Village of Waunakee do hereby ordain as follows: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Village of Waunakee, Wisconsin," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 133, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before February 16. 2015, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished as follows: (i) for the first offense, by a forfeiture of not less $25.00 nor more than $1,000.00, plus costs of prosecution; and (ii) for each subsequent violation of the same provision by the person within one year, by a forfeiture of not less than $50.00, nor more than $1,000.00, plus costs of prosecution. Except as otherwise provided: (i) with respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense; and (ii) with respect to violations that are not continuous with respect to time, each act constitutes a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the village may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate an intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after February 16. 2015, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective January 1, 2017. 
Passed and adopted by the Village Board of the Village of Waunakee this 19th day of December, 2016. 
APPROVED 
___________ 
Chris Zellner, Village President 
ATTEST: 
___________ 
Julee Helt, Village Clerk 
APPROVED: 7-0 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 1 15-5  3-16-2015 Included 15-10  5-18-2015 Included 15-11  5-18-2015 Included 16-1  2-15-2016 Included 16-3  4- 4-2016 Included 16-4  4- 4-2016 Included 16-5  5- 2-2016 Included 16-9 10-17-2016 Included 16-10 11- 7-2016 Included 16-12 12-19-2016 Included Supp. No. 2 17-3  7-24-2017 Included 17-4  7-24-2017 Included 17-6 12-18-2017 Included 18-2  2-5-2018 Included 18-4  2-19-2018 Included 18-5  3-12-2018 Included 18-6  3-12-2018 Included 18-7  3-19-2018 Included 18-19 10-15-2018 Included  
PART I - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    This Code may be known and cited as the "Code of Ordinances, Village of Waunakee, Wisconsin." Such Code may also be cited as the "Waunakee Code." The Code consists of parts I and II. 
(Code 1988, § 1-1-1; Code 1998, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Authorizing preparation and adoption of a Code of Ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0103. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and construction of terms. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed according to their plain meaning in common usage. However, words or phrases with a technical or special meaning shall be understood and construed according to that technical or special meaning if such is the intent of this Code. 
    Code. Whenever the term "Code" is used without further qualification, it shall mean the Code of Ordinances, Village of Waunakee, Wisconsin, as designated in section 1-1. The Code consists of parts I and II. While part I of this Code is a codification of general ordinances and part II is a codification of ordinances pertaining to land development, provisions in part I may also pertain to land development and provisions in part II may not pertain to land development. Inclusion of provisions in part I that pertain to land development does not excuse noncompliance with such provisions. Inclusion of provisions in part II that do not pertain to land development does not excuse noncompliance with such provisions. 
    County. The term "county" means Dane County, Wisconsin. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a section appears requiring the head of a department or some other village officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty, unless the terms of the section specify otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as well as to males, unless the intention to give a more limited meaning is disclosed by the context. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(2). 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(8). 
    May. The term "may" shall be construed as being permissive and discretionary. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Number. A word importing the singular may extend and be applied to the plural as well as to the singular number, and vice versa. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(1). 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. If any oath or affirmation is required to be taken, such oath or affirmation shall be taken before and administered by some officer authorized by the laws of this state to administer oaths, at the place where the oath is required to be taken or administered, unless otherwise expressly directed, and, when necessary, duly certified by such officer. If an oath is administered, it shall end with the words "so help me God." In actions and proceedings in the courts, a person may take an oath or affirmation in communication with the administering officer by telephone or audiovisual means. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(24). 
    Officers and employees generally. Whenever any officer or employee is referred to by title, such as "administrator" or "police chief," such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the Village of Waunakee, Wisconsin." The term "officer" shall refer solely to local offices created by state statute. 
    Officials. The term "officials" means all village officers and employees. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, limited liability company or limited liability partnership of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" means any of the following entities: natural persons, corporations, partnerships, associations, bodies politic or any other entity of any kind which is capable of being sued. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action, evidences of debt and energy. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments, and rights thereto and interests therein. 
    Shall. The term "shall" shall be construed as being mandatory. 
    Signature. If the signature of any person is required by law, it shall always be the handwriting of such person or, if the person is unable to write, the person's mark or the person's name written by some other person at the person's request and in the person's presence. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(38). 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Wisconsin. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
    Village. The term "village" means the Village of Waunakee, Dane County, Wisconsin. 
    Village board. The term "village board" means the village board of Waunakee, Wisconsin, being the governing body of the village. 
    Wis. Stats. The abbreviation "Wis. Stats." means Wisconsin Statutes as now or hereafter amended. 
    Wisconsin Administrative Code, Wis. Admin. Code. The term "Wisconsin Administrative Code" and its abbreviation as "Wis. Admin. Code" means the Wisconsin Administrative Code as now or hereafter amended. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1988, § 1-1-2; Code 1998, § 1-2; Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 2-15-1999) 
State Law reference- Similar rules of statutory construction, Wis. Stats. §§ 990.001, 990.002. 
Sec. 1-3. - Conflict of provisions. 
(a)  If the provisions of different chapters of this Code conflict with each other, the provisions of each individual chapter shall control all issues arising out of the events and persons intended to be governed by that chapter. 
(b)  If the provisions of different sections of the same chapter conflict with each other, the provision which is more specific in its application to the events or persons raising the conflict shall control over the more general provision. 
(Code 1988, § 1-1-3; Code 1998, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Computation of time. 
(a)  The time within which an act is to be done or proceeding had or taken shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, and when any such time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday and of any legal holiday, from 12:00 midnight to 12:00 midnight, shall be excluded. 
(b)  If the last day within which an act is to be done or proceeding had or taken falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, the act may be done or the proceeding had or taken on the next secular day. 
(c)  When the last day within which a proceeding is to be had or taken or an act done, which consists of any payment to or the service upon or the filing with any officer, agent, agency, department or division of the state or of the county or a city, village, town, school district or other subdivision of the state, of any money, return, statement, report, notice or other document, falls on a Saturday and the duly established official office hours of such officer, agent, agency, department or division to which such payment is to be made or upon which such service is to be made or with which such return, statement, report, notice or other document is required to be filed do not include any office hours thereof on such Saturday, such proceeding may be had or taken or such act may be done on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday. 
(d)  Regardless of whether the time limited in any ordinance or any section of this Code for the taking of any proceeding or the doing of an act is measured from an event or from the date or day on which such event occurs, the day on which such event took place shall be excluded in the computation of such time. 
(e)  The term "legal holiday," as used in this section, means any statewide legal holiday provided in Wis. Stats. § 895.20. When an act is permitted to be done by the use of the postal service, and the last day within the time prescribed by law for performing such act falls on a legal public holiday under federal law or other holiday designated by the President such that the postal service does not receive registered mail or make regular deliveries on that day, the day shall be considered a legal holiday for purposes of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 1-1-2(c); Code 1998, § 1-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(4). 
Sec. 1-5. - Titles of sections and other headings. 
    The titles of the several sections and subsections and the titles of chapters, articles and divisions of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, subsection, chapter, article or division and shall not be deemed or taken to be substantive portions of such sections, subsections, chapters, articles or divisions, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, subsections, chapters, articles or divisions, including the titles, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1998, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - References to chapters or sections. 
(a)  Generally. All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(b)  Inclusion of penalty. Reference to any section of this Code shall be understood to refer to and include the penalty section relating thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided. 
(Code 1998, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - State law references, cross references and editor's notes. 
    The state law references, cross references and editor's notes appearing after sections throughout the Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to assist the user of the Code. 
(Code 1998, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
(Code 1998, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Village clerk to maintain copies of documents incorporated by reference. 
    Whenever any standard code, rule, regulation, statute or other written or printed matter is adopted by reference, it shall be deemed incorporated in this Code as if fully set forth in this Code, and the village clerk shall maintain in his office a copy of any such material as adopted and as amended from time to time. Materials on file at the village clerk's office shall be considered public records open to reasonable examination by any person during the office hours of the village clerk, subject to such restrictions on examination as the clerk imposes for the preservation of the material. 
(Code 1988, § 1-1-7; Code 1998, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The sections appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the 1998 Code of the Village of Waunakee, Wisconsin, and of ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1998, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-11. - Effective date of ordinances. 
    All ordinances passed by the village board subsequent to the adoption of this Code, except when otherwise specifically provided, shall take effect from and after their publication. 
(Code 1988, § 1-1-5(b); Code 1998, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-12. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the village, or any contract or obligations assumed by the village. 
(3)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the village not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(4)  Any appropriation ordinance or resolution. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the village board to any person, firm or corporation. 
(6)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the village. 
(7)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing the prescribing of street grades of any streets in the village. 
(8)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or special assessments therefor. 
(9)  Any ordinance or resolution approving or accepting any plat, subdivision or certified survey map in the village. 
(10)  Any ordinance annexing property to the village. 
(11)  Any ordinance or resolution regulating the erection, alteration, repair, demolition, moving or removal of buildings or other structures, except as these ordinances have been amended as part of this Code. 
(12)  Zoning ordinances or rezoning specific property; one- and two-family dwelling building code; and any other building codes except as these ordinances have been amended as part of this Code. 
(13)  Charter ordinances. 
(14)  The issuance of corporate bonds and notes of the village of whatever name or description. 
(15)  Water, sewer and electric rates, rules and regulations and sewer and water main construction. 
(Code 1998, § 1-12) 
Sec. 1-13. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1988, § 1-1-2(k); Code 1998, § 1-13) 
Sec. 1-14. - Prior offenses, acts, penalties or rights not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 1-14) 
Secs. 1-15-1-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 1-32. - Penalty for violation of Code. 
(a)  Other remedies. The village shall have any and all other remedies afforded by state statutes in addition to the forfeitures and costs of prosecution in this section. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by order, rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by order, rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by order, rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(c)  Every person concerned in the commission of any act that is a violation of this Code, whether the person directly commits the act or prosecutes, counsels, aids or abets in its commission, may be prosecuted and, upon conviction, is punishable as if the person had directly committed such act. 
(d)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a village officer or village employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, by a forfeiture of not less $25.00 nor more than $1,000.00, plus costs of prosecution. 
(2)  For each subsequent violation of the same provision by the person within one year, by a forfeiture of not less than $50.00, nor more than $1,000.00, plus costs of prosecution. 
(f)  In default of payment of such forfeiture and costs a person shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid, but such imprisonment shall not exceed 90 days; provided, however, that imprisonment under this subsection shall be imposed only in accordance with Wis. Stats. §§ 800.09 and 800.095. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  With respect to violations that are not continuous with respect to time, each act constitutes a separate offense. 
(h)  The imposition of a forfeiture does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(i)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
(Code 1988, § 1-1-6; Code 1998, §§ 1-15, 1-16, 1-27, 1-28) 
State Law reference- Bail, Wis. Stats. § 66.0111; penalties for violation of municipal ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0109; outstanding unpaid forfeitures, Wis. Stats. § 66.0115; actions for violation of municipal ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0114; fines and costs of municipal courts, Wis. Stats. § 814.65. 
Sec. 1-33. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Any additions or amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the village board to make such additions or amendments a part of this Code, are incorporated in this Code, so that a reference to this Code shall be understood as including such additions or amendments. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the village board. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code being amended in the following language: "Section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, Village of Waunakee, Wisconsin, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "Section _____ is hereby created to read as follows:_____." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this Code desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1998, § 1-24) 
Sec. 1-34. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by village personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered as to fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1998, § 1-25) 
Sec. 1-35. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of the court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 1-1-4; Code 1998, § 1-26) 
State Law reference- Severability, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(11). 
Secs. 1-36-1-58. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITATIONS 

Sec. 1-59. - Non-exclusivity of division. 
(a)  The provisions of this division do not preclude the village board from adopting any other ordinance providing for the enforcement of any other law or ordinance relating to the same or other matters. 
(b)  The issuance of a citation under the provisions of this division shall not preclude the village or any authorized officer from proceeding under any other section of this Code or village ordinance or law or proceeding under any other enforcement method to enforce any section of this Code or any ordinance, regulation or order. 
(Code 1988, § 1-2-7; Code 1998, § 1-23) 
Sec. 1-60. - Authorization for use of citation; officials authorized to issue citations. 
(a)  The village elects to use the citation method of enforcement of this Code and other village ordinances. 
(b)  Citations authorized in subsection (a) of this section may be issued by law enforcement officers of the village and by all village officers and village employees for violation of ordinances such officers and employees are authorized to enforce 
(Code 1988, §§ 1-2-1, 1-2-2; Code 1998, § 1-17) 
Sec. 1-61. - Form of citation. 
    The form of the citation to be issued by village police officers or other designated village officials, as authorized by section 1-60, is incorporated in this section by reference and shall provide for the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the alleged violator. 
(2)  The factual allegations describing the alleged violation. 
(3)  The time and place of the offense. 
(4)  The section of the ordinance violated. 
(5)  A designation of the offense in a manner that can be readily understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so. 
(6)  The time at which the alleged violator may appear in court. 
(7)  A statement which in essence informs the alleged violator: 
a.  That the alleged violator may make a cash deposit of a specified amount to be mailed to a specified official within a specified time. 
b.  That if the alleged violator makes such a deposit, he need not appear in court unless subsequently summoned. 
c.  That, if the alleged violator makes a cash deposit and does not appear in court, he either will be deemed to have tendered a plea of no contest and submitted to a forfeiture, plus costs, fees, and surcharges imposed under Wis. Stats. ch. 814, not to exceed the amount of the deposit or will be summoned into court to answer the complaint if the court does not accept the plea of no contest. 
d.  That, if the alleged violator does not make a cash deposit and does not appear in court at the time specified, the court may issue a summons or a warrant for the defendant's arrest or consider the nonappearance to be a plea of no contest and enter judgment under Wis. Stats. § 66.0113(3)(d), or the municipality may commence an action against the alleged violator to collect the forfeiture, plus costs, fees, and surcharges imposed under Wis. Stats. ch. 814. 
e.  That if the court finds that the violation involves an ordinance that prohibits conduct that is the same as or similar to conduct prohibited by state statute punishable by fine or imprisonment or both, and that the violation resulted in damage to the property of or physical injury to a person other than the alleged violator, the court may summon the alleged violator into court to determine if restitution shall be ordered under Wis. Stats. § 800.093. 
(8)  A direction that if the alleged violator elects to make a cash deposit, the alleged violator shall sign an appropriate statement which accompanies the citation to indicate that he read the statement required under Wis. Stats. 66.0113(7) and shall send the signed statement with the cash deposit. 
(9)  Such other information as may be deemed necessary. 
(Code 1988, § 1-2-3; Code 1998, § 1-19) 
Sec. 1-62. - Schedule of cash deposits. 
    The schedule of cash deposits for the various sections of this Code and other village ordinances for which a citation may be issued are as established in the deposit schedule adopted by the village board, a copy of which is on file with the village treasurer. In addition to the deposit amount listed, the deposit must include a penalty assessment imposed by Wis. Stats. § 757.05, and court costs as imposed by Wis. Stats. § 800.10, and a jail assessment, per Wis. Stats. § 302.46(1), where applicable, and a domestic abuse assessment, per Wis. Stats. § 973.055(1), where applicable. The police chief shall be provided a copy of all bond schedules and amendments thereto. 
(Code 1988, § 1-2-4; Code 1998, § 1-20; Ord. of 12-20-1993, § 2) 
Sec. 1-63. - Receipt of cash deposits. 
    As provided in section 1-62, deposits shall be made in cash, money order, personal check or certified check to the clerk of municipal court. Receipts shall be given for all deposits received. 
(Code 1988, § 1-2-5; Code 1998, § 1-21) 
Sec. 1-64. - Procedure. 
    The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0113(3), relating to a violator's options and procedure on default, is adopted and incorporated in this Code by reference. 
(Code 1988, § 1-2-6; Code 1998, § 1-22) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipalities generally, Wis. Stats. ch. 66; villages, Wis. Stats. ch. 61. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Form of government. 
    The village is a municipal corporation with the powers of a municipality at common law and governed by Wis. Stats. chs. 61 and 66, laws amending those chapters, other acts of the legislature and the constitution of the state. 
(Code 1988, § 2-1-1; Code 1998, § 2-1(a)) 
Sec. 2-2. - Election poll hours. 
    The voting polls in the village shall be opened as provided in Wis. Stats. § 6.78. 
(Code 1988, § 2-1-2; Code 1998, § 2-2) 
Sec. 2-3. - Official newspaper. 
    The official village newspaper shall be the Waunakee Tribune, to be used for the publication of legal and official notices and documents. 
(Code 1988, § 2-1-3; Code 1998, § 2-3) 
Sec. 2-4. - Voter registration. 
    Voter registration is conducted as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 6.36 and 6.55. 
(Code 1988, § 2-1-4; Code 1998, § 2-4) 
Sec. 2-5. - Election worker shifts. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 7.30(1), two or more sets of officials may be selected to work at different times on election days, and the clerk or his designee may establish different working hours for different officials assigned to the same polling place. Alternate officials shall also be appointed in a number sufficient to maintain adequate staffing of the polling place. 
(Code 1998, § 2-5; Ord. No. 02-15, § 1, 12-16-2002) 
Sec. 2-6. - Fees established by resolution. 
(a)  Fees required or authorized by this Code may be established or modified from time to time by resolution of the village board. 
(b)  If a fee in this Code is inconsistent with a fee established by resolution, the more recently established fee shall control. 
(c)  If this section is ineffective or invalid as to any fee, it shall not affect its effectiveness or validity as to any other fee. 
(Code 1998, § 2-6; Ord. No. 2003-15, §§ 1-3, 12-15-2003) 
Secs. 2-7-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VILLAGE BOARD[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Village board generally, Wis. Stats. § 61.20 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-31. - Trustees. 
    Election, term, number and the service of trustees as president are governed by Wis. Stats. §§ 61.20, 61.24, 61.325, 8.10 and 5.02(21). 
(Code 1988, § 2-2-2; Code 1998, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-32. - Village president. 
    Election and duties of the village president are covered by Wis. Stats. §§ 61.19, 61.24, 8.10 and 5.02(21). 
(Code 1988, § 2-2-3; Code 1998, § 2-33) 
Sec. 2-33. - Standing committees. 
(a)  Appointments. Members of standing committees of the village are appointed by the village president, subject to confirmation by the village board, and shall be composed as prescribed in subsection (b) of this section. Each committee shall consist of at least three members, at least one of whom shall be a member of the village board. The appointments to each committee shall be made at the annual organizational meeting of the village board. Standing committees shall review such matters as may be referred to them by the village board and shall submit to the village board recommendations for action thereon. 
(b)  Established. The following standing committees are established: 
(1)  Public works committee, composed of three trustees and four citizens, plus the director of public works in an ex officio capacity. 
(2)  Police committee, composed of three trustees and four citizens, plus the police chief in an ex officio capacity. 
(3)  Parks and recreation committee, composed of three trustees and four citizens, plus the community services director and the public works/parks superintendent in an ex officio capacity. 
(4)  Finance committee, composed of three trustees and four citizens, plus the finance director and village administrator in an ex officio capacity. 
(5)  Senior services committee, composed of two trustees and four citizens, plus the senior services director in an ex officio capacity. 
(c)  Designation of chairpersons; special committees. 
(1)  The president shall designate the chairperson of each standing committee. All committee appointments, except designation of the chairperson, shall be subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the village board. 
(2)  All trustees shall serve on at least one standing committee. The village president shall be an ex officio member of each standing committee or may be appointed to serve as a member of a specific committee. 
(3)  The village president may declare the entire village board a committee of the whole for an informal discussion at any time or for any purpose, and shall ex officio be chairperson of the committee of the whole. 
(4)  The village president may, from time to time, appoint such special committees as is deemed advisable or as provided by resolution by the village board, stating the number of members and the subject thereof to perform such duties as may be assigned to them from time to time. 
(d)  Ambiguity of committee authority. If any ambiguity or conflict occurs between this section on committee authority and any other section of this Code relating to the authority of a village officer, employee, board, committee or commission, the latter provisions of this Code shall prevail. 
(Code 1988, § 2-2-4; Code 1998, § 2-34; Ord. No. 92-7, § I, 5-18-1992; Ord. No. 94-16, § 1, 8-15-1994; Ord. No. 95-2, 3-6-1995; Ord. No. 95-3, 3-6-1995; Ord. No. 95-7, 8-7-1995; Ord. No. 96-3, § 2, 3-18-1996; Ord. No. 97-5, § 1, 5-5-1997; Ord. No. 98-8, § 1, 5-4-1998; Ord. No. 06-06, §§ 1, 2, 6-5-2006; Ord. No. 09-09, § 1, 9-8-2009; Ord. No. 12-10, § 1, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 2-34. - General powers. 
    The village board shall be vested with all the powers provided in Wis. Stats. § 61.34. 
(Code 1988, § 2-2-5(a); Code 1998, § 2-35) 
Sec. 2-35. - Cooperation with other municipalities. 
    The village board may enter into intergovernmental agreements in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 61.36. 
(Code 1988, § 2-2-6; Code 1998, § 2-36) 
Sec. 2-36. - Salaries. 
(a)  The president shall be paid a gross annual salary of $8,500.00 per calendar year, and each trustee shall be paid a gross annual salary of $4,250.00 per year for all services performed by each of them on behalf of the village in any capacity whatsoever and regardless of the number of meetings attended. Such annual salary is in lieu of all other compensation. Nothing contained in this subsection shall preclude the president or any trustee from being reimbursed for reasonable costs and expenses incurred in the performance of their respective duties. 
(b)  The above salary for the president and each trustee shall be effective upon the commencement of a new term of office for each such officer following the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. Until such time, the president and each trustee shall continue to receive the previously established salary. 
(Code 1988, § 2-2-8; Code 1998, § 2-37; Ord. No. 96-4, § 2, 3-18-1996; Ord. No. 02-14, § 1, 12-16-2002; Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 3-17-2008; Ord. No. 13-14, § 1, 11-18-2013) 
State Law reference- Authority to establish compensation, Wis. Stats. § 61.32. 
Secs. 2-37-2-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BYLAWS AND RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-61. - Regular meetings; annual organizational meeting; minutes. 
(a)  Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the village board shall be held on the first and third Mondays of each month at 6:00 p.m. local time. However, when the day so designated falls on a legal holiday, the regular meeting shall be held on the following day or at such other date and time as the village board shall designate. When the village board designates a date and time for the regular village board meeting, notice thereof shall be posted at the village hall and in the official village newspaper prior to such rescheduled meeting date. All meetings of the village board shall be held at the village hall, unless specified otherwise in the minutes of the preceding meeting or by written notice posted at the regular meeting place at least 24 hours (two hours in an emergency) prior to any meeting. In any event, all village board meetings shall be held within the boundaries of the village. 
(b)  Annual organizational meeting. The village board shall hold an annual organizational meeting at the first regular village board meeting in May for the purposes of organization. 
(c)  Minutes. Minutes of village board meetings are governed by Wis. Stats. § 62.25. 
(Code 1988, § 2-2-9; Code 1998, § 2-38; Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 12-9, § 1, 10-1-2012) 
State Law reference- Authority to prescribe meeting times, Wis. Stats. § 61.32; open meetings, Wis. Stats. § 19.81 et seq. 
Sec. 2-62. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings of the village board may be called with Wis. Stats. § 61.32. The village administrator shall select the day for the special meeting and notice given in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 61.32. The notice shall be delivered to each trustee a minimum of 24 hours prior to the meeting time. The village clerk shall cause an affidavit of such notice to be filed in the office prior to the time fixed for such special meeting. No business shall be transacted at a special meeting except for the purpose stated in the notice thereof. Notice to the public of special meetings shall conform to the open meeting requirements of Wis. Stats. § 61.32 and Wis. Stats. ch. 19, subch. V (Wis. Stats. § 19.81 et seq.). The village clerk shall give notice immediately upon the call for such meeting being filed with the village administrator. 
(Code 1988, § 2-2-10; Code 1998, § 2-39) 
State Law reference- Notice, Wis. Stats. § 985.02(2)(a); open meetings, Wis. Stats. § 19.81 et seq. 
Sec. 2-63. - Open meetings; adjournment of meetings. 
(a)  Open meeting law compliance. All meetings of the village board shall be open to the public, unless falling within a lawful exception found in Wis. Stats. ch. 19, subch. V (Wis. Stats. § 19.81 et seq.). 
(b)  Adjournment of meetings. Regular sessions of the village board may be adjourned from time to time for later reconvening. Any regular session of the village board may be adjourned for later reconvening as many times as the village board may determine to be necessary, advisable or convenient. The adjournment may be made for a new reconvening time later in the same day or on a subsequent day. Any such adjournment may provide for reconvening at the same place or another place. An adjournment to a closed session may be only for a permitted purpose as enumerated in Wis. Stats. § 19.85, and must meet the other requirements of Wis. Stats. § 19.85. 
(Code 1988, § 2-2-11; Code 1998, § 2-40) 
State Law reference- Meetings, Wis. Stats. § 61.32. 
Sec. 2-64. - Quorum. 
(a)  Four members of the village board shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may adjourn or compel attendance of absent members if a majority is not present. The president shall be counted in computing a quorum. 
(b)  When the presiding officer shall have called the members to order, the village clerk shall proceed to call the roll in alphabetical order, noting who are present and who are absent. If, after having gone through with the call, it shall appear that a quorum is not present, the fact shall be entered in the minutes, and the members present may adjourn to a later date in the month; if they do not establish the next meeting date, the village board shall stand adjourned to the time appointed for the next regular meeting unless a special meeting is called sooner. 
(Code 1988, § 2-2-12; Code 1998, § 2-41) 
State Law reference- Quorum, Wis. Stats. § 61.32. 
Sec. 2-65. - Presiding officers. 
(a)  Village president. The village president shall preside over meetings of the village board. In the absence of the village president, the village clerk shall call the meeting to order, and the trustees present shall elect one of their number acting president. 
(b)  Duties. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, shall decide all questions of order, and shall conduct the proceedings of the meeting in accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in this division. Any member shall have the right to appeal from a decision of the presiding officer. Such appeal is not debatable and must be sustained by a majority vote of the members present, excluding the presiding officer. 
(Code 1988, § 2-2-13; Code 1998, § 2-42) 
State Law reference- Presiding officers, Wis. Stats. § 61.32. 
Sec. 2-66. - Order of business. 
(a)  Generally. At all meetings, the order of business as specified in the notice of meeting shall be observed in conducting the business of the village board. 
(b)  Order to be followed. No business shall be taken up out of order unless authorized by the village president or by majority consent of all trustees and in the absence of any debate whatsoever. 
(Code 1988, § 2-2-14; Code 1998, § 2-43; Ord. No. 94-16, § 2, 8-15-1994) 
Sec. 2-67. - Introduction of bylaws, resolutions and ordinances; disposition of communications. 
(a)  Form of ordinances, bylaws and resolutions; referral to committee. All ordinances or bylaws submitted to the village board shall be in writing and shall include at the outset a brief statement of the subject matter and a title and shall be referred to the appropriate committee by the president. The committee shall report back to the village board on the matter at the next village board meeting. Unless requested by a trustee before a final vote is taken, no ordinance, resolution or bylaw need be read in full. Resolutions may be referred to an appropriate standing committee for an advisory recommendation. 
(b)  Placing ordinances on agenda. 
(1)  The village board may take action on an ordinance only if it appears on the written agenda for the meeting at which action is requested. 
(2)  Ordinances will be placed on the agenda for village board action only if they are submitted to the village administrator in written form and there is sufficient time to place the ordinance on the agenda. 
(c)  Disposition of petitions, communication, etc. Every petition or other writing of any kind, addressed to the village board or to the village administrator or other village officer for reference to the village board, shall be delivered by such other village officer to the village president or to the presiding officer of the village board as soon as convenient after receipt of such and in any event prior to or at the opening of the next meeting of the village board following the receipt of such. Every such petition or other writing and every paper, communication or other proceeding which shall come before the village board for action may be referred by the village president or presiding officer to the appropriate committee or commission, unless objection is made by some member of the village board. 
(Code 1988, § 2-2-15; Code 1998, § 2-44) 
Sec. 2-68. - Conduct of deliberations. 
(a)  A roll call shall not be necessary on any questions or motions before the village board except as follows: 
(1)  When the ayes and nays are requested by any member. 
(2)  On confirmation and on the adoption of any measure assessing or levying taxes, appropriations or disbursing money or creating any liability or charge against the village or any fund thereof in excess of $10,000.00. 
(3)  When required by the state statutes. 
(b)  All aye and nay votes shall be recorded in the official minutes. The ayes and nays shall be ordered upon any question at the request of any member of the village board or the president, and the village clerk shall call the roll in alphabetical order, starting with the letter "A," and then rotating the start of subsequent votes in chronological order. 
(c)  Except as follows, the village board shall in all other respects determine the rules of its procedure, which shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, which is incorporated in this section by reference, unless otherwise provided by ordinance or statute, except when otherwise limited or modified by this Code: 
(1)  No trustee shall address the village board until the trustee has been recognized by the presiding officer. The trustee shall thereupon address the village board and shall confine remarks to the question under discussion and avoid all personalities. 
(2)  When two or more members simultaneously seek recognition, the presiding officer shall name the member who is to speak first. 
(3)  No person other than a member shall address the village board except under order of business, except the citizens may address the village board with permission of the presiding officer as to matters which are being considered by the village board at the time. 
(4)  When a question is in debate, no action shall be in order except: 
a.  To adjourn. 
b.  To lay on the table. 
c.  The previous question. 
d.  To postpone to a certain date. 
e.  To refer to a standing, select or special committee. 
f.  To amend. 
g.  To postpone indefinitely. 
h.  To approve or deny. 
These several motions shall have precedence in the order in which they stand. 
(Code 1988, § 2-2-17; Code 1998, § 2-46) 
Sec. 2-69. - Reconsideration of questions. 
    When a question before the village board has been once decided, any member of the majority or, in case of a tie, any member voting in the affirmative, may move a reconsideration thereof; but if a motion to reconsider is made on a day subsequent to that on which the ordinance question was decided, a vote of the majority of the entire village board shall be required to sustain it. 
(Code 1988, § 2-2-18; Code 1998, § 2-47) 
Sec. 2-70. - Disturbances and disorderly conduct. 
    Whenever any disturbance or disorderly conduct shall occur in any of the meetings of the village board, the president may cause the room to be cleared of all persons causing such disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1988, § 2-2-19; Code 1998, § 2-48) 
Sec. 2-71. - Amendment of bylaws. 
    The bylaws of this article shall not be rescinded or amended unless the proposed amendment or motion to rescind has laid over from a regular meeting, and then it shall require a vote of two-thirds of all the members of the village board. 
(Code 1988, § 2-2-20; Code 1998, § 2-49) 
Sec. 2-72. - Suspension of bylaws. 
    The bylaws in this article shall not be suspended except by a two-thirds vote of all the members of the village board. 
(Code 1988, § 2-2-21; Code 1998, § 2-50) 
Secs. 2-73-2-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Village officers, Wis. Stats. § 61.193 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-103. - General powers. 
    Village officers shall have generally the powers and duties prescribed for like officers of villages, except as otherwise provided, and such powers and duties as are prescribed by law. Except as to the village president, village officers shall perform such duties as shall be required of them by the village board. Officers whose powers and duties are not enumerated in Wis. Stats. ch. 61 shall have such powers and duties as are prescribed by law for like officers or as are directed by the village board. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-1(a); Code 1998, § 2-76) 
Sec. 2-104. - Rules. 
    All village officers and departments may make the necessary rules for the conduct of their duties and incidental proceedings. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-1(b); Code 1998, § 2-77) 
Sec. 2-105. - Applicability of ethics laws. 
    The general laws for the punishment of bribery, misdemeanors and corruption in office shall apply to village officers. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-1(c); Code 1998, § 2-78) 
State Law reference- Bribery and official misconduct, Wis. Stats. § 946.11 et seq. 
Sec. 2-106. - Legal representation. 
    Whenever a village official in the official capacity is proceeded against or obliged to proceed before any court, board or commission to defend or maintain such official position or because of some act arising out of the performance of such official duties and such official has prevailed in such proceedings or the village board has ordered the proceedings discontinued, the village board may provide for payment to such official such sum as it sees fit, to reimburse such official for the expenses reasonably incurred for costs and attorney's fees. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-1(d); Code 1998, § 2-79) 
Sec. 2-107. - Eligibility for office. 
(a)  Eligibility of elected office is as provided for in Wis. Stats. § 61.19. 
(b)  An appointee by the village president, requiring confirmation by the village board, who shall be rejected by the village board shall be ineligible for appointment to the same office for one year thereafter. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-14; Code 1998, § 2-80) 
State Law reference- Annual appointments, Wis. Stats. § 61.19. 
Sec. 2-108. - Form, procedure of oaths of office. 
    The form, filing and general procedure for the taking of oaths by village officers shall be governed by Wis. Stats. ch. 19, subch. I (Wis. Stats. § 19.01 et seq.) 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-15(b); Code 1998, § 2-81) 
State Law reference- Oaths and bonds, Wis. Stats. § 19.01 et seq. 
Sec. 2-109. - Vacancies. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, vacancies in village elective and appointive positions occur as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 17.03 and 17.035. 
(b)  Vacancies in elective and appointive offices shall be filled as provided in Wis. Stats. § 17.24. 
(c)  If any officer is absent or temporarily incapacitated from any cause, the village board may appoint some person to discharge such duties until such officer returns or until such disability is removed. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-16; Code 1998, § 2-82) 
State Law reference- Terms, Wis. Stats. § 61.23. 
Sec. 2-110. - Removal from office. 
(a)  Elected officials. Elected village officials may be removed by the village board as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 17.13(2) and 17.16. 
(b)  Appointed officials. Appointed village officials may be removed as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 17.13(2) and 17.16. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-17; Code 1998, § 2-83) 
Sec. 2-111. - Custody of official property. 
    Village officers must observe the standards of care imposed by Wis. Stats. § 19.21, with respect to the care and custody of official property. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-18; Code 1998, § 2-84) 
Sec. 2-112. - Official bonds. 
    Every village officer shall, if required by law or the village board, upon entering upon the duties of such office, give a bond in such amount as may be determined by the village board, with such sureties as are approved by the village president, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of such office. Official bonds shall be filed with the office of the village clerk. Any person reelected or reappointed to the same office shall take and file an official bond for each term of service. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-19; Code 1998, § 2-85) 
State Law reference- Official bonds, Wis. Stats. § 61.22. 
Secs. 2-113-2-137. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 2-138. - Appointment; responsibilities; qualifications; compensation; term of office. 
    The village administrator shall be appointed by and responsible to the village board upon such terms and conditions, and for such compensation, as prescribed by the village board. The village administrator may also be appointed as clerk, treasurer, or both, pursuant to sections 2-195 and 2-215. The village administrator shall serve for an indefinite term. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-2(b); Code 1998, § 2-112; Ord. No. 00-6, § 3, 3-6-2000) 
Sec. 2-139. - Functions and duties. 
    The village administrator shall serve as the chief administrative officer of the village and shall be responsible to the village president and village board for the daily administration of all business affairs of the village, with the powers and duties as follows: 
(1)  The duties and responsibilities of the village administrator include directing the effective and efficient performance of all village employees and coordinating and expediting all village services, functions and programs. 
(2)  The village administrator shall carry out all directives approved by the village board which require administrative implementation through the active direction and coordination of the various village departments. 
(3)  The village administrator shall be responsible for directing, coordinating and expediting the activities of all village departments, except for such authority vested by state statutes in certain boards and commissions. These responsibilities shall include making or directing such studies as are necessary to answer the most economical, efficient operation of such departments, sources and programs from the various departments when deemed necessary. 
(4)  The village administrator shall be at all times responsible to the village president and village board and shall be responsible for effectuating all actions of the president and village board which require administrative implementation or where the village president and village board has directed the village administrator to act. 
(5)  The village administrator shall be responsible for the administration of all day-to-day operations and services provided by the village government, including supervision of all departments in the monitoring and enforcement of all village ordinances, resolutions, state statutes and village board directives. 
(6)  The village administrator shall establish and implement administrative procedures, which are fully consistent with approved policies established by the village board, to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of the village government. 
(7)  The village administrator shall keep informed concerning current federal, state and county legislation and administrative rules affecting the village and shall submit appropriate reports and recommendations thereon to the village board. 
(8)  The village administrator shall represent the village in matters involving legislative and intergovernmental affairs as required. 
(9)  The village administrator shall submit as deemed necessary recommendations or suggestions for improving the health, safety or welfare of the village and shall institute and operate a system whereby village departments, as well as persons having business with the village president or village board or any village department, may properly and efficiently conduct such business. 
(10)  The village administrator shall establish and maintain procedures to facilitate communication between citizens and village government to ensure that complaints, grievances, recommendations and other matters receive prompt attention and to ensure that all such matters are expeditiously resolved. 
(11)  The village administrator shall promote the economic well-being and growth of the village through public and private sector cooperation. 
(12)  The village administrator shall keep the village president and village board informed about activities of the village departments through oral or written reports. 
(13)  The village administrator or designee shall serve as the village's personnel officer, which shall include the development, implementation, interpretation and enforcement of the village personnel rules and regulations as approved by the village board. This includes recommending revisions to village personnel policies when necessary. In addition, the administrator shall recommend salary and wage scales for all village employees not covered by collective bargaining agreements and shall direct and oversee the process where personnel problems and grievances are promptly resolved. 
(14)  The village administrator shall have specific oversight authority over the operations of the library and police department and administrative responsibilities for all village operations (legal affairs, employee benefits, personnel matters, etc.). 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-2(c); Code 1998, § 2-113; Ord. No. 00-6, § 4, 3-6-2000) 
Secs. 2-140-2-161. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-162. - Appointment. 
    The village attorney is an appointed position. The village president shall, at the organizational meeting in May, appoint a village attorney, subject to confirmation by a majority of the members of the village board. The village attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the village board. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-4(a); Code 1998, § 2-141) 
Sec. 2-163. - Duties. 
(a)  The village attorney shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Conduct all of the legal business in which the village is interested. 
(2)  When requested by village officers, give written legal opinions, which shall be filed with the village. 
(3)  Draft ordinances, bonds and other instruments as may be required by village officers. 
(4)  Appoint an assistant, who shall have power to perform the village attorney's duties, and for whose acts the village attorney shall be responsible to the village. Such assistant shall receive no compensation from the village, unless previously provided by ordinance. 
(5)  Perform such other duties as provided by state law and as designated by the village board. 
(b)  The village board may employ and compensate special counsel to assist in or take charge of any matter in which the village is interested. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-4(b); Code 1998, § 2-142) 
Secs. 2-164-2-194. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CLERK[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Village clerk, Wis. Stats. § 61.25; deputy village clerk, Wis. Stats. § 61.261. 

Sec. 2-195. - Appointment. 
    The clerk shall be appointed by the village president, subject to confirmation by a majority of all the members of the village board. The village, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 61.197, elects to not be bound by the provisions of state law providing for the election of the clerk. 
(Code 1998, § 2-171; Ord. No. 00-6, § 6, 3-6-2000) 
Sec. 2-196. - Term of office. 
    The clerk shall have an indefinite term of office. 
(Code 1998, § 2-172; Ord. No. 00-6, § 6, 3-6-2000) 
Sec. 2-197. - Duties. 
    The clerk shall serve under the supervision and direction of the village administrator. The village clerk shall have the duties set forth in Wis. Stats. § 61.25 and this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 2-173; Ord. No. 00-6, § 6, 3-6-2000) 
Sec. 2-198. - Bond. 
    The acts of the clerk shall be covered by an official bond in such amount as directed by the village board and approved by the village president. 
(Code 1998, § 2-174; Ord. No. 00-6, § 6, 3-6-2000) 
Secs. 2-199-2-214. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - TREASURER[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Village treasurer, Wis. Stats. § 61.26; deputy village treasurer, Wis. Stats. § 61.261. 

Sec. 2-215. - Appointment. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 61.197, the treasurer shall be appointed by the village president, subject to confirmation by a majority of all the members of the village board. 
(Code 1998, § 2-185; Ord. No. 00-6, § 7, 3-6-2000) 
Sec. 2-216. - Term of office. 
    The treasurer shall have an indefinite term of office. 
(Code 1998, § 2-186; Ord. No. 00-6, § 7, 3-6-2000) 
Sec. 2-217. - Duties. 
    The treasurer shall serve under the supervision and direction of the village administrator. The village treasurer shall have the duties set forth in Wis. Stats. § 61.26. The finance director shall perform the duties of the treasurer. 
(Code 1998, § 2-187; Ord. No. 00-6, § 7, 3-6-2000) 
Sec. 2-218. - Bond. 
    The acts of the treasurer shall be covered by an official bond in such amount as directed by the village board and approved by the village president. In lieu of requiring the treasurer to deliver a bond to the county treasurer, the village elects to be obligated to pay all taxes of any kind that the village treasurer is required to pay to the county treasurer. 
(Code 1998, § 2-188; Ord. No. 00-6, § 7, 3-6-2000) 
State Law reference- Public official's oaths and bonds, Wis. Stats. § 19.01. 
Secs. 2-219-2-232. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - FINANCE DIRECTOR 

Sec. 2-233. - Functions. 
(a)  The finance director shall direct and oversee the village's purchasing policy as approved by the village board. 
(b)  The finance director, in coordination with the village administrator, shall administer the payroll. The village administrator or designee shall maintain accurate and complete official employment records for all village employees. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-2(c); Code 1998, § 2-113; Ord. No. 00-6, § 4, 3-6-2000) 
Sec. 2-234-2-2-252. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ASSESSOR[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Village assessor, Wis. Stats. §§ 61.197(f), 61.27; affidavit of assessor, Wis. Stats. § 70.49; assessor certification, Wis. Stats. § 73.02. 

Sec. 2-253. - State law superseded. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 61.195, 61.197 and 61.21, the village elects not to be governed by those portions of Wis. Stats. §§ 61.19 and 61.23 which relate to the selection and tenure of the village assessor and which are in conflict with this division. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-10(a); Code 1998, § 2-201) 
Sec. 2-254. - Appointment; designation of person responsible for assessments. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "independent contractor" means a person who either is under contract to furnish appraisal and assessment services or is customarily engaged in an independently established trade, business or profession in which the services are offered to the general public. 
(b)  Instead of being elected, the assessor or assessing firm shall be appointed by the village president, subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the members-elect of the village board. A corporation or an independent contractor may be appointed as the village assessor. The corporation or independent contractor so appointed shall designate the person responsible for the assessment. The designee shall file the official oath under Wis. Stats. § 19.01 and shall sign the affidavit of the assessor attached to the assessment roll under Wis. Stats. § 70.49. No person may be designated by any corporation or independent contractor unless such person has been granted the appropriate certification under Wis. Stats. § 73.09. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-10(b); Code 1998, § 2-202) 
Sec. 2-255. - Confidentiality of information. 
    Whenever the assessor, in the performance of the assessor's duties, requests or obtains income and expense information pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.47(7)(af), or any successor statute thereto, then, such income and expense information that is provided to the assessor shall be held by the assessor on a confidential basis, except, however, that said information may be revealed to and used by persons: in the discharge of duties imposed by law; in the discharge of duties imposed by office (including, but not limited to, use by the assessor in performance of official duties of the assessor's office and use by the board of review in performance of its official duties); or pursuant to order of a court. Income and expense information provided to the assessor under Wis. Stats. § 70.47(7)(af), unless a court determines that it is inaccurate, is, per section 70.47(7)(af), not subject to the right of inspection and copying under Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1). 
(Code 1998, § 2-204; Ord. No. 02-13, § 1, 11-28-2002) 
Secs. 2-256-2-273. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS 

Sec. 2-274. - Appointment. 
    The director of public works shall be appointed by the village president, subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the village board, on the basis of merit, training, experience, administrative ability, efficiency and general qualifications and fitness for performing the duties of the position. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-8(a); Code 1998, § 2-231) 
Sec. 2-275. - Term of office. 
    The director of public works shall have an indefinite term of office. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-8(b); Code 1998, § 2-232) 
Sec. 2-276. - Duties and powers. 
    The director of public works shall serve under the supervision and direction of the village administrator. The director of public works shall: 
(1)  Have general charge and supervision of all public works in the village. 
(2)  Be responsible for the maintenance, repair and construction of streets, alleys, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, bridges, street signs, storm sewers, village buildings and structures and all machinery, equipment and property used in any activity under the director's control. 
(3)  Have charge of all public services, including garbage and refuse collection and disposal, snow and ice removal, street cleaning and flushing, mosquito and rodent control. 
(4)  Perform such other activities and duties as are required from time to time by the village board or by the job description. 
(5)  Have specific oversight authority over operations, but not administrative matters, regarding public works. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-8(c); Code 1998, § 2-233) 
Secs. 2-277-2-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - ETHICAL STANDARDS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Local government ethics, Wis. Stats. § 19.59. 

Sec. 2-301. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Public employee. Any person excluded from the definition of a public officer who is employed by the village. 
(2)  Public officer. Those persons serving in statutory elected or appointed offices provided for in Wis. Stats. ch. 61 and all members appointed to boards, committees and commissions established or appointed by the village president or village board, whether paid or unpaid. 
(Code 1988, § 2-5-1; Code 1998, § 2-301) 
Sec. 2-302. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is declared that high ethical standards among village officers and employees are essential to the conduct of good representative government and that a code of ethics for the guidance of public officers and employees will help them avoid conflicts with improved standards of public service and will promote and strengthen the confidence of the residents of the village in their public officers and employees. The purpose of this division is to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such village officers and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the public interest and which compromise, or appear to compromise, public trust in the fairness, independence and integrity of village officers and employees and their official actions. 
(Code 1988, § 2-5-2; Code 1998, § 2-302) 
Sec. 2-303. - Statutory standards of conduct. 
    Violation of the provisions of the following sections of the state statutes are made a violation of the village ethical standards and shall apply to all public officers and public employees, whenever applicable: 
(1)  Wis. Stats. § 946.10, Bribery of Public Officers and Employees. 
(2)  Wis. Stats. § 946.11, Special Privileges from Public Utilities. 
(3)  Wis. Stats. § 946.12, Misconduct in Public Office. 
(4)  Wis. Stats. § 946.13, Private Interest in Public Contract Prohibited. 
(Code 1988, § 2-5-3; Code 1998, § 2-303) 
Sec. 2-304. - Specific conflicts of interest. 
(a)  Use of public property. No public officer or employee shall use or permit the use of village vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such services are available to the public generally or are provided as village policy for the use of such officer or employee in the conduct of official business, as authorized by the village board or authorized board, commission or committee. 
(b)  Disclosure of interest. Except as provided in this section, no public officer or public employee shall engage in any business transaction with the village or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of the public officer's or public employee's official duties or which will tend to impair the independence of judgment or action in the performance of such official duties. Any public officer or employee who has a substantial financial interest, including employment, in any business entity entering into, proposing to enter into or bidding on any transaction with the village or who, as part of such official duties, will be making an official decision or recommendation significantly affecting a business competitor, client or regular customer shall disclose such interest to the membership of the village board or committee, board or commission thereof, as appropriate, to be recorded in the minutes of that body. Upon such disclosure, it is advised that the public officer or employee abstain from voting on the matter and from participating in the discussion of the matter. 
(c)  Representing private interests before village board or village agencies. No public officer or employee, including persons engaged to provide professional services to the village, shall represent, for compensation, private interests before the village board or any village board, commission or committee without disclosure of the private business relationship and without the explicit consent of the village board. 
(d)  Disclosure of confidential information. No public officer or employee shall, without proper authorization of the village board, disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or affairs of the village, nor shall such public officer or employee use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of such public officer or employee or others. 
(e)  Gifts and favors. No public officer or employee shall accept anything of value, whether in the form of a gift, service loan or promise, from any person who, to such public officer or employee's knowledge, has a direct financial interest in any transaction or official business with the village, which may tend to impair the independence of judgment or action in the performance of such official duties. However, it is not a conflict of interest for any public officer or employee to receive a gift or gratuity that is an unsolicited item of nominal intrinsic value, such as a meal up to $25.00 in value. 
(f)  Outside employment unless approved by the village board. No full-time employee of the village shall engage in any other remunerative employment if such other employment interferes or conflicts with the ability of the employee to perform the normal duties in an efficient and regular manner. No full-time personnel may alter normal work scheduling or ask that scheduling changes be made for the normal work schedule so as to accommodate such other employment, unless approved per policy established by village board. 
(g)  Advisory opinion. Any questions as to the interpretation of this division shall be referred to the village attorney for an advisory opinion. 
(Code 1988, § 2-5-4; Code 1998, § 2-304) 
Secs. 2-305-2-326. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND AUTHORITIES 

Sec. 2-327. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings. Every board, committee and commission created by or existing under the ordinances of the village shall: 
(1)  Schedule a date, time and place for its meetings. 
(2)  Give notice of its meetings in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 19.84. 
(b)  Special meetings. Nothing in subsection (a) of this section shall preclude the calling of a special meeting or dispensing with the or posting of the agenda, for good cause, but such special meetings shall nonetheless comply in all respects with Wis. Stats. §§ 19.81 and 19.89. 
(c)  Minutes. The secretary of each board, committee and commission shall file a copy of the meeting minutes of such board, committee or commission with the village administrator. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-11; Code 1998, § 2-361) 
Sec. 2-328. - Residency requirement. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no person not a resident of and not residing in the village shall be appointed in a voting capacity to any village board, committee or commission. Any board or commission member who moves from the village shall be removed from such board or commission, but may be appointed to serve in an ex officio capacity. 
(b)  Members of the library board need not reside in the village. Members of the police commission need not reside in the village if the member resides within a 30-mile radius of the intersection of Main Street and County Trunk Highway Q, Village of Waunakee. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-12(a); Code 1998, § 2-362; Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-5-2000) 
Sec. 2-329. - Attendance standard. 
(a)  Members of boards, committees and commissions are required to attend a minimum of two-thirds of the meetings in each six-month period of their respective bodies. Failure to comply with this section may result in the removal and replacement of the official found to be in noncompliance. 
(b)  Temporary alternate. 
(1)  Whenever a quorum is unavailable for a scheduled public meeting of the boards and commissions identified in subsection (b)(2) of this section and such unavailability is known at least three days before such meeting, the village president shall appoint a citizen, subject to confirmation by the village board, to act as an alternate member of the board or commission at such meeting. If the lack of a quorum is expected to continue for more than one scheduled meeting, the appointment shall continue until the end of the period of unavailability. An alternate member shall have the same duties and responsibilities as a regular member with regard to any meetings in which the alternate member is involved. 
(2)  The boards and commissions to which subsection (b)(1) of this section shall apply shall include the following: 
a.  The board of police commissioners established pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 61.65(1)(b)2. 
b.  The library board appointed pursuant to section 42-19 of this Code. 
c.  The zoning board of appeals established pursuant to section 101-56 of this Code. 
d.  The board of review established pursuant to section 62-21 of this Code. 
e.  The public utilities commission established pursuant to section 74-45 of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-12(b); Code 1998, § 2-363; Ord. No. 99-6, § 1, 2, 4-5-1999) 
Sec. 2-330. - Compensation. 
    Compensation for the members of boards, commissions, committees and authorities shall be as established by the village board at the organizational meeting in May. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-1(b)(2); Code 1998, § 90-28) 
Sec. 2-331. - Waunakee economic development commission. 
(a)  Establishment. An economic development commission for the village is hereby created as an advisory body to the village president and board of trustees. 
(b)  Purpose. To carry out economic development policies and advise the village board on the following goals and objectives: 
(1)  Business and industrial park. Work to preserve and grow the village's business and industrial parks and those doing business within the parks. 
(2)  Commercial, retail. To facilitate a successful commercial and retail environment. 
(3)  Housing. To promote a diverse housing mix that supports the needs of the local market. 
(4)  Growth. To oversee the village's economic growth in accordance with the village's comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Composition. 
(1)  The WEDC board of directors shall consist of up to nine members, and shall be appointed by the village president, subject to the approval of the village board. WEDC membership shall include: 
a.  Two members of the village board. 
b.  One member of the plan commission. 
c.  School district superintendent or his designee. 
d.  Waunakee-Westport Area Chamber of Commerce Executive Director or his designee. 
e.  City utilities general manager or his designee. 
f.  Three village residents. 
(2)  Members will be appointed for three-year terms. 
(3)  The WEDC shall elect a chairperson at its first meeting following annual appointment. 
(4)  The WEDC may appoint temporary task forces for the WEDC to deal with specialized tasks related to economic development. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The WEDC would have the responsibility of developing, and administering the various elements of Waunakee's economic development programs and policies, subject to approval by the board of trustees. 
(e)  Meetings and rules. Public notice of all regular and special meetings of the economic development commission shall be given to the public and news media as required by the law. The rules of procedure of the WEDC shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised (2000), as modified for small bodies. 
(Code 1998, § 2-365; Ord. No. 09-09, § 2, 9-8-2009; Ord. No. 15-1, § 1, 2-2-2015) 
Sec. 2-332. - Tourism commission. 
(a)  Establishment . The tourism commission of the village is hereby created for the purpose of administering the village's room tax revenues for tourism promotion and tourism development. 
(b)  Purpose . To carry out the tourism promotion and tourism development for the village on the following actions: 
(1)  Shall contract with another organization to perform the functions of a tourism entity. 
(2)  Shall use the room tax revenue that it receives from the village for tourism promotion and tourism development (as defined by the statute) in the village. 
(3)  Shall report annually to the village on or before April of each year providing the room tax revenue and the purposes for which revenues were spent. 
(c)  Composition . 
(1)  The tourism commission shall consist of five members, and shall be appointed by the village president, subject to approval by the village board. The commission shall include: 
a.  Village administrator/economic development director, or his/her designee. 
b.  Chamber director, or his/her designee. 
c.  Two village residents. 
d.  One member of Wisconsin hotel and motel industry. 
(Ord. No. 16-9, § 4(2-366), 10-17-2016) 
Secs. 2-333-2-351. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal finance, Wis. Stats. § 66.0601 et seq. 

Sec. 2-352. - Village budget. 
(a)  Departmental estimates. When requested by the finance director, each officer, department and committee shall annually file with the finance director an itemized statement of disbursements made to carry out the powers and duties of such officer, department or committee during the preceding fiscal year; a detailed statement of the receipts and disbursements on account of any special fund under the supervision of such officer, department or committee during such year and of the conditions and management of such fund; and detailed estimates of the same matters for the current fiscal year and for the ensuing fiscal year. Such statements shall be presented in the form prescribed by the finance director, shall be designated as "departmental estimates," and shall be as nearly uniform as possible for the main division of all departments. 
(b)  Consideration of estimates. The village administrator and finance director shall consider such departmental estimates in consultation with the department head and shall recommend to the village board's finance committee a budget amount for such department or activity. The finance committee shall consider the budget recommendations submitted by the village administrator in developing a proposed budget for submission to the village board. 
(c)  Form. The form of the municipal budget shall be as provided in Wis. Stats. § 65.90 and shall include the capital improvement and equipment levy. 
(d)  Copies; public inspection. The finance director shall provide a reasonable number of copies of the budget summary thus prepared for distribution to citizens. The entire fiscal budget shall be available for public inspection in the office of the village clerk during regular office hours. 
(e)  Report and hearing. 
(1)  The finance committee shall make a report to the village board no later than the village board's first November meeting. The report shall include the estimated cost of improvements as well as the estimated cost of operating the various departments and all other costs, including interest charges, for which money will have to be raised by taxation during the following year. 
(2)  A summary of such budget and notice of the time and place where such budget and detail is available for public inspection and notice of the time and place for holding the public hearing thereon shall be published in the official newspaper of the village as a class 1 notice. 
(3)  Not less than 15 days after the publication of the proposed budget and the notice of hearing thereon, the public hearing shall be held at the time and place stipulated, at which time any resident or taxpayer of the village shall have an opportunity to be heard on the proposed budget. The budget hearing may be adjourned from time to time. Following the public hearing, the proposed appropriation may be changed or amended and shall take the same course in the village board as other ordinances. 
(Code 1988, § 3-1-3; Code 1998, § 2-452) 
State Law reference- Municipal budgets, Wis. Stats. § 65.90. 
Sec. 2-353. - Disbursement of funds in accordance with appropriation. 
    No money shall be drawn from the village treasury nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance of the annual appropriation in the adopted budget or when changed as authorized by Wis. Stats. § 65.90(5)(a). At the close of each fiscal year an unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general fund and shall be subject to re-appropriation. However, appropriations may be made by the village board, to be paid out of the income of the current year, in furtherance of improvements or other objects or works which will not be completed within such year, and any such appropriation shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned. 
(Code 1988, § 3-1-5; Code 1998, § 2-453) 
Sec. 2-354. - Public depositories. 
    The village board shall designate the public depository within this state within which village funds shall be deposited. When the money is deposited in such depository in the name of the village, village officials and bondsmen shall not be liable for such losses as are defined by state law. The interest arising therefrom shall be paid into the village treasury. 
(Code 1988, § 3-1-7; Code 1998, § 2-454) 
State Law reference- Depositories, Wis. Stats. § 34.05 et seq. 
Sec. 2-355. - Claims against village. 
(a)  Certification. Prior to submission of any account, demand or claim to the village board for approval of payment, the village treasurer shall certify or cause to be endorsed thereon or on attached papers compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  Funds are available therefor pursuant to the budget. 
(2)  The item or service was duly authorized by the proper official or agency and has been received or rendered in accordance with the purchasing agreement. 
(3)  The claim is accurate in amount and a proper charge against the treasury. 
(b)  Payment of regular wages and nondiscretionary claims. Regular wages or salaries of village officers and employees shall be paid by payroll, verified by the proper village official, department head, board or commission, and filed with the administrator in time for payment on the regular payday. Nondiscretionary, routine claims, such as utility statements, insurance, etc., may be paid by the village treasurer without following the procedures of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 3-1-8; Code 1998, § 2-455) 
State Law reference- Auditing claims, Wis. Stats. § 61.51. 
Sec. 2-356. - Receipt for payments. 
(a)  The village shall not receive any money into the treasury from any source, except on account of taxes levied and collected during the fiscal year for which they may then be serving, without giving a receipt therefor in the manner specified by the village board. 
(b)  Upon the payment of any money, except for taxes as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the village treasurer shall prepare a receipt in duplicate for the money so received. The treasurer shall charge the amount thereof to the treasury and credit the proper account. The payment of the money to any receiving agent of the village or to the village or to the village treasurer shall be safeguarded in such manner as the village board shall direct. 
(Code 1988, § 3-1-10; Code 1998, § 2-456) 
State Law reference- Receipts for fees, Wis. Stats. § 66.0515. 
Sec. 2-357. - Statement of real property status. 
    The village clerk is authorized to prepare a statement of real property status form to be used to provide information often requested for transfers of real property, such as the amount of outstanding special assessments, deferred assessments, changes in assessments, amount of taxes; outstanding water, electric and sewer bills; current water, electric and sewer bills; contemplated improvements; floodplain status; violations of the building and health codes; and similar information. Any such information sought shall be provided to the person requesting it on such form. Requests for statements of real property status shall be made to the village clerk a minimum of seven days in advance. A fee of in the amount established by resolution shall be charged for compiling this information. 
(Code 1988, § 3-1-11; Code 1998, § 2-457; Ord. No. 98-12, § 1, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 2-358. - Bidding procedures for public construction. 
(a)  Adopted. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 61.54, the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.15 shall be applicable to all village contracts for public construction of $25,000.00 or larger. The authority vested in the board of public works by Wis. Stats. § 62.15 shall be exercised by the village board or by a committee designated by the village board. 
(b)  Construction by village. Any class of public construction may be done directly by the village without submitting the work for bids, provided that the construction is authorized by a vote of three-fourths of all members of the village board. 
(Code 1988, § 3-1-12; Code 1998, § 2-458; Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 7-20-2009) 
State Law reference- Bidding, Wis. Stats. §§ 61.54, 61.55, 62.15. 
Sec. 2-359. - Bid solicitation procedures for purchases. 
    As an alternative to the bidding process, the village and village departments may use the municipal cooperative purchasing service program administered by the state or other similar accredited purchasing programs to purchase goods and services. 
(Code 1988, § 3-1-13; Code 1998, § 2-459; Ord. No. 09-07, §§ 2, 3, 7-20-2009; Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Secs. 2-360-2-407. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC RECORDS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Public records, Wis. Stats. § 19.21 et seq. 

Sec. 2-408. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Actual cost means the total cost of personnel including wages, fringe benefits and all other benefits and overhead related to the time spent in search of records. 
    Authority means any of the following village entities having custody of a village record: an office, elected official, agency, board, commission, committee, council, department or public body corporate and politic created by constitution, law, ordinance, rule or order; or a formally constituted subunit of such. 
    Custodian means that officer, department head, division head or employee of the village designated under section 2-409 or otherwise responsible by law to keep and preserve any village records or files, to deposit or keep such records in such office, or to lawfully be in possession or entitled to possession of such public records and who is required by this article to respond to requests for access to such records. 
    Direct cost means the actual cost of personnel plus all expenses for paper, copier time, depreciation and supplies. 
    Record means any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual, or electromagnetic information or electronically generated or stored data is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical form or characteristics, which has been created or is being kept by an authority. The term "record" includes, but is not limited to, handwritten, typed or printed pages, maps, charts, photographs, films, recordings, tapes, optical disks, and any other medium on which electronically generated or stored data is recorded or preserved. The term "record" does not include drafts, notes, preliminary computations and like materials prepared for the originator's personal use or prepared by the originator in the name of a person for whom the originator is working; materials which are purely the personal property of the custodian and have no relation to his office; materials to which access is limited by copyright, patent or bequest; and published materials in the possession of an authority other than a public library which are available for sale, or which are available for inspection at a public library. 
(Code 1988, § 3-3-1; Code 1998, § 2-557) 
State Law reference- Record defined, Wis. Stats. § 19.32. 
Sec. 2-409. - Legal custodians. 
(a)  Custodians of elected official's records and the records of such office are determined by Wis. Stats. § 19.33(a). 
(b)  The village clerk shall act as legal custodian for the village board and for all village records, except that the following offices or authorities shall have as a legal custodian of records the individual so named. 
Authority Designated Legal 
Custodian Police department Police chief  
(c)  Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in the legal custodian's absence or in the absence of the legal custodian's designee, and each legal custodian shall send notice of the designated deputy to the village administrator. 
(d)  The village clerk shall establish criteria for establishing the records system and shall cause the department/office records system to be reviewed on an annual basis. 
(Code 1988, § 3-3-3; Code 1998, § 2-558) 
Sec. 2-410. - Public access to records. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 2-412, any person has a right to inspect a record and to make or receive a copy of any record as provided in Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1). 
(b)  Records will be available for inspection and copying as provided in Wis. Stats. § 19.34(2)(a). 
(c)  If regular office hours are not maintained at the location where records are kept, the records will be available for inspection and copying upon at least 48 hours' advance notice of intent to inspect or copy. 
(d)  The use of facilities to inspect, copy or abstract a record are governed by Wis. Stats. § 19.35(2). 
(e)  The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may impose other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an original record if the record is irreplaceable or easily damaged. 
(f)  A requester shall be charged a fee in the amount established by resolution to defray the cost of copying records. Charges for records are based on the following: 
(1)  If the form of a written record does not permit copying, the actual, necessary and direct cost of photographing and photographic processing shall be charged. 
(2)  The actual, necessary and direct cost of providing a copy of other records not in printed form on paper, such as films, computer printouts and audiotapes and videotapes, shall be charged. 
(3)  If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost thereof shall also be charged. 
(4)  There shall be no charge for locating a record unless the actual, necessary and direct cost therefor exceeds the amount established by resolution, in which case the actual, necessary and direct cost shall be determined by the legal custodian and billed to the requester. 
(5)  The legal custodian shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees and shall require a cash deposit adequate to ensure payment, if such estimate exceeds the amount established by resolution. 
(6)  Elected and appointed officials of the village shall not be required to pay for public records they may reasonably require for the proper performance of their official duties. 
(7)  The legal custodian may provide copies of a record without charge or at a reduced charge where the legal custodian determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public interest. 
(g)  Notices relative to public records are governed by Wis. Stats. § 19.34. 
(Code 1988, § 3-3-4; Code 1998, § 2-559) 
Sec. 2-411. - Access procedures. 
    Public records access procedures are governed by Wis. Stats. §§ 19.35, 19.37. 
(Code 1988, § 3-3-5; Code 1998, § 2-560) 
Sec. 2-412. - Limitations on right to access. 
    Limitations of the right of access to public records are governed by Wis. Stats. § 19.36 and other statutes. 
(Code 1988, § 3-3-6; Code 1998, § 2-561) 
Sec. 2-413. - Destruction of records. 
(a)  Village officers may destroy the following nonutility financial records of which they are the legal custodians and which are considered obsolete, after completion of any required audit by the bureau of municipal audit or an auditor licensed under Wis. Stats. ch. 442, but not less than seven years after payment or receipt of any sum involved in the particular transaction, unless a shorter period has been fixed by the state public records and forms board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 16.61(3)(e), and then after such shorter period: 
(1)  Bank statements, deposit books, slips and stubs. 
(2)  Bonds and coupons after maturity. 
(3)  Canceled checks, duplicates and check stubs. 
(4)  License and permit applications, stubs and duplicates. 
(5)  Payrolls and other time and employment records of personnel included under the state retirement fund. 
(6)  Receipt forms. 
(7)  Special assessment records. 
(8)  Vouchers, requisitions, purchase orders and all other supporting documents pertaining thereto. 
(b)  Village officers may destroy the following utility records of which they are the legal custodians and which are considered obsolete after completion of any required audit by the bureau of municipal audit or an auditor licensed under Wis. Stats. ch. 442, subject to state public service commission regulations, but not less than seven years after the record was effective unless a shorter period has been fixed by the state public records and forms board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 16.61(3)(e), and then after such a shorter period, except that water stubs, receipts of current billings and customers' ledgers may be destroyed not less than two years after payment or receipt of the sum involved or the effective date of such record: 
(1)  Contracts and papers relating thereto. 
(2)  Excavation permits. 
(3)  Inspection records. 
(c)  Village officers may destroy the following records of which they are the legal custodian and which are considered obsolete, but not less than seven years after the record was effective unless another period has been set by statute, and then after such a period, or unless a shorter period has been fixed by the state public records and forms board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 16.61(3)(e), and then after such a shorter period: 
(1)  Contracts and papers relating thereto. 
(2)  Correspondence and communications. 
(3)  Financial reports other than annual financial reports. 
(4)  Justice dockets. 
(5)  Oaths of office. 
(6)  Reports of boards, commissions, committees and officials duplicated in the village board proceedings. 
(7)  Election notices and proofs of publication. 
(8)  Canceled voter registration cards. 
(9)  Official bonds. 
(10)  Police records other than investigative records. 
(11)  Resolutions and petitions, providing the text of such appears in the official village minutes. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) through (c) of this section, it is intended that election materials may be destroyed according to lesser time schedules as made and provided in Wis. Stats. § 7.23. 
(e)  Notice to the state historical society is governed by Wis. Stats. § 19.21(4)(a). 
(f)  Destruction of tape recording of governmental meetings is governed by Wis. Stats. § 19.21(5). 
(Code 1988, § 3-3-7; Code 1998, § 2-562) 
Sec. 2-414. - Preservation through microfilm. 
    Any village officer or the director of any department or division of village government may, subject to the approval of the village administrator, keep and preserve public records in such village official's possession by means of microfilm or other photographic reproduction method. Such records shall meet the standards for photographic reproduction set forth in Wis. Stats. § 16.61(7)(a) and (7)(b) and shall be considered original records for all purposes. Such records shall be preserved along with other files of the department or division and shall be open to public inspection and copying according to the provisions of state law and of sections 2-411 through 2-412. 
(Code 1988, § 3-3-8; Code 1998, § 2-563) 
Secs. 2-415-2-441. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - LOST, ABANDONED AND SURPLUS PROPERTY[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Disposal of abandoned property, Wis. Stats. § 66.0139. 

Sec. 2-442. - Disposal of surplus village property. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Surplus village property means that property which is owned by the village and which has no further usefulness to the village. 
(1)  An item of property shall be considered to have no further usefulness when: 
a.  The item or its function has been totally replaced by other village property, and no probable future function exists for it; 
b.  The village no longer performs the service for which the item was purchased, and no other service can reasonably be provided by the item; or 
c.  The item is no longer able to reliably or economically perform the work required of it. 
(2)  The term "surplus village property" shall not include: 
a.  Property which is obtained by the village as a result of abandonment or loss by the property's original owner; 
b.  Items of property which are traded in for newer items; and 
c.  Surplus village property shall not include library materials used by the public library for lending purposes. 
(b)  Determination. 
(1)  Whenever an item of village property is determined to be surplus village property on the basis that the village no longer performs the service for which the item was purchased, the village board shall determine whether or not the item is surplus village property. 
(2)  Whenever the fair market value of the item is more than $500.00, the village board shall determine whether or not the item is surplus village property. 
(c)  Disposition. 
(1)  Whenever the village board determines that an item of property is surplus village property, it shall dispose of such property as it determines. 
(2)  Whenever the fair market value of an item is more than $500.00 and the village board has determined, pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, that the item is surplus village property, the department head responsible for the items shall dispose of the property by: 
a.  Donation to a nonprofit organization within the village or to a governmental agency; 
b.  Public auction; or 
c.  Sale by sealed bid. 
(3)  For a public auction or sale by sealed bid, the item will be sold in as-is condition to the person submitting the highest bid; provided, however, that a lower bid submitted by a nonprofit organization or governmental agency may be accepted by the village board. The department head responsible for the item shall determine the time in which the successful bidder must remove the item. If the item is not removed within that time, the item shall revert to the city, and the amount of the bid shall be forfeited to the village. If no bids are received, the item shall be disposed of as directed by the village board. 
(4)  No public auction or awarding of bids shall occur under this section unless a description of the item to be sold and an advance notice of the time and place for such auction or bid submission is first published as a class 2 notice in the official village newspaper. 
(5)  Whenever the fair market value of an item is $500.00 or less and the village board has determined, pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, that it is surplus village property, the item shall be either disposed of as set forth in subsection (c)(2) of this section or destroyed. 
(d)  Determination of fair market values. Whenever this section requires a determination of the fair market value of an item of property, that determination shall be made by the department head responsible for the property, whose decision shall be final. 
(e)  Authority to dispose of property. 
(1)  Except for library materials used by the public library for lending purposes, only the village board may dispose of village property which is not surplus village property. 
(2)  Whenever this section provides for an auction or other disposition of any property, the village board shall be authorized to hire an auctioneer or take such other action as is necessary to properly dispose of the property; provided, however, that the fees of such auctioneer and all such costs, other than those for village labor and the use of village property, do not exceed the payment received by the village from the auction or sale of the property. 
(Code 1988, § 3-4-1; Code 1998, § 2-591) 
Sec. 2-443. - Lost and abandoned property. 
(a)  Scope of section. Property which appears to be lost or abandoned, which is discovered by officers or which is turned in to the police chief by citizens shall be disposed of according to this section. 
(b)  Identification of owner. Lost and abandoned property will be examined by the police chief for identifying marks in an attempt to determine the owner. If identifying marks are present, they shall be used by the police chief to attempt to contact the owner to return the property. If no identifying marks are present, the property shall be taken into custody by the police chief. 
(c)  Possession by village employees. No village employee shall keep for such village employee's own use property found in the course of duty, nor shall any village employee take possession of property during off-duty hours when the discovery was made while on duty. 
(d)  Return of lost property to owner. The police chief shall permit citizens to claim lost property if the citizens can provide sufficient proof that they are the rightful owners. 
(e)  Receipt for property given to village employees. No village employee shall receive any lost, stolen, abandoned or other unclaimed property from the police chief, unless that person receives a written receipt signed by the police chief, a copy of which shall remain with the village administrator. 
(f)  Disposal procedures. Procedures for disposal of lost and abandoned property are as follows: 
(1)  Classes of property. All property which has been abandoned, lost or remained unclaimed for a period of 30 days after the taking of possession of the property by the village shall be disposed of as follows, except that if the property is usable for village operations, the property need not be sold at auction, but may become the property of the village: 
a.  Vehicles. Vehicles shall be disposed of as set forth in article V of chapter 70. 
b.  Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages. Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages shall be destroyed. 
c.  Firearms, ammunition and explosives. Firearms or ammunition shall be returned to their rightful owner, destroyed, or transferred to the state crime laboratory, the Division of Law Enforcement Services of the Department of Justice, the Federal Bureau of Investigation or the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms of the U.S. Department of the Treasury. Any explosive, flammable, or other material proving a danger to life or property may be disposed of immediately upon taking possession thereof. The police chief and the fire chief, after consulting with the county sheriff's department, are authorized to determine the disposal procedure; provided, however, that any such procedure will attempt to return to its rightful owner any such material which appears to have been stolen. 
d.  Other property with fair market value of $100.00 or less. An item of property with a fair market value of $100.00 or less shall be destroyed or sold at public auction. Perishable property which deteriorates to a fair market value of less than $100.00 shall be destroyed. 
e.  Other property with fair market value over $100.00. An item of property with a fair market value of more than $100.00 shall be sold at public auction or by sealed bid. 
f.  Illegal property. Property which cannot be legally possessed shall be destroyed. 
(2)  Disposal by auction or sealed bid. 
a.  Whenever any property under this section is sold by public auction or sale or by sealed bid, such auction or the awarding of bids shall be preceded by a class 2 notice describing the property and arranging the time and place for the auction or bid submission; such notice shall be published in the official village newspaper. The property auctioned or sold by sealed bid shall be sold in as-is condition to the highest bidder. No sale or auction shall occur until the police chief has determined that the property has no value to any probable investigation or legal proceeding. The department head responsible for the property shall determine the time in which the successful bidder shall remove the property. If the property is not removed within that time, the property shall revert to the village and the amount of the bid shall be forfeited to the village. 
b.  Any village official selling property under this section shall maintain for two years an inventory of any property not disposed of by auction or sale by sealed bid and shall include a record of the date and method of disposal, any payment received for the property, and the name and address of the person acquiring the property. 
(3)  Lost property. Property which is found by persons and delivered to the police chief for the purpose of locating the former owner shall not be considered abandoned or unclaimed under this section until 30 days after mailing to the person finding the property a notice that such person may claim ownership of the property. The police chief shall determine what portion, if any, of the property or its value shall be given the finder. This subsection shall not apply to any village employee finding property in the regular course of such employment. 
(4)  Payment to village treasury. All sums received from the sale of property under this section shall be paid to the village treasury. 
(Code 1988, § 3-4-2; Code 1998, § 2-592) 
State Law reference- Disposal of abandoned property, Wis. Stats. § 66.0139. 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOL BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Alcohol beverages, Wis. Stats. ch. 125; municipal regulation of alcohol liquor, Wis. Stats. § 125.10. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    As used in this chapter, the terms "alcohol beverages," "intoxicating liquors," "sell," "sold," "sale," "restaurant," "club," "retailer," "person," "fermented malt beverages," "wholesalers," "retailers," "operators," and "non-intoxicating beverages" shall have the meaning given them by Wis. Stats. ch. 125. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-2; Code 1998, § 6-2) 
Sec. 6-2. - State statutes adopted. 
    The provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 125, relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor and malt beverages, except provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed, are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this chapter. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated in this section by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendment, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated in this section are intended to be made a part of this chapter in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of alcohol beverage control. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-1; Code 1998, § 6-1) 
Sec. 6-3. - Penalties. 
(a)  Forfeitures for violations of Wis. Stats. §§ 125.07(1)-(4) and 125.09(2), adopted by reference in section 6-2, shall conform to the forfeiture penalty permitted to be imposed for violations of the comparable state statute, including any variations or increases for subsequent offenses. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any section of this chapter, except as otherwise provided in subsection (a) of this section, or who shall conduct any activity or make any sale for which a license is required without a license shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in section 1-32. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall preclude or affect the power of the sentencing court to exercise additional authorities granted by the state statutes. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-40; Code 1998, § 6-3) 
Sec. 6-4. - Non-alcohol events for underage persons on licensed premises. 
    The presence of underage persons on a licensed premises as provided under Wis. Stats. § 125.07(3)(a)10 shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  The licensee or agent of a corporate licensee shall notify the police department at least 48 hours in advance of the date of any event at which underage persons will be present on the licensed premises. Each such non-alcohol event notice shall specify the date on which the event is to occur and the time of commencement. All notices shall be filed with the police department during normal working hours and shall be given on forms prescribed by the department. After a non-alcohol event notice has been given, the licensee may cancel an event only by giving like notice to the department in accordance with this subsection. Regardless of the date given, all notices shall expire and shall be deemed canceled no later than the date of expiration or revocation of the applicable retail class "B" license. 
(2)  During the period of any non-alcohol event, a notice card prescribed by the police department shall be posted at all public entrances to the licensed premises notifying the general public that no alcohol beverages may be consumed, sold or given away on or carried into the licensed premises during the event. Such notice cards shall be made available by the department to a requesting licensee. 
(3)  Once a non-alcohol event has commenced, no alcohol beverages may be consumed, sold or given away on or carried into the licensed premises until the next day following the closing hours of the licensed premises. 
(4)  During the period of any non-alcohol event, all alcohol beverages shall be stored in a locked portion of the licensed premises in a secure place out of the sight and physical reach of any patron present and shall be under the direct and immediate control and supervision of the licensee or a licensed operator in the employ of the licensee. All beer taps and automatic dispensers of alcohol beverages (speed guns) shall be either disconnected, disabled or made inoperable. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-19; Code 1998, § 6-4) 
Sec. 6-5. - Outside consumption. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcohol beverage means all ardent, spirituous, distilled or vinous liquors, liquids or compounds, whether medicated, proprietary, patented or not, and by whatever name called, as well as all liquors and liquids made by the alcohol fermentation of an infusion in potable water of barley malt and hops, with or without unmalted grains or decorticated or degerminated grains or sugar, which contain one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which are fit for use for beverage purposes 
    Public area means any location within the village which is open to access to persons not requiring specific permission of the owner to be at such location, including all parking lots serving commercial establishments. 
(b)  Alcohol beverages in public areas. Alcohol beverages in public areas shall be governed by the following: 
(1)  Unlawful sale or possession generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve or give away or offer to sell, serve or give away any alcohol beverage upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, public parking lot, highway, cemetery or drives or other public area within the village or on private property without the owner's consent, except at licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or have possession of any open container containing an alcohol beverage upon any public street, public sidewalk, public way, public alley or public parking lot within the village except at licensed premises. 
(2)  Parks. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or have possession of any alcohol beverage in any village park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except at licensed premises. 
(3)  Private property held out for public use. Except for wine purchased from a "Class B" or "Class C" licensee as provided in Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3r), it shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcohol beverages upon any private property held open for public use within the village unless the property is specifically named as being part of a licensed premises. 
(4)  Leaving licensed premises with open container. It shall be unlawful for any: 
a.  Licensee, permittee or operator to permit any patron to leave the licensed premises with an open container containing any alcohol beverage. 
b.  Patron to leave a licensed premises with an open container containing any alcohol beverage. 
c.  Any patron to remove an original unopened package, container or bottle containing any alcohol beverage from the licensed premises between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(5)  Class "B" fermented malt beverage license for parks. 
a.  Applicants for special class "B" fermented malt beverage licenses shall fully comply with the requirements of section 6-45. 
b.  The sale of fermented malt beverages shall be confined to park hours, unless such hours are modified by the village board for specific events. 
(6)  Exceptions. This section may be waived as follows: 
a.  By the village board for duly authorized events. 
b.  For an organization which has been issued a special class "B" fermented malt beverage picnic license for a designated area pursuant to this chapter, provided that there is compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 11-4-1; Code 1998, § 6-5) 
Sec. 6-6. - Solicitation of drinks prohibited. 
    Any licensee, permittee or bartender of a retail alcohol beverage establishment covered by a license issued by the village who permits an entertainer or an employee to solicit a drink of any alcohol beverage defined in Wis. Stats. § 125.02(1) or any other drink from a customer on the premises, or any entertainer or employee who solicits such drinks from any customer is deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 11-4-9; Code 1998, § 6-6) 
Sec. 6-7. - Consumption or possession on village-owned property. 
    The possession or consumption of any type of alcohol beverage by any person is prohibited within or upon all buildings, equipment and vehicles owned, leased or rented by the village, including but not limited to, the village hall, police and fire department facilities and the public library. Excepted from this section are specific events for which a temporary class "B" fermented malt beverage license has been issued by the village board. 
(Code 1998, § 6-7) 
Sec. 6-8. - Closing hours. 
    Closing hours of premises subject to this chapter shall be established in conformance with Wis. Stats. § 125.32(3), and shall be further restricted as follows: 
(1)  "Class B" licenses and fermented malt beverage licenses. 
a.  No premises for which a retail class B liquor and fermented malt beverage license has been issued shall be permitted to remain open for the sale of liquor or fermented malt beverages or for any other purpose between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, and 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Saturday and Sunday. On January 1, premises operating under a class B license or permit are not required to close. 
b.  Hotels and restaurants, whose principal business is the furnishing of food or lodging to patrons, bowling centers, indoor horseshoe-pitching facilities, curling clubs, golf courses and golf clubhouses shall be permitted to remain open for the conduct of their regular business, but shall not sell liquor or malt beverages during the closing hours of subsection (1)a of this section. 
c.  The licensee or permittee and one employee shall be permitted to check out receipts, check the licensed premises for security and do minor cleaning up during closed hours. Under no circumstances shall the consumption of alcohol beverages be permitted after closing time. Commercial janitorial service personnel shall be allowed to enter the licensed premises for the purpose of cleaning during closed hours. The premises shall be well lighted during cleanup. Prior approval must be requested and granted by the village board or its designee for any variance of the exigent circumstances in this subsection. 
(2)  Carryout hours. Except for wine purchased from a "class B" or "class C" licensee under as provide in Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3r), between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. no person may sell, remove, carry out or permit to be removed or carried out from any premises having a class "A," "class A," class "B," "class B," or any combination of such licenses, any fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquor in original unopened packages, containers, or bottles for consumption away from the premises. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-15; Code 1998, § 6-8; Ord. No. 13-11, § 1, 6-17-2013) 
Secs. 6-9-6-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Licenses, Wis. Stats. §§ 125.04 et seq., 125.25 et seq., 125.51 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-35. - Required. 
    No person shall vend, sell, deal or traffic in or have in such person's possession with intent to vend, sell, deal or traffic in or, for the purpose of evading any law or ordinance, give away any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage in any quantity whatsoever or cause such to be done without having procured a license as provided in this article or without complying with all the sections of this chapter and all applicable sections of Wis. Stats. ch. 125. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-3; Code 1998, § 6-36) 
Sec. 6-36. - Authorization for issuance; special provisions for reserve "class B" licenses and special class "B" fermented malt beverage/wine cooler picnic licenses. 
(a)  Classification of licenses authorized. The village clerk is authorized to issue "class A" licenses, "class B" licenses, temporary "class B" licenses, "class C" licenses, reserve "class C licenses", class "A" licenses, class "B" licenses, and temporary class "B" licenses. 
(1)  Reserve "class B" licenses. The annual fee for a reserve "class B" license shall be the same as the annual fee for a "class B" license as prescribed in section 6-37(i). An applicant for a reserve "class B" license shall pay an initial issuance fee in the amount established by resolution, either by official bank check or by personal check subject to a 21-day waiting period and satisfaction that the funds have been paid to the village. 
(2)  Special class "B" fermented malt beverage/wine cooler picnic license. Application for such license shall be signed by the president or corresponding officer of the society making such application and shall be filed with the village r clerk together with the appropriate license fee for each day for which the license is sought. Any person fronting for any group other than the one applied for shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-32 and will be ineligible to apply for a special class "B" license for one year. The license shall specify the hours and dates of license validity. The application shall be filed a minimum of 15 days prior to the meeting of the village board at which the application will be considered for events of more than three consecutive days. If the application is for a license to be used in a village park, the applicant shall specify the main point-of-sale facility. 
(b)  Fees. The annual license fees for each of the classes of licenses enumerated in this section shall be as established by resolution. 
(Code 1988, §§ 7-2-4, 7-2-5(b); Code 1998, § 6-37; Ord. No. 99-18, § 1, 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 3-11-2002) 
State Law reference- Retail intoxicating liquor licenses, Wis. Stats. § 125.51; retail fermented malt beverage licenses, Wis. Stats. § 125.25 et seq. 
Sec. 6-37. - Application. 
(a)  Contents. Application for a license to sell or deal in intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages shall be made in writing on the form prescribed by the state department of revenue and shall be sworn to by the applicant as provided by Wis. Stats. §§ 887.01 through 887.03 and 906.03 and shall be filed with the village clerk not less than 15 days prior to the granting of such license. The premises shall be physically described to include every room and storage space to be covered by the license, including all rooms not separated by a solid wall or joined by connecting entrances. 
(b)  Corporations. Such application shall be filed and sworn to by the applicant if an individual, by the president and secretary if a corporation. 
(c)  Publication. The application shall be published once in the official village newspaper, and the costs of publication shall be paid by the applicant. 
(d)  Notice of changes. Whenever anything occurs to change any fact set out in the application of any licensee, such licensee shall file with the issuing authority a notice in writing of such change within ten days after the occurrence thereof. 
(e)  Construction. Any person or corporation applying for a liquor license that does not at the time of filing the application have a building constructed for the purpose of utilizing the license may be granted said license so long as the person or corporation has already begun construction on the building, contingent upon satisfying the requirements set forth in subsections (e)(1) through (4) of this section: 
(1)  The applicant shall complete construction of the building within 12 months of the date that the license was granted, as determined by the building inspector. 
(2)  The construction of the building, once completed, shall be consistent with the building plans upon which the village granted the license, as determined by the building inspector. 
(3)  Pursuant to section 6-39, the building, once completed, shall receive recommendations from the applicable village officials that the license should be granted. 
(4)  The building, once completed, shall satisfy the requirements set forth in subsection 6-41(b), as determined by the building inspector. 
(5)  If any of the requirements set forth in subsections (e)(1) through (4) of this section are not satisfied, the village clerk shall give notice to the applicant, in writing, that his license has been denied and state the requirement that were not satisfied. The notice shall be sent via ordinary mail to the applicant's address as stated on the application. The notice shall also inform the applicant that he may appeal the denial of the license to the village board pursuant to the procedures set forth in subsections 6-41(b) and (c). 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-6; Code 1998, § 6-38; Ord. No. 04-18, § 1, 12-20-2004) 
State Law reference- License applications, Wis. Stats. § 125.04(3). 
Sec. 6-38. - Qualifications of applicants and premises. 
(a)  Right to premises. No applicant will be considered without having the right to possession of the premises described in the application for the license period, by lease or by deed. 
(b)  Corporate restrictions. Each corporate applicant shall file with its application for such license a statement by its officers showing the names and addresses of the persons who are stockholders together with the amount of stock held by such persons. It shall be the duty of each corporate applicant and licensee to file with the village clerk a statement of transfers of stock within 48 hours after such transfer of stock. 
(c)  Separate license required for each place of sale. A separate license shall be required for each stand, place, room or enclosure or for each suite of rooms or enclosures which are in a direct connection or communication where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are kept, sold or offered for sale, and no license shall be issued to any person for the purpose of possession, selling or offering for sale any intoxicating liquors or fermented malt beverages in any dwelling house, flat or residential apartment. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-7; Code 1998, § 6-39) 
Sec. 6-39. - Investigation. 
    The village clerk shall notify the police chief, the building inspector and the chief of the fire department of each new application submitted under this article, and these officials shall inspect or cause to be inspected each application and the premises, together with such other investigation as shall be necessary to determine whether the applicant and the premises sought to be licensed comply with the regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto, including those governing sanitation in restaurants, and whether the applicant is a proper recipient of a license. These officials shall furnish to the village clerk, in writing, who shall forward to the village board the information derived from such investigation, accompanied by a recommendation as to whether a license should be granted or refused. No license shall be renewed without a reinspection of the premises and a report as originally required. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-8; Code 1998, § 6-40) 
Sec. 6-40. - Approval of application. 
(a)  Under this article, no license shall be granted for operation on any premises or with any equipment for which taxes, assessments, forfeitures or other financial claims of the village are delinquent and unpaid. 
(b)  No license shall be issued unless the premises conform to the sanitary, safety and health requirements of the state building code, and the regulations of the state board of health and local board of health applicable to restaurants. The premises must be properly lighted and ventilated, must be equipped with separate sanitary toilet and lavatory facilities equipped with running water for each sex and must conform to all village ordinances. 
(c)  Consideration for the granting or denial of a license will be based on the following: 
(1)  Arrest and conviction record of the applicant, subject to the limitations imposed by Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.322, and 111.335; 
(2)  The financial responsibility of the applicant; 
(3)  The appropriateness of the location and the premises where the licensed business is to be conducted; and 
(4)  Generally, the applicant's fitness for the trust to be reposed. 
(d)  An application may be denied based upon the applicant's arrest and conviction record, subject to Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.323 and 111.325. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-9; Code 1998, § 6-41) 
Sec. 6-41. - Issuance; denial. 
(a)  Opportunity shall be given by the village board to any person to be heard for or against the granting of any license pursuant to this article. Upon the approval of the applicant by the village board, the village clerk shall issue to the applicant a license, upon payment by the applicant of the license fee to the village. The full license fee shall be charged for the whole or for a fraction of any year. 
(b)  If the village board denies the license, the village clerk shall give notice to the applicant, in writing, that his license has been denied and state the reason for the denial. The notice shall be sent via ordinary mail to the applicant's address as stated on the application. The notice shall also inform the applicant that he may appeal the denial of the license to the village board by giving written notice of said appeal to the village clerk within 20 days of the date on which the license was denied. 
(c)  If an applicant files a notice of appeal pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, a hearing on the appeal shall take place within 30 days of receipt of said notice of appeal. At the hearing, the applicant shall have the opportunity to appear before the village board to provide evidence as to why the denial should be reversed. The village board shall issue a decision on the applicant's appeal within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-10; Code 1998, § 6-42; Ord. No. 04-18, § 2, 12-20-2004) 
Sec. 6-42. - Numbering; contents. 
    All licenses issued under this article shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall state clearly the specific premises for which granted, the date of issuance, the fee paid and the name of the licensee. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-12; Code 1998, § 6-44) 
Sec. 6-43. - Unauthorized posting; defacement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to post such license or to be permitted to post it upon premises other than those mentioned in the application or to knowingly deface or destroy such license. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-13; Code 1998, § 6-45) 
State Law reference- License display, Wis. Stats. § 125.04(10). 
Sec. 6-44. - Conditions. 
    All retail fermented malt beverage and intoxicating liquor "class A" and "class B" licenses granted under this article shall be granted subject to the following conditions, and all other conditions of this chapter and subject to all other ordinances and regulations of the village applicable thereto: 
(1)  Consent to entry. Every applicant procuring a license thereby consents to the entry of police or other duly authorized representatives of the village at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection and search, consents to the removal from such premises of all things and articles there had in violation of village ordinances or state laws, and consents to the introduction of such things and articles in evidence in any prosecution that may be brought for such offenses. 
(2)  Disorderly conduct prohibited. Each licensed premises shall, at all times, be conducted in an orderly manner, and no disorderly, riotous or indecent conduct shall be allowed at any time on any licensed premises. 
(3)  Health and sanitation. The rules and regulations of the state board of health governing sanitation in restaurants shall apply to all "class B" liquor licenses issued under this article. No class "B" license shall be issued unless the premises to be licensed conform to such rules and regulations. 
(4)  Restrictions near schools and churches. No retail "class "A" or "class "B" license shall be issued for premises, the main entrance of which is less than 300 feet from the main entrance of any established public school, parochial school, hospital or church. Such distance shall be measured by the shortest route along the highway from the closest point of the main entrance of such school, church or hospital to the main entrance to such premises. This subsection shall not apply to premises licensed as such on June 30, 1947, nor shall it apply to any premises licensed as such prior to the occupation of real property within 300 feet thereof by any school building, hospital building or church building, nor to a restaurant located within 300 feet of a church or school; this exception applies only to restaurants in which the sale of alcohol beverages accounts for less than 50 percent of their receipts. 
(5)  Clubs. No club shall sell or give away any intoxicating liquors except to bona fide members and guests invited by members. 
(6)  Credit prohibited. No retail "class A" or "class B" liquor or fermented malt beverage licensee shall sell or offer for sale any alcohol beverage to any person by extending credit, except hotel credit extended to a resident guest or a club to a bona fide member. It shall be unlawful for such licensee or permittee to sell alcohol beverages to any person on a passbook or store order or to receive from any person any goods, wares, merchandise or other articles in exchange for alcohol beverages. 
(7)  Licensee or permittee responsible for acts of help. A violation of this chapter by a duly authorized agent or employee of a licensee or permittee under this article shall constitute a violation by the licensee or permittee. Whenever any such licensee or permittee shall violate any portion of this chapter, proceedings for the suspension or revocation of the license or permit of the holder thereof may be instituted in the manner prescribed in this chapter. 
(8)  Improper exhibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform or for any licensee or manager or agent of the licensee to permit any employee, entertainer or patron to engage in any live act, demonstration, dance or exhibition on the licensed premises which: 
a.  Exposes such person's genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; 
b.  Exposes any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; 
c.  Exposes any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof; or 
d.  Engages in or simulates sexual intercourse or any sexual contact, including the touching of any portion of the female breast or the male or female genitals. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-14; Code 1998, § 6-46) 
Sec. 6-45. - Restrictions on special class "B" fermented malt beverage special event license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or organization on a temporary basis to sell or offer to sell any alcohol beverage upon any village-owned property or privately owned property within the village, except through the issuance of temporary class "B" license issued by the village board in accordance with state law and as set forth in this section. A temporary class "B" license authorizing the sale and consumption of beer on village-owned property or privately owned property may be authorized by the village board, provided the following are met: 
(1)  Compliance with eligibility standards. The organization shall meet the eligibility requirements of a bona fide club, association, lodge or society as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 125.26(6) and shall fully comply with the requirements of this section and section 74-158(d). Members of an organization which is issued a picnic beer license and who are issued operator's licenses for the event shall attend a pre-event informational meeting to learn what rules and regulations apply and what the responsibilities of the bartenders and organization will be. 
(2)  Posting of signs and licenses. Every organization issued a fermented malt beverage license shall post in a conspicuous location at the main point of sale and at all remote points of sale a sufficient number of signs stating that no fermented malt beverage shall be served to any underage person without proper identification. 
(3)  Fencing. Every organization shall install a double fence around the main point of sale to control ingress and egress and shall continually station a licensed operator, security guard or other competent person at the entrance for the purpose of checking age identification. There shall be only one point of ingress and egress. The double fence shall be a minimum of four feet high and a minimum of six feet between fences. A single eight-foot chainlink fence may be used to meet the fence requirements. 
(4)  Underage persons prohibited. No underage person, as defined by state law, shall be allowed to assist in the sale of fermented malt beverages at any point of sale, nor shall the person be allowed to loiter or linger in the area of any point of sale. 
(5)  Licensed operators at points of sale. A licensed operator shall be stationed at all points of sale at all times. 
(6)  Containers. Intoxicants will be sold outdoors only in foam or plastic cups or cans. 
(7)  Additional requirements. In addition, requesting organizations shall comply with the following: 
a.  When the event sponsored by the requesting organization is to take place on village park property, the organization shall work closely with the village officials in locating, setting up and identifying the size of the snow fence area. Such information shall be made part of the temporary class "B" license application. 
b.  When the event sponsored by the requesting organization is to take place on village-owned property other than park property or privately owned property, the organization shall work closely with the police department in locating and setting up the snow fence area. The police chief shall work closely with the requesting organization in identifying the size of the fenced-in area and the exact location. Such information shall be made part of the temporary class "B" license application. For indoor events, the structure used must have suitable exits and open spaces to accommodate anticipated attendance. It shall contain adequate sanitary facilities to accommodate the size of the group. 
(8)  Waiver. The village board may waive or modify the requirements of this section due to the physical characteristics of the licensed site. 
(9)  Insurance. The applicant for a special class "B" fermented malt beverage license may be required to indemnify, defend and hold the village and its employees and agents harmless against all claims, the death of any person or any damage to property caused by or resulting from the activities for which the license is granted. As evidence of the applicant's ability to perform the conditions of the license, the applicant may be required to furnish a certificate of comprehensive general liability insurance with the village. The applicant may be required to furnish a performance bond prior to being granted the license. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-16; Code 1998, § 6-47) 
Sec. 6-46. - Limitations on other business; "class B" premises. 
    No "class B" license or permit may be granted for any premises where any other business is conducted in connection with the premises, except that this restriction does not apply if the premises for which the "class B" license or permit is issued is connected to premises where other business is conducted by a secondary doorway which serves as a safety exit and is not the primary entrance to the "class B" premises. No other business may be conducted on premises operating under a "class B" license or permit. These restrictions do not apply to a hotel or a restaurant, which is not located on the premises of any mercantile establishment, or to a bona fide club, society or lodge that has been in existence for six months or more prior to the date of filing application for the "class B" license or permit. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-20; Code 1998, § 6-50) 
Sec. 6-47. - Revocation and suspension. 
(a)  Scope of section. Whenever the holder of any license issued under this article violates any portion of this chapter or articles IV and V of chapter 74, proceedings for the revocation of such license may be instituted in the manner and under the procedure established by this section and Wis. Stats. § 125.12. 
(b)  Abandonment of premises. Any licensee holding a license to sell alcohol beverages who abandons such business shall forfeit any right or preference such licensee may have to the holding or renewal of such license. Abandonment shall be sufficient grounds for revocation of any alcohol beverage license. The closing of the licensed premises for at least six months shall be prima facie evidence of the abandonment, unless extended by the village board. Every person issued a license to sell alcohol beverages in the village for which a quota exists limiting the number of such licenses that may be issued by the village shall cause such business described in such license to be operated on the premises described in such license for at least 150 days during the term of such license, unless such license is issued for a term of less than 180 days, in which event this subsection shall not apply. 
(c)  Nonrenewal of license. The village attorney may, after investigation, commence an action before the special committee to hear evidence and make a recommendation to the village board that a license issued pursuant to this article not be renewed. The chairperson of the committee shall, in writing, notify the licensee of the consideration of nonrenewal. Such notification shall be in the form of and shall serve as the summons and complaint and shall include a statement of the reasons for the consideration of the nonrenewal of the license in the same specificity required for a summons and complaint for revocation or suspension. If the license is recommended for nonrenewal, costs may be assessed against the licensee, and any renewal application fee shall be forfeited. In all other respects, of this subsection shall apply. The commencement of this action shall stay action by the village board on the licensee's application until the committee makes its recommendation. 
(d)  Other restrictions. Any license issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to such further regulations and restrictions as may be imposed by the village board by amendment to this section or by the enactment of new ordinances. If any licensee shall fail or neglect to meet the requirements imposed by such new restrictions and regulations, the licensee's license may be revoked in accordance with this section. For revocation of any license or any violation of any section of this chapter in accordance with this section or by the court or for any reasonable cause, except the imposition of new restrictions, no refund shall be made of any part of the license fee. 
(e)  Point values for violations, revocations and suspensions. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to administratively interpret those portions of this chapter and articles IV and V of chapter 74 relating to establishing an alcohol beverage demerit point system to assist in determining which license holders should be subject to suspension or revocation procedures. 
(2)  Point schedule. The scale of demerit points is listed according to the type of alcohol beverage violation. This demerit point system is used to identify habitually troublesome license holders who have repeatedly violated state statutes and village ordinances for the purpose of recommending suspension or revocation of their alcohol beverage licenses. 
Type of Violation Point Value Sale of alcohol beverages without license or permit; sale of controlled substances on licensed premises 100 Sale of alcohol beverages to underage person 50 Sale of alcohol beverages to intoxicated person 50 Underage person on premises 50 Intoxicated bartender; disorderly conduct on premises 50 After-hours consumption 50 Refusal to allow police to search premises or refusal to cooperate with lawful police investigation 50 Licensee, agent or operator not on premises at all times 25 Persons on premises after closing hours 25 Violation of carryout hours 25 Licensee permitting person to leave licensed premises with open alcohol beverage 25 Other violations of this chapter 25  
(3)  Determination of demerit points. In determining the accumulated demerit points against a licensee within 12 months, the village shall use the date each violation was committed as the basis for the determination. 
(4)  Suspension or revocation of license. 
a.  The special committee of the village board shall call before it for purposes of a revocation or suspension hearing all licensees who have accumulated 200 points in a 12-month period as a result of court-imposed convictions or who have had referred to it reports from the village attorney which, if believed, would result in 200 demerit points in 12 months. 
b.  If the demerit point accumulation, calculated from the date of violation, exceeds 200 points in a 12-month period, 250 points in a 24-month period or 300 points in a 36-month period, the suspension shall be for not less than ten days or more than 90. If the license is revoked, no other license shall be granted to such licensee or for such premises for a period of 12 months from the date of revocation. 
c.  The procedure to be used for suspension or revocation shall be that found in subsection (c) of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-18; Code 1998, § 6-49) 
State Law reference- License revocation or suspension, Wis. Stats. § 124.12 et seq. 
Secs. 6-48-6-67. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OPERATOR'S LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Operator's licenses, Wis. Stats. §§ 125.17, 125.32(2), 125.68(2). 

Sec. 6-68. - Required. 
    There shall be upon the premises operated under a "class A" or "class B" intoxicating liquor license or class "A" or class "B" fermented malt beverage license at all times the licensee or some other person who shall have an operator's license and who shall be responsible for the acts of all persons serving or selling any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages to customers. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-30; Code 1998, § 6-81) 
State Law reference- Municipalities required to issue operator's license, Wis. Stats. § 125.17(1). 
Sec. 6-69. - Procedure upon application. 
(a)  Under this division, the village board may issue an operator's license, which license shall be granted only upon application in writing on forms to be obtained from the village clerk only to persons 18 years of age or older. Operator's licenses shall be operative only within the village limits. 
(b)  All applications are subject to an investigation by the police chief and other appropriate authority to determine whether the applicant and premises to be licensed complies with all regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto. The police department shall conduct an investigation of the applicant, including but not limited to, requesting information from the state, surrounding municipalities, and any community where the applicant has previously resided concerning the applicant's arrest and conviction record. Based upon such investigation, the police chief shall recommend, in writing, to the village board approval or denial of the application. If the police chief recommends denial, the police chief shall provide, in writing, the reasons for such recommendation. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-31; Code 1998, § 6-82) 
Sec. 6-70. - Duration. 
    Licenses issued under this division shall be valid for a period of one year and shall expire on June 30. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-32; Code 1998, § 6-83) 
Sec. 6-71. - Fee; provisional license. 
(a)  Fee. The fee for an operator's license required under this division shall be as established in the schedule of village license fees. 
(b)  Provisional license. The village clerk shall issue a provisional operator's license in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 125.17(5). The provisional operator's license shall expire 60 days after its issuance or when an operator's license is issued to the holder, whichever is sooner. A provisional license may not be issued to any person who has been denied an operator's license by the village board or who has had such operator's license revoked or suspended within the preceding 12 months. The village clerk may revoke the provisional license issued if the village clerk discovers that the holder of the license made a false statement on the application. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-33; Code 1998, § 6-84) 
State Law reference- Provisional operators' licenses, Wis. Stats. § 125.17(5). 
Sec. 6-72. - Issuance or denial. 
(a)  After the village board approves the granting of an operator's license, the village clerk shall issue the license. Such licenses shall be issued and numbered in the order they are granted and shall give the applicant's name and address and the date of the expiration of such license. 
(b)  For denial of the application, the following procedures shall be used: 
(1)  If the application is denied by the village board, the village clerk shall, in writing, inform the applicant of the denial, the reasons therefor, and of the opportunity to request a reconsideration of the application by the village board in a closed session. Such notice must be sent by registered mail to or served upon the applicant at least ten days prior to the board's reconsideration of the matter. At such reconsideration hearing, the applicant may present evidence and testimony as to why the license should be granted. 
(2)  If, upon reconsideration, the board again denies the application, the village clerk shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons therefor. An applicant who is denied any license upon reconsideration of the matter may apply to circuit court for review pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.12(2)(d). 
(c)  Consideration for the granting or denial of a license will be based on: 
(1)  The arrest and conviction record of the applicant, subject to the limitations imposed by Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.322, and 111.335; 
(2)  The financial responsibility of the applicant; and 
(3)  Generally, the applicant's fitness for the trust to be reposed. 
(d)  If a licensee is convicted of an offense substantially related to the licensed activity, the village board may act to revoke or suspend the license. 
(e)  An application may be denied based upon the applicant's arrest and conviction record, subject to Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.323 and 111.325. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-34; Code 1998, § 6-85) 
Sec. 6-73. - Display. 
    Each license issued under this division shall be posted on the premises whenever the operator dispenses beverages or shall be in the operator's possession or the operator shall carry a license card. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-35; Code 1998, § 6-86) 
Sec. 6-74. - Revocation. 
    Violation of any of the terms or provisions of the state law or of this chapter relating to operator's licenses by any person holding such operator's license shall be cause for revocation of the license. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-36; Code 1998, § 6-86) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AMUSEMENT ARCADES 

Sec. 10-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amusement arcade means any premises or arcade operated by any organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee or occupant of a building whose primary purpose or object of its existence or operation is that of providing amusement devices to the public at retail, or any premises operated by any organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee or occupant of a building, the majority of whose gross receipts are derived from the providing of amusement devices to the public at retail or where six or more amusement devices are located. 
    Amusement device means any table, platform, mechanical device or apparatus operated or intended to be operated for amusement, pleasure, test of skill, competition or sport, the use or operation of which is conditioned upon payment of a consideration either by insertion of a coin or token in a slot or otherwise. Such amusement device shall include but not be limited to devices commonly known as baseball, foosball, basketball, hockey, pinball, shuffleboard, ray guns, bowling games, bumper games, skiball, electronic video games, and shall also include billiard tables and pool tables (whether coin-operated or not). Such definition does not include a bowling alley, jukebox or other coin-operated music machine or a mechanical children's amusement riding device. 
(Code 1988, § 7-9-1; Code 1998, § 10-56) 
Sec. 10-20. - License generally. 
(a)  Required; application. No person shall operate or keep an amusement arcade without having obtained and posted on the premises, in plain view, a license to operate such arcade. Application shall be made to the village clerk on the form provided by such office. The application shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant or, if a partnership or a limited liability partnership, the names and addresses of all the partners or, if a corporation or a limited liability company, the names and addresses of the principal officers and registered agent thereof, and the name and address of the person who will supervise the game room. 
(2)  The names and addresses of the owners of the amusement devices to be located on the licensed premises, if such others are different from that of the applicant. If the owner of the amusement devices is a partnership, the names and addresses of all the partners or, if a corporation, the names and addresses of the principal officers and registered agent thereof. 
(3)  A building plan of the premises to be licensed specifically describing and otherwise showing all dimensions, indicating the intended division of floor space, exits and entrances, the areas to be used for amusement devices, and the common aisles. 
(4)  A site plan of the premises to be licensed which shall include the proposed landscaping for the subject premises, and all the improvements, parking and driveway areas, and landscaping located on property adjacent to and within 20 feet of the property lines of the premises to be licensed. 
(5)  If the applicant operates other game rooms in other areas, the names and addresses of such other licensed establishments. 
(6)  Such application shall also contain such additional information as the village deems necessary to assist it in determining the qualifications of the applicant for such license. 
(b)  Inspection. The village clerk shall notify the police chief and building inspector of each new application for a license, and they shall inspect or cause to be inspected each application and the premises, together with such other investigation as shall be necessary to determine whether the applicant and the premises sought to be licensed comply with the regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto, including those governing sanitation in restaurants, and whether the applicant is a proper recipient of a license. The police chief and building inspector shall furnish to the village board in writing the information derived from such investigation, accompanied by a recommendation as to whether a license should be granted or refused. No license shall be renewed without a reinspection of the premises and report as originally required. 
(c)  Public hearing. The application shall be forwarded to the village board, which shall hold a public hearing prior to the granting or denial of any amusement arcade license. In reviewing each application, the village board shall find that: 
(1)  The establishment, maintenance or operation of an amusement arcade at the location requested will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare. 
(2)  The proposed amusement arcade will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purpose already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood. 
(3)  The establishment of the amusement arcade will not impede the normal orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district. 
(4)  Adequate measures have been or will be taken to maintain good order surrounding the location thereof. 
(d)  Issuance; term. The village clerk shall issue a license upon approval of the application by the village board upon the payment by the applicant of an annual license fee established by resolution. All licenses issued shall be for one year ending on June 30 and shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1988, § 7-9-2; Code 1998, § 10-57) 
Sec. 10-21. - License revocation. 
    A license issued under this article may be revoked by the village board after notice and public hearing if an amusement arcade's location or operation fails to conform to standards provided in this article or if the amusement arcade is in violation of any other section of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 7-9-5; Code 1998, § 10-60) 
Sec. 10-22. - Hours of operation. 
    No premises for which an amusement arcade license has been issued shall be permitted to remain open for the offering of electronic amusement devices to the public at retail between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Code 1988, § 7-9-3; Code 1998, § 10-58) 
Sec. 10-23. - General requirements. 
    The following general requirements shall apply to all amusement arcades licensed in accordance with this article: 
(1)  Supervisor. All amusement arcades shall have a supervisor, age 18 years or older, on the premises at all times in which the game room is open to the public. 
(2)  Compliance with codes. Game rooms licensed in this article shall comply with all other building and fire codes and applicable village laws and regulations. 
(3)  Rules of conduct. All arcades shall post rules of unacceptable patron conduct. 
(Code 1988, § 7-9-4; Code 1998, § 10-59) 
Secs. 10-24-10-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRANSIENT AND TEMPORARY ENTERTAINMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-50. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Transient or temporary public entertainment means one to which the public may gain admission by payment of an admission charge. It includes carnivals, shows, circuses, exhibitions, entertainments and vaudeville. 
(Code 1988, § 7-11-1(b); Code 1998, § 10-86) 
Sec. 10-51. - Food handler's health certificate. 
    Any person employed in such entertainment for the purpose of preparing, handling or selling food or drink shall submit to a physical examination and shall obtain a health certificate as required by state statute. 
(Code 1988, § 7-11-1(d)(4); Code 1998, § 10-92) 
Secs. 10-52-10-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-76. - Required. 
(a)  No person shall maintain or operate any transient or temporary public entertainment within the village without first obtaining a license as provided in this article. 
(b)  This section does not require that a license be obtained for the conducting of fairs, lectures, concerts, exhibitions or entertainments of a scientific, historical, political, literary or musical character for humane, religious, charitable or scientific purposes. 
(Code 1988, § 7-11-1(a); Code 1998, § 10-87) 
Sec. 10-77. - Application. 
    Application for a license required by this article shall be made by the applicant to the village clerk in writing at least ten days before the planned event, and all of the information regarding insurance, etc., shall be filed within ten days and referred to the village board for examination of the qualifications, character and reputation of the applicant and of the desirability of permitting the entertainment to operate, show or exhibit in the village. 
(Code 1988, § 7-11-1(c); Code 1998, § 10-88) 
Sec. 10-78. - Insurance required. 
    No license required by this article shall be granted unless the applicant therefor shall have filed with the village clerk a public liability insurance policy in a sum as set by the village board from time to time, with the condition that the applicant shall indemnify and save harmless the village and its officers and agents and citizens against any injuries and damages resulting or arising from the conducting of any entertainment for which the license is issued or from the performance by the applicant or the applicant's agents of any negligence incident to or connected with the conduct of such entertainment, and that the applicant shall pay all judgments, costs and charges that may be recovered against the village or any of its officers or agents because of the conducting of such entertainment. 
(Code 1988, § 7-11-1(d)(1); Code 1998, § 10-89) 
Sec. 10-79. - Payment of fees. 
    No license required by this article shall be issued unless the applicant shall pay a license fee as established by resolution. 
(Code 1988, § 7-11-1(d)(2); Code 1998, § 10-90) 
Sec. 10-80. - Posting of license. 
    A license issued pursuant to this article shall be prominently displayed while the entertainment is in operation. 
(Code 1988, § 7-11-1(d)(3); Code 1998, § 10-91) 
Sec. 10-81. - Inspection of mechanical devices. 
    The applicant for a license required by this article shall indicate the date of the last state inspection of rides, merry-go-rounds and other mechanical devices. The village reserves the right to require inspections of all mechanical devices that would be available to the public. All inspection costs shall be paid by the licensee. 
(Code 1988, § 7-11-1(d)(5); Code 1998, § 10-93) 
Sec. 10-82. - Revocation. 
    Any license granted by the village board under this article may be revoked by the village president if such entertainment shall not be maintained or if the person who maintains, owns, controls or operates such entertainment shall permit the violation of any section of this Code or state laws or where, in the opinion of the village, the entertainment is deemed undesirable. Revocations or suspensions may be appealed to the village board. 
(Code 1988, § 7-11-1(d), (e); Code 1998, § 10-94) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Animals generally, Wis. Stats. chs. 172-174; cruelty to animals, Wis. Stats. ch. 951; animal health, Wis. Stats. ch. 95. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means mammals, reptiles and birds. 
    At large means off the premises of the owner and not under the control of some person either by leash or otherwise, but a dog or cat within an automobile of its owner or in an automobile of any other person with the consent of the owner of the dog or cat shall be deemed to be upon the owner's premises. 
    Cat means any feline, regardless of age or sex. 
    Cruel means causing unnecessary and excessive pain or suffering or unjustifiable injury or death. 
    Dog means any canine, regardless of age or sex. 
    Farm animal means any warm-blooded animal normally raised on farms in the United States and used for food or fiber. 
    Law enforcement officer has the meaning that appears in Wis. Stats. § 967.02(5), and includes a humane officer under Wis. Stats. § 173.03, but does not include a conservation warden appointed under Wis. Stats. § 23.10. 
    Neutered means, as describing a dog or cat, a dog or cat having nonfunctional reproductive organs. 
    Owner means any person owning, harboring or keeping a dog or cat and the occupant of any premises on which a dog or cat remains or to which it customarily returns daily for a period of ten days; such person is presumed to be harboring or keeping the dog or cat within the meaning of this article. 
    Pet means an animal kept and treated as a pet. 
(Code 1988, § 7-1-1(b); Code 1998, § 14-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Penalties; state statutes. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to punishment as provided under section 1-32. In addition, the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 174.02, relating to the owner's liability for damage caused by dogs, together with the penalties therein set forth, are adopted and incorporated by reference in this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 15-2; Ord. No. 13-13, § 4, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 14-3. - Rabies quarantine. 
(a)  Confinement of dogs and cats. If a district is quarantined for rabies, all dogs and cats within the village shall be kept securely confined, tied, leashed or muzzled. Any dog or cat not confined, tied, leashed or muzzled is declared a public nuisance and may be impounded. All officers shall cooperate in the enforcement of the quarantine. The village administrator shall promptly post notices of quarantine in at least three public places in the village. 
(b)  Exemption of vaccinated dog or cat. A dog or cat which is immunized currently against rabies, as evidenced by a valid certificate of rabies vaccination or other evidence, is exempt from the village quarantine of subsection (a) of this section if a rabies vaccination tag or substitute tag is attached to the dog's or cat's collar. 
(c)  Quarantine or sacrifice of animal suspected of biting person or being infected or exposed to rabies. 
(1)  Dog or cat. An officer shall order a dog or cat quarantined if the officer has reason to believe that the dog or cat bit a person, is infected with rabies or has been in contact with a rabid animal. If a quarantine cannot be imposed because the dog or cat cannot be captured, the officer may kill the dog or cat. The officer may kill a dog or cat only as a last resort or if the owner agrees. The officer shall attempt to kill the dog or cat in a humane manner and in a manner which avoids damage to the animal's head. 
(2)  Other animals. Any person may order killed or may kill an animal other than a dog or cat if the person has reason to believe that the animal bit a person or is infected with rabies. 
(3)  Sacrifice of dog or cat. Any person may order killed or may kill a dog or cat if the owner of the dog or cat violates Wis. Stats. § 95.21(5)(a), (b) or (c). 
(d)  Quarantine of dog or cat. 
(1)  Delivery to isolation facility or quarantine on premises of owner. An officer who orders a dog or cat to be quarantined shall deliver the dog or cat or shall order the dog or cat delivered to an isolation facility as soon as possible, but no later than 24 hours after the original order is issued, or the officer may order the dog or cat to be quarantined on the premises of the owner if the dog or cat is immunized currently against rabies as evidenced by a valid certificate of rabies vaccination or other evidence. 
(2)  Health risk to humans. If a dog or cat is ordered to be quarantined because there is reason to believe that the dog or cat bit a person, the custodian of an isolation facility or the owner shall keep the dog or cat under strict isolation under the supervision of a veterinarian for at least ten days after the incident occurred. In this subsection, the term "supervision of a veterinarian" includes, at a minimum, examination of the animal on the first day of isolation, on the last day of isolation and on one intervening day. If the observation period is not extended and if the veterinarian certifies that the dog or cat has not exhibited any signs of rabies, the dog or cat may be released from quarantine at the end of the observation period. 
(3)  Risk to animal health. 
a.  If a dog or cat is ordered to be quarantined because there is reason to believe that the dog or cat has been exposed to a rabid animal and if the dog or cat is not currently immunized against rabies, the custodian of an isolation facility or the owner shall keep the dog or cat leashed or confined for 180 days. The owner shall have the dog or cat vaccinated against rabies between 155 and 165 days after the exposure to a rabid animal. 
b.  If a dog or cat is ordered to be quarantined because there is reason to believe that the dog or cat has been exposed to a rabid animal but if the dog or cat is immunized against rabies, the custodian of an isolation facility or the owner shall keep the dog or cat leashed or confined for 60 days. The owner shall have the dog or cat revaccinated against rabies as soon as possible after exposure to a rabid animal. 
(4)  Sacrifice of dog or cat exhibiting symptoms of rabies. If a veterinarian determines that a dog or cat exhibits symptoms of rabies during the original or extended observation period, the veterinarian shall notify the owner and the officer who ordered the dog or cat quarantined and the officer or veterinarian shall kill the dog or cat in a humane manner and in a manner which avoids damage to the animal's head. If the dog or cat is suspected to have bitten a person, the veterinarian shall notify the person or the person's physician. 
(e)  Delivery of carcass; preparation; examination by state laboratory of hygiene. An officer who kills an animal shall deliver the carcass to a veterinarian or local health department. The veterinarian or local health department shall prepare the carcass, properly prepare and package the head of the animal in a manner to minimize deterioration, arrange for delivery by the most expeditious means feasible of the head of the animal to the state laboratory of hygiene and dispose of or arrange for the disposal of the remainder of the carcass in a manner which minimizes the risk of exposure to any rabies virus. The state laboratory of hygiene shall examine the specimen and determine if the animal was infected with rabies. The state laboratory of hygiene shall notify the village, the veterinarian or local health department which prepared the carcass and, if the animal is suspected of having bitten a person, that person or the person's physician. 
(f)  Cooperation of veterinarian. Any practicing veterinarian who is requested to be involved in the rabies control program by an officer is encouraged to cooperate in a professional capacity with the village, the state laboratory of hygiene, the local health department, the officer involved and, if the animal is suspected of having bitten a person, the person's physician. 
(g)  Responsibility for quarantine and laboratory expenses. The owner of an animal is responsible for any expenses incurred in connection with keeping the animal in an isolation facility, supervision and examination of the animal by a veterinarian, preparation of the carcass for laboratory examination and the fee for the laboratory examination. If the owner is unknown, the county is responsible for these expenses. 
(Code 1988, § 7-1-5; Code 1998, § 14-2) 
State Law reference- Rabies control, Wis. Stats. § 95.21. 
Sec. 14-4. - Dangerous animals. 
(a)  The police chief may issue an order declaring an animal to be dangerous on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  The animal has attacked, bitten, injured, or killed another animal or a human being. 
(2)  The animal has, off the property of its owner, chased, confronted or approached a person in a menacing fashion that would put a reasonable person in fear of being attacked. 
(3)  The animal, while on the property of its owner, chases, confronts or approaches a person located on an adjacent public or private property in a menacing fashion that would put a reasonable person in fear of being attacked. 
(4)  The animal has been trained for fighting or attack. 
(5)  The animal has acted in any manner demonstrating that the animal is a threat to public safety. 
(b)  If the police chief issues an order declaring an animal to be dangerous, the police chief shall, in his discretion, either require the animal to be removed from the village, or place restrictions on the animal and its owner and allow the animal to remain in the village subject to the restrictions, except that the order shall require the removal from the village an animal that has been trained for fighting or attack. The restrictions imposed by the police chief may include, but are not limited to, a requirement that the animal's owner pay applicable forfeitures, penalties, and/or damages as set forth in section 14-2. 
(c)  An order declaring an animal to be dangerous shall be personally delivered to the owner of the animal, if the owner can with reasonable diligence be determined. 
(d)  An owner aggrieved by an order issued by the police chief declaring an animal to be dangerous may appeal the order to the police committee by giving written notice of such appeal to the village clerk within ten days of receipt of the order. The police committee shall then set a time and place for a hearing, shall conduct a hearing at which the appellant and the police chief may present witnesses and be heard, and shall issue a written decision, which written decision shall be provided to the appellant and the police chief. The police committee, in its discretion, may issue its written decision at the same meeting during which the hearing is held or at the next police committee meeting. Either the appellant or the police chief may appeal the decision of the police committee to the village board by giving written notice of such appeal to the village clerk within five days of receipt of the written decision. The village board shall then act on the appeal, although no hearing is necessary. The appellant or the police chief may, within 30 days after the village board issues its decision, appeal the decision by certiorari review to Dane County Circuit Court. 
(e)  The conditions of an order shall be stayed during the pendency of a lawful appeal, except that if the police chief determines that certain conditions must be immediately and continuously imposed to protect the public from immediate danger from the animal, such conditions shall remain in effect during the pendency of the appeal. As part of the appeal, the owner aggrieved by the police chief's order may appeal to the police committee the immediate and continuous imposition of the conditions and seek to have them stayed during the pendency of the appeal. 
(f)  Any person who knowingly possesses, harbors or keeps an animal in violation of an order declaring the animal to be dangerous or who otherwise knowingly violates the terms of an order declaring an animal to be dangerous shall be subject to a forfeiture under section 14-2. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1998, § 15-4; Ord. No. 13-13, § 1, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 14-5. - Additional restrictions on animals. 
(a)  No person having the possession or ownership of an animal shall: 
(1)  Allow the animal to run at large within the village, including village parks. The owner of any animal shall keep the animal on a leash, tied, or enclosed in a proper enclosure so as not to allow the animal to interfere with the public or neighbors. Any animal running at large unlicensed and required by state law or this chapter to be licensed may be seized and impounded by a humane officer or law enforcement officer. An animal shall not be considered to be running at large if it is on a leash and under control of a person physically able to control it, or, in the case of dogs, if the dog is at the Waunakee Dog Park. 
(2)  Allow the animal to destroy or harm property, including, but not limited to, lawns, flower beds, plants, shrubs, trees, or gardens. 
(3)  Allow the animal to habitually bark, howl, yelp, or cry to the great discomfort of the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or in such manner as to materially disturb or annoy persons in the neighborhood who are of ordinary sensibilities. An animal is considered to be in violation of this subsection if: 
a.  Two written complaints are filed with the police department in a four-week period regarding the animal's conduct; or 
b.  A city police officer or municipal official witnesses an animal acting in violation of this subsection and reports the conduct to the police department. 
(4)  Allow the animal to deposit solid fecal matter on any street, alley or other public or private property, unless such matter is immediately removed there from by the owner or person in possession of the animal. This subsection shall not apply to a person who is visually or physically handicapped. 
(5)  Allow the animal upon any public cemetery, except for a dog that is specially trained to lead or guide a person who is visually or physically handicapped. 
(6)  Have an unlicensed dog. 
(b)  Any person having the possession or ownership of an animal that is known by such person to be infected with rabies or to have been bitten by an animal known to have been infected with rabies shall contact or notify the police department within 24 hours and have the animal quarantined pursuant to section 14-3. 
(c)  Animals in violation of this section are declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1998, § 15-3; Ord. No. 13-13, § 2, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 14-6. - Impoundment. 
(a)  Contractual agreement to provide shelter or confinement; animal control agency. 
(1)  The village may contract with or enter into an agreement with a person to provide for the operation of an animal shelter, for the impoundment of stray animals, for the confinement of certain animals and for the disposition of impounded animals. 
(2)  The village delegates any such animal control agency the authority to act pursuant to this section. 
(b)  Grounds for impoundment. In addition to any penalty, forfeiture, or damages imposed for a violation of this chapter, and in addition to any other grounds for impoundment stated in the state statutes, a police officer, humane officer or animal control officer may impound an animal that violates section 14-3 or 14-4. For an animal to be impounded, the impounding officer must see or hear the violation or conduct of the animal that results in the impoundment or have possession of a signed statement of a complaining witness alleging facts that support the impoundment. It shall be a violation of this subsection for a complaining witness to provide false or inaccurate information in the signed statement. 
(c)  Claiming animal; disposal of unclaimed animals. After seizure of an animal under this section by a law enforcement officer, humane officer or animal control officer, the animal shall be impounded. Animals transferred to the county humane society shall be cared for and disposed of pursuant to the humane society's policies. If an animal is retained in village custody, the officer shall notify the owner, personally or through the U.S. mail, if such owner is known to the officer or can be ascertained with reasonable effort, but if such owner is unknown or unascertainable, the officer shall publish in the village newspaper, giving a description of the animal, stating where it is impounded and the conditions for its release, after the officer has taken possession of such animal. If within seven days after such notice the owner does not claim such animal, the officer may dispose of the animal in a proper and humane manner. However, if an animal before being impounded has bitten a person, the animal shall be retained in the animal shelter for ten days for observation purposes. Within such time, the owner may reclaim the animal upon payment of impoundment fees, such fees to be established by resolution of the village board. No animal shall be released from the pound without being properly licensed if so required by state law or this chapter. 
(d)  Sale of impounded animals. If the owner doesn't reclaim the animal within seven days, the animal warden may sell the animal to any willing buyer. 
(e)  Village liability. The village and its animal control agency shall not be liable for the death of any animal which has been impounded or disposed of pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1988, § 7-1-7; Code 1998, § 14-4; Ord. No. 13-13, § 3, 11-4-2013) 
State Law reference- Animal impoundment, Wis. Stats. § 173.13 et seq. 
Sec. 14-7. - Duty of owner for dog, cat or ferret bite. 
    Every owner or person harboring or keeping a dog, cat or ferret who knows that such dog, cat or ferret has bitten any person shall immediately report such fact to the police department and shall keep such dog, cat or ferret confined for not less than ten days or for such period of time as the police department shall direct. The owner or keeper of any such dog, cat or ferret shall surrender the dog, cat or ferret to a law enforcement officer or humane officer upon demand for examination. 
(Code 1988, § 7-1-9; Code 1998, § 14-6) 
Sec. 14-8. - Prohibited and protected animals. 
(a)  Protected animals. The keeping of protected animals shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Possession and sale. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess with intent to sell or offer for sale or buy or attempt to buy, within the village, any of the following animals, alive or dead, or any part or product thereof: all wild cats of the family Felidae; polar bear (Thalarctos maritimus); red wolf (Canis niger); vicuna (Vicugna vicugna); or alligator, caiman or crocodile of the order of Crocodilia; gray or timber wolf (Canis lupus); sea otter (Enhydra lutris); Pacific ridley turtle (Lepidochelys olivacea); Atlantic green turtle (Chelonia mydas); Mexican ridley turtle (Lepidochelys kempii). 
(2)  Compliance with federal regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, sell or offer for sale a native or foreign species or subspecies of mammal, bird, amphibian or reptile or the dead body or parts thereof which appears on the endangered species list designated by the United States Secretary of the Interior and published in the Code of Federal Regulations pursuant to the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (PL 135), 16 USC 1531. 
(3)  Importation of certain birds. No person shall import or cause to be imported into this village any part of the plumage, skin or dead body of any species of hawk, owl or eagle. This subsection shall not be construed to forbid or restrict the importation or use of the plumage, skin, body or any part thereof legally collected for use by the American Indians for ceremonial purposes or in the preservation of their tribal customs and heritage. 
(b)  Exceptions to subsection (a). Subsection (a) of this section shall not be deemed to prevent the lawful importation, possession, purchase or sale of any species by any public agency, institute of higher learning, persons holding federal permits, or by a person holding a scientific collector's permit issued by the secretary of the department of natural resources of the state or to any person or organization licensed to represent a circus. 
(c)  Keeping wild animals. Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have in such person's possession or under such person's control within the village any poisonous reptile; any other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal, insect or reptile; any vicious or dangerous domesticated animal; or any other animal or reptile of wild, vicious or dangerous propensities. Specifically, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have in such person's possession or under such person's control within the village any of the following animals, reptiles or insects: 
(1)  All poisonous animals and reptiles including rear-fang snakes. 
(2)  Apes: 
a.  Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). 
b.  Gibbons (Hylobates). 
c.  Gorillas (Gorilla gorilla). 
d.  Orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus). 
e.  Siamangs (Symphalangus). 
(3)  Bears (Ursidae). 
(4)  Bison (Bison). 
(5)  Cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus). 
(6)  Crocodilians (Crocodilia), 30 inches in length or more. 
(7)  Constrictor snakes, six feet in length or more. 
(8)  Coyotes (Canis latrans). 
(9)  Deer (Cervidae), including all members of the deer family; for example, white-tailed deer, elk, antelope and moose. 
(10)  Elephants (Elephas maximus and Loxodonta africana). 
(11)  Game cocks and other fighting birds. 
(12)  Hippopotami (Hippopotamidae). 
(13)  Hyenas (Hyaenidae). 
(14)  Jaguars (Panthera onca). 
(15)  Leopards (Panthera pardus). 
(16)  Lions (Panthera leo). 
(17)  Lynxes (Lynx). 
(18)  Monkeys, new world (Platyrrhine). 
(19)  Monkeys, old world (Catarrhine). 
(20)  Ostriches (Struthio camelus). 
(21)  Prosimians (Prosimii). 
(22)  Pumas (Felis concolor); also known as cougars, mountain lions and panthers. 
(23)  Rhinoceroses (Rhinocerotidae). 
(24)  Sharks (class Chondrichthyes). 
(25)  Snow leopards (Panthera uncia). 
(26)  Tigers (Panthera tigris). 
(27)  Wolves (Canis lupus). 
(28)  Poisonous insects or spiders. 
(29)  Except in properly zoned districts, horses, mules, llamas, ponies, donkeys, cows, pigs, goats, sheep, chickens or any animal raised for fur-bearing purposes unless otherwise permitted elsewhere in this Code. 
(d)  Exceptions to subsection (c). The prohibitions of subsection (c) of this section shall not apply where the creatures are in the care, custody or control of a veterinarian for treatment; agricultural fairs; shows or projects of the 4-H clubs; a display for judging purposes; an itinerant or transient carnival, circus or other show; dog or cat shows or trials; public or private educational institutions; licensed pet shops; zoological gardens; if: 
(1)  Their location conforms to chapter 133 pertaining to zoning. 
(2)  All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary condition and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors. 
(3)  Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent their escape. 
(4)  No person lives or resides within 100 feet of the quarters in which the animals are kept. 
(Code 1988, § 7-1-13; Code 1998, § 14-10; Ord. No. 10-11, § 3, 11-1-2010) 
State Law reference- Captive wildlife, Wis. Stats. ch. 169. 
Sec. 14-9. - Trapping. 
(a)  In the interest of public health and safety, it shall be unlawful for any person, in or on land within the village, to set, place or tend any trap for the purpose of trapping, killing, catching, wounding, worrying or molesting any animal, except by use of live box-type traps only. Live box-type traps shall be defined as those traps which capture and hold an animal in an alive and unharmed condition. 
(b)  This section shall prohibit the use of all traps other than live traps as described in subsection (a) of this section, including but not limited to, traps commonly known as leg traps, pan-type traps or other traps designed to kill, wound or close upon a portion of the body of an animal. 
(c)  All such traps set, placed or tended shall comply with Wis. Stats. ch. 29 as it relates to trapping. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to trapping within the confines of buildings or homes. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit or hinder the village or its employees or agents from performing their official duties. 
(Code 1988, § 7-1-19; Code 1998, § 14-11) 
Sec. 14-10. - Vehicle accidents. 
    The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of a dog, cat or other animal which appears to be a pet shall immediately notify the police department or an animal control agency whose jurisdiction extends into the village. 
(Code 1988, § 7-1-21; Code 1998, § 14-12) 
Sec. 14-11. - Limitation on number of dogs and cats. 
(a)  Purpose. The village board finds that keeping large numbers of cats and dogs contributes to the degradation of the public health and general welfare by tending to create unreasonable noise and pet odors and possession of large numbers of cats or dogs can create serious health risks to the public and the caretakers when the burden to care and clean overwhelm individuals charged with the care of such animals. The village board further finds that addressing such public health and welfare issues on a case-by-case basis relying solely on the existence of actual public or private nuisances is not an effective or practical method of addressing such issues and that by contrast, it is not unreasonable to limit the numbers of cats and dogs harbored, sheltered or possessed and that such a regulation provides a more effective and practical method of addressing the public health and general welfare concerns attendant to the keeping of a large number of such pets. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fostering facility means a facility that has been approved by the Dane County Humane Society to foster animals. 
    Kennel means any premises licensed under section 14-48, or portion thereof, where dogs or cats are maintained, boarded, bred, or cared for, in return for remuneration, or are kept for the purpose of sale. 
    Premises means any parcel of land including improvements considered a single unit for purposes of use or occupancy. As applied to multifamily dwellings, the term shall refer to each dwelling unit. 
    Rescue facility means a facility that has been approved by the American Kennel Club to care for abandoned or abused animals. 
(c)  Prohibition. There shall be no more than three dogs or cats or any combination thereof harbored, sheltered or possessed upon a single premises. 
(d)  Exceptions. The prohibition contained in subsection (c) of this section shall not apply to the following, so long as all applicable state, county or village zoning, licensing or other laws or regulations are satisfied: 
(1)  Dogs and cats under the age of five months. 
(2)  Service animals as that term is used and interpreted by the federal Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(3)  A fostering facility or a rescue facility. 
(4)  Pet shops. 
(5)  Veterinary hospitals or clinics. 
(6)  Kennels. 
(7)  Pet grooming parlor. 
(Code 1988, § 7-1-22; Code 1998, § 14-13; Ord. No. 10-11, § 4, 11-1-2010) 
Sec. 14-12. - Keeping of bees. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or maintain any hive, stand or box where bees are kept or to keep any bees in or upon any premises within the corporate limits of the village, unless the bees are kept in accordance with the following: 
(1)  No hive, stand or box where bees are kept shall be located closer than 20 feet to any property boundary. 
(2)  If bee colonies are kept within 50 feet of any exterior boundary of the property on which the hive, stand or box is located, a barrier that will prevent bees from flying through it, no less than five feet high, shall be installed and maintained along the exterior boundary. The barrier may be either a natural planting or artificial. 
(3)  Fresh, clean watering facilities for bees shall be provided on the premises. 
(4)  The bees and equipment shall be kept in accordance with state statutes. 
(5)  A conditional use permit, following notice and hearing, pursuant to chapter 133, shall first be obtained. 
(6)  Hives, stands or boxes for bees shall only be kept in a rear yard area. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed to prohibit the keeping of bees in a hive, stand or box located within a school or university building for the purpose of study or observation. 
(Code 1988, § 7-1-23; Code 1998, § 14-14) 
Sec. 14-13. - Exclusion from food handling establishments. 
    No person shall take or permit to remain any dog, cat or other live animal on or upon any premises where food is sold, offered for sale or processed for consumption by the general public; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to guide dogs accompanying blind, deaf and mobility-impaired persons, as provided under Wis. Stats. § 174.056. persons with service animals as provided in Wis. Stats. § 106.52. 
(Code 1988, § 8-1-3(b); Code 1998, § 14-15) 
Secs. 14-14-14-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOG, CAT AND KENNEL LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dog licenses, Wis. Stats. § 174.05 et seq. 

Sec. 14-45. - Dog or cat license required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the village to own, harbor or keep any dog or cat of more than five months of age after April 1 of the license year without complying with the sections of this chapter relating to the listing, licensing and tagging of the dog or cat. 
(Code 1988, § 7-1-1(a); Code 1998, § 14-41; Ord. No. 2003-14, 12-15-2003) 
Sec. 14-46. - Rabies vaccination. 
(a)  Required. The owner of a dog or cat shall have the dog or cat vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian within 30 days after the dog or cat reaches four months of age, and the dog or cat shall be revaccinated within one year after the initial vaccination. If the owner obtains the dog or cat or brings the dog or cat into the village after the dog or cat has reached four months of age, the owner shall have the dog or cat vaccinated against rabies within 30 days after the dog or cat is brought into the village, unless the dog or cat has been vaccinated as evidenced by a current certificate of rabies vaccination. The owner of a dog or cat shall have the dog or cat revaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian before the date of that immunization expires, as stated on the certificate of vaccination, or, if no date is specified, within two years after the previous vaccination. The certificate of vaccination shall meet the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 95.21(2). 
(b)  Issuance of certificate of rabies vaccination. A veterinarian who vaccinates a dog or cat against rabies shall complete and issue to the owner a certificate of rabies vaccination bearing a serial number and in the form approved by the village stating the owner's name and address; the name, sex, spayed or unspayed, neutered or unneutered, breed and color of the dog or cat; the date of the vaccination; the type of rabies vaccination administered and the manufacturer's serial number; the date that the immunization expires as specified for that type of vaccine by the Centers for Disease Control of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and the village. 
(c)  Copies of certificate. The veterinarian shall keep a copy of each certificate of rabies vaccination in a file maintained for this purpose until the date that the immunization expires or until the dog or cat is revaccinated, whichever occurs first. 
(d)  Issuance of tag. After issuing the certificate of rabies vaccination, the veterinarian shall deliver to the owner a rabies vaccination tag of durable material bearing the same serial number as the certificate; the year the vaccination was given; and the name, address and telephone number of the veterinarian. 
(e)  Attaching tag. The owner shall attach the rabies vaccination tag or a substitute tag to a collar, and a collar with the tag attached shall be kept on the dog or cat at all times, but this does not apply to a dog or cat during competition or training, to a dog while hunting, to a dog or cat securely confined indoors or to a dog or cat securely confined in a fenced area. The substitute tag shall be of a durable material and shall contain the same information as the rabies vaccination tag. The requirements of this subsection do not apply to a dog or cat which is not required to be vaccinated under subsection (a) of this section. 
(f)  Duplicate tag. The veterinarian may furnish a new rabies vaccination tag with a new serial number to an owner in place of the original tag upon presentation of the certificate of rabies vaccination. The veterinarian shall then indicate the new tag number on the certificate and shall keep a record in the file. 
(g)  Cost. The owner shall pay the cost of the rabies vaccination and the cost associated with the issuance of a certificate of rabies vaccination and the delivery of a rabies vaccination tag. 
(Code 1988, § 7-1-2; Code 1998, § 14-42; Ord. No. 2003-14, 12-15-2003) 
Sec. 14-47. - Requirements for issuance of dog or cat licenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the village to own, harbor or keep any dog or cat more than five months of age without complying with Wis. Stats. §§ 174.05-174.09 relating to the listing, licensing and tagging of the dog or cat. 
(b)  The owner of any dog or cat more than five months of age on January 1 of any year or five months of age within the license year shall annually, or on or before the date the dog or cat becomes five months of age, pay a license tax fee and obtain a license. 
(c)  The minimum license tax fee under this section shall be as established in the schedule of village license fees. The license year shall commence January 1 and shall end December 31. 
(d)  Upon payment of the required license tax fee and upon presentation of evidence that the dog or cat is currently immunized against rabies, as required by section 14-46, the village administrator shall complete and issue to the owner a license for such dog or cat containing all information required by state law. The village clerk shall also deliver to the owner, at the time of issuance of the license, a tag of durable material bearing the same serial number as the license, the name of the county in which issued and the license year. 
(e)  The owner shall securely attach the tag to a collar, and the collar with the tag attached shall be kept on the dog or cat for which the license is issued at all times, except as provided in subsection 14-46(e). 
(f)  The fact that a dog or cat is without a tag attached to the dog or cat by means of a collar shall be presumptive evidence that the dog or cat is unlicensed. Any village police or humane officer shall seize, impound or restrain any dog or cat for which a dog or cat license is required which is found without such tag attached. 
(g)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) through (f) of this section, every dog or cat specifically trained to lead blind or deaf persons or to provide support for mobility-impaired persons, or that is kept only for educational or scientific purposes is exempt from the license tax fee, and every person owning such a dog or cat shall receive annually a free dog or cat license from the village clerk upon application therefor. 
(Code 1988, § 7-1-3(a); Code 1998, § 14-43; Ord. No. 2003-14, 12-15-2003) 
Sec. 14-48. - Requirements for issuance of kennel licenses. 
(a)  Any person who keeps or operates a kennel may, instead of the license tax for each dog required by this article, apply for a kennel license for the keeping or operating of the kennel. Such person shall pay for the license year a license tax as established in the schedule of village license fees. Upon payment of the required kennel license tax and, if required by the village board, upon presentation of evidence that all dogs over five months of age are currently immunized against rabies, the village clerk shall issue the kennel license and a number of tags equal to the number of dogs authorized to be kept in the kennel. Kennels may only be located in residential areas after a conditional use permit has been issued pursuant to chapter 133 pertaining to zoning. 
(b)  The owner or keeper of a kennel shall keep at all times a kennel license tag attached to the collar of each dog over five months old kept by the owner or keeper under a kennel license, but this requirement does not apply to a show dog during competition, to a dog securely confined indoors or to a dog securely confined in a fenced area. These tags may be transferred from one dog to another within the kennel whenever any dog is removed from the kennel. The rabies vaccination tag or substitute tag shall remain attached to the dog for which it is issued at all times, but this requirement does not apply to a show dog during competition, to a dog securely confined indoors or to a dog securely confined in a fenced area. No dog bearing a kennel tag shall be permitted to stray or to be taken anywhere outside the limits of the kennel unless the dog is on a leash or temporarily for the purposes of hunting, breeding, trial, training or competition. 
(Code 1988, § 7-1-3(b); Code 1998, § 14-44) 
State Law reference- Kennel licenses, Wis. Stats. § 174.053. 
Sec. 14-49. - Late fees. 
    The village clerk shall assess and collect a late fee in the amount established by resolution from every owner of a dog or cat five months of age or over if the owner failed to obtain a license prior to April 1 of each year or within 30 days of acquiring ownership of a licensable dog or cat or if the owner failed to obtain a license on or before the dog or cat reached licensable age. The late fee shall be charged in addition to the required license fee. 
(Code 1988, § 7-1-4; Code 1998, § 14-45; Ord. No. 2003-14, 12-15-2003) 
Secs. 14-50-14-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LIVESTOCK 

Sec. 14-72. - Restrictions on keeping. 
    All structures, pens, buildings, stables, coops or yards wherein animals or fowl are kept shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free of rodents, vermin and objectionable odors, and all animals or fowl shall only be kept in properly zoned areas. 
(Code 1988, § 8-1-3(a); Code 1998, § 14-76) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Licensees required to pay local taxes, assessments and claims; appellate procedures. 
(a)  Payment of claims. The village shall not issue or renew any license to transact any business within the village for any: 
(1)  Purposes for which taxes, assessments or other claims of the village are delinquent and unpaid. 
(2)  Person who is delinquent in payment of any: 
a.  Taxes, assessments or other claims owed the village; or 
b.  Forfeiture resulting from a violation of any village ordinance. 
(b)  Exception. Except for chapter 14, this section shall apply to this Code. 
(c)  Denial of application for license renewal. An application for renewal of a license subject to this section shall be denied pursuant to subsection (a) of this section only following notice and opportunity for hearing as provided by subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Hearings. Prior to any denial of an application for renewal of a license, including denials pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the applicant shall be given notice and opportunity for a hearing as follows: 
(1)  With respect to licenses renewable under division 2 of article II of chapter 6, notice and opportunity for hearing shall be as provided by Wis. Stats. § 125.12. 
(2)  With respect to licenses other than those described in subsection (a) of this section, the village board shall notify the applicant in writing of the village's intention not to renew the license and shall provide the applicant with an opportunity for hearing. The notice shall state the reasons for the intended action and shall establish a date, not less than three days or more than ten days after the date of the notice, on which the applicant shall appear before the village board. If the applicant shall fail to appear before the board on the date indicated on the notice, the board shall deny the application for renewal. If the applicant appears before the board on the date indicated in the notice and denies that the reasons for nonrenewal exist, the village board shall conduct a hearing with respect to the matter. At the hearing, both the village board and the applicant may produce witnesses, cross examine witnesses and be represented by counsel. The applicant shall, upon request, be provided a written transcript of the hearing at the applicant's expense. If the village board determines the applicant shall not be entitled to renewal pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the application for renewal shall be denied. 
(e)  Appeals of other denials. Where an individual, business or corporation wishes to appeal the village administrator's decision not to issue a license or permit under the sections of this Code listed in subsection (b) of this section, including chapter 15, on grounds other than those specified in subsections (a) through (d) of this section, the applicant may file a request in writing with the village administrator that the matter be referred to the village board. A public hearing shall be scheduled within 14 calendar days by the village board. All parties may be represented by counsel. The board shall consider all relevant information and shall render a decision, which shall be binding. 
(Code 1988, § 7-12-1; Code 1998, § 22-1) 
Sec. 18-2. - Cigarette license. 
(a)  Required. No person shall, in any manner, directly or indirectly, upon any premises, or by any device sell, exchange, barter, dispose of or give away or keep for sale any cigarette, cigarette paper or cigarette wrappers or any substitute therefor without first obtaining a license as provided in this section. 
(b)  Application; fee. Every person desiring a license under this section shall file with the village clerk a written application therefor, stating the name of the person and the place for which such license is desired. Each license shall be filed by the village administrator and shall name the licensee and the place wherein the licensee is authorized to conduct such business. The license shall not be delivered until the applicant shall pay to the village clerk a license fee as established by resolution. 
(c)  Issuance and term. Licenses for the sale, exchange, barter, disposition of or giving away or keeping for sale of cigarette paper or cigarette wrappers or any substitute therefor shall be issued by the village clerk. Each license shall be issued on July 1 in each year or thereafter whenever applied for and shall continue in force from the date of issuance until the succeeding June 30, unless sooner revoked for any violation of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 7-3-2; Code 1998, § 22-2) 
State Law reference- Cigarette license, Wis. Stats. § 134.65. 
Secs. 18-3-18-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate, Wis. Stats. § 66.0423. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-23. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charitable organization means and includes any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation, or one purporting to be such. 
    Merchandise means and includes personal property of any kind, and includes merchandise, goods, or materials provided incidental to services offered or sold. The sale of merchandise includes donations required by the seller for the retention of merchandise by a donor or prospective customer. 
    Permanent merchant means any person who, for at least one year prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives: 
(1)  Has continuously operated an established place of business in the local trade area among the communities bordering the place of sale; or 
(2)  Has continuously resided in the local trade area among the communities bordering the place of sale and now does business from such merchant's residence. 
    Person means all humans of any age or sex, partnerships, corporations, associations, groups, organizations and any other description of a collection of human beings working in concert or for the same purpose or objective. 
    Transient merchant means any individual who engages in the retail sale of merchandise at any place in this state temporarily, and who does not intend to become and does not become a permanent merchant of such place. For purposes of this definition, the term "sale of merchandise" includes a sale in which the personal services rendered upon or in connection with the merchandise constitutes the greatest part of value for the price received, but does not include a farm auction sale conducted by or for a resident farmer of personal property used on the farm, or the sale of produce or other perishable products at retail or wholesale by a resident of this state. 
(Code 1988, § 7-4-2; Code 1998, § 22-62) 
Sec. 18-24. - Penalty. 
    Any person adjudged in violation of this article shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in section 1-32 for each violation per day plus costs of prosecution. 
(Code 1988, § 7-4-10; Code 1998, § 22-71) 
Sec. 18-25. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempt from all sections of this article: 
(1)  Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods to regular customers on established routes. 
(2)  Any person selling merchandise at wholesale to dealers in such merchandise. 
(3)  Any person selling agricultural products which the person has grown. 
(4)  Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders at the home of the buyer for merchandise regularly offered for sale by such merchant within this county and who delivers such merchandise in the regular course of business. 
(5)  Any person who has an established place of business where the merchandise being sold is offered for sale on a regular basis, and in which the buyer has initiated contact with and specifically requested a home visit by such person. 
(6)  Any person who has had or one who represents a company which has had a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit arrangement, with the prospective customer. 
(7)  Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the sale or offering for sale of merchandise. 
(8)  Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law. 
(9)  Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who engages in direct sales for or on behalf of such organization, provided that there is submitted to the village administrator proof that such charitable organization is registered under Wis. Stats. § 440.41. Any charitable organization engaging in the sale of merchandise and not registered under Wis. Stats. § 440.41 or which is exempt from that statute's registration requirements shall be required to register under this article. 
(10)  Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant, but against whom complaint has been made to the village administrator that such person is a transient merchant, provided that there is submitted to the village administrator proof that such person has leased for at least one year or has purchased the premises from which such person is conducting business or proof that such person has conducted such business in this village for at least one year prior to the date complaint was made. 
(11)  Any individual licensed by an examining board as defined in Wis. Stats. § 15.01(7). 
(12)  Transient merchants while doing business at special events authorized by the village board. 
(Code 1988, § 7-4-3; Code 1998, § 22-63) 
Sec. 18-26. - Records of violations. 
    The police department shall report to the village clerk all convictions for violations of this article, and the clerk shall note any such violation on the record of the registrant convicted. 
(Code 1988, § 7-4-8; Code 1998, § 22-69) 
Sec. 18-27. - Prohibited practices. 
(a)  A transient merchant shall be prohibited from: 
(1)  Calling at any dwelling or other place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except by appointment; 
(2)  Calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing the words "no peddlers," "no solicitors" or words of similar meaning; 
(3)  Calling at the rear door of any dwelling place; or 
(4)  Remaining on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or other person having authority over such premises. 
(b)  A transient merchant shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity or character of any merchandise offered for sale, the purpose of the transient merchant's visit, the transient merchant's identity or the identity of the organization the transient merchant's represents. A charitable organization transient merchant shall specifically disclose what portion of the sale price of merchandise being offered will actually be used for the charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting. Such portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the merchandise. 
(c)  No transient merchant shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed. 
(d)  No transient merchant shall make any loud noises or use any sound amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced is capable of being plainly heard outside a 100-foot radius of the source. 
(e)  No transient merchant shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around the area in which the transient merchant is conducting business. 
(Code 1988, § 7-4-7(a); Code 1998, § 22-67) 
Sec. 18-28. - Disclosure requirements. 
(a)  After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to a prospective customer, a transient merchant shall expressly disclose the transient merchant's name, the name of the company or organization the transient merchant is affiliated with, if any, and the identity of merchandise or services being offered for sale. 
(b)  If any sale of merchandise is made by a transient merchant or any sales order for the later delivery of merchandise is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have the right to cancel the transaction if it involves the extension of credit or if it is a cash transaction of more than $25.00, in accordance with the procedure as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 423.203. The seller shall give the buyer two copies of a typed or printed notice of that fact. Such notice shall conform to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 423.203(1)(a), (b) and (c), (2) and (3). 
(c)  If the transient merchant takes a sales order for the later delivery of merchandise, the transient merchant shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the agreement; the amount paid in advance; whether full, partial or no advance payment is made; the name, address and telephone number of the seller; the delivery or performance date; and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms thereof. 
(Code 1988, §§ 7-4-7(b), 7-4-8, Code 1998, § 22-68) 
Secs. 18-29-18-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 18-60. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant to engage in direct sales within the village without being registered for that purpose as provided in this article. 
(Code 1988, § 7-4-1; Code 1998, § 22-61) 
Sec. 18-61. - Procedures. 
(a)  Information required. An applicant for registration pursuant to this article must complete and return to the village clerk a registration form furnished by the clerk which shall require the following information: 
(1)  Name, permanent address and telephone number, and temporary address, if any. 
(2)  Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and date of birth. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person that the transient merchant represents or is employed by or whose merchandise is being sold. 
(4)  The temporary address and telephone number from which business will be conducted, if any. 
(5)  The nature of the business to be conducted and a brief description of the merchandise offered and any services offered. 
(6)  The proposed method of delivery of merchandise, if applicable. 
(7)  The make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by the applicant in the conduct of the applicant's business. 
(8)  The most recent cities, villages, towns, not to exceed three, where the applicant conducted similar business just prior to making this registration. 
(9)  The place where the applicant can be contacted for at least seven days after leaving this village. 
(10)  A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime or ordinance violation related to the applicant's transient merchant business within the last five years, the nature of the offense and the place of conviction. 
(b)  Identification and certification. An applicant shall present to the village clerk for examination: 
(1)  A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be reasonably required. 
(2)  A state certificate of examination and approval from the sealer of weights and measures where the applicant's business requires use of weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities. 
(3)  A state health officer's certificate where the applicant's business involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be certified under state law. Such certificate shall state that the applicant is apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease and shall be dated not more than 90 days prior to the date the application for registration is made. 
(c)  Fee. At the time of filing the application, a registration fee as established by resolution shall be paid to the village clerk to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated in the application and for processing the registration. Every member of a group must file a separate registration form. 
(d)  Appointment of agent for service of process. The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the village clerk or the village clerk's agent to accept service of process in any civil action brought against the applicant arising out of any sale or service performed by the applicant in connection with the direct sales activities of the applicant, if the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be served personally. 
(e)  Issuance; term. Upon payment of the fees and the signing of the statement required in subsection (d) of this section, the village clerk shall register the applicant as a transient merchant and shall date the entry. The registration shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of entry, subject to subsequent refusal as provided in subsection 18-62(b). 
(Code 1988, § 7-4-4; Code 1998, § 22-64) 
Sec. 18-62. - Investigation; denial of registration. 
(a)  Upon receipt of each application for registration as required in this article, the village clerk may refer it immediately to the police department for an investigation of the statements made in such registration. 
(b)  The village clerk shall refuse to register the applicant if it is determined, pursuant to the investigation that: 
(1)  The application contains any material omission or materially inaccurate statement; 
(2)  Complaints of a material nature have been received against the applicant by authorities in the last cities, villages and towns, not exceeding three, in which the applicant conducted similar business; 
(3)  The applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance violation within the last five years, the nature of which is directly related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling; or 
(4)  The applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision of subsection 18-61(b). 
(Code 1988, § 7-5-5; Code 1998, § 22-65) 
Sec. 18-63. - Appeal of denial. 
    Any person denied registration as required in this article may appeal the denial through the appeal procedure provided by ordinance of the village board. 
(Code 1988, § 7-4-6; Code 1998, § 22-66) 
Sec. 18-64. - Revocation. 
(a)  Registration issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the village board after notice and hearing if the registrant: 
(1)  Made any material omission or materially inaccurate statement in the application for registration; 
(2)  Made any fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation in the course of engaging in direct sales; 
(3)  Violated any section of this article; or 
(4)  Was convicted of any crime or ordinance or statutory violation which is directly related to the registrant's fitness to engage in selling. 
(b)  Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally or pursuant to subsection 18-61(d) on the registrant at least 72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing. Such notice shall contain the time and place of the hearing and a statement of the facts upon which the hearing will be based. 
(Code 1988, § 7-4-9; Code 1998, § 22-70) 
Secs. 18-65-18-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-87. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Manager means the operator or an agent licensed under this article who shall not be licensed as a massage technician. 
    Massage means any process or procedure consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading or tapping, by physical or mechanical means, upon the external parts or tissues of the body of another for a consideration. 
    Massage establishment means a place of business wherein private massage is practiced, used or made available as a principal use of the premises. 
    Massage room means the area where private massage is performed. 
    Massage technician means a person who practices, administers or uses massage for a consideration, who holds a valid license under this article. 
    Operator means any person licensed by the village to operate a massage establishment. 
    Patron means any person who receives a massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that such person will pay money or give any consideration therefor. 
    Sexual or genital parts means the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. 
    Waiting area means an area adjacent to the main entrance that is separate from any area where massages are given. 
(Code 1998, § 22-102) 
Sec. 18-88. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in section 1-32. 
(Code 1998, § 22-110) 
Sec. 18-89. - Compliance with article. 
    It is unlawful for a person to suffer, cause or permit the operation of a massage establishment or for a person to operate as a massage agent, manager or employee, except in strict compliance with this article. 
(Code 1998, § 22-101) 
Sec. 18-90. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to the following classes of individuals while engaged in the duties of their respective professions: 
(1)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, masseurs, or physical therapists licensed or registered to practice their respective professions under state laws or nurses registered under state laws acting under their direction and control. 
(2)  Barbershops and beauty parlors, barbers and beauticians licensed under state laws, provided that such massage as is practiced is limited to the head and scalp. 
(3)  Accredited high schools and colleges and coaches and trainers therein while acting within the scope of their employment. 
(Code 1998, § 22-108) 
Sec. 18-91. - Regulation of licensed operators. 
(a)  Establishments. Each establishment licensed under this article shall at all times maintain and comply with the following: 
(1)  The establishment shall comply with all village codes. 
(2)  Only one nonflashing business sign clearly identifying the establishment as a massage establishment shall be posted at the main entrance. No description of services shall be permitted on such sign. 
(3)  No establishment shall be open for business between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(4)  Only massage technicians licensed pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 460.19 shall be employed as massage technicians by the establishment. 
(5)  The practice of all massage technicians employed by the establishment shall be limited to the licensed premises. 
(6)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted on the premises. 
(7)  No intoxicating beverages or substance included in Wis. Stats. ch. 961, subch. II (Wis. Stats. § 961.11 et seq.), shall be permitted in the licensed establishment. Food shall be permitted only when there is no charge therefor and when a food preparation area, including sink with hot and cold running water, is a part of the establishment. 
(8)  The establishment shall provide a waiting area for patrons separate from any area wherein massages are given. There shall be direct access to this area from the main entrance or from the hallway connected only to the main entrance. 
(9)  The operator or a licensed manager shall be present on the premises at all times during hours of operation and shall be responsible for the operation of the establishment. 
(10)  The establishment shall permit inspections of the premises at any time during business hours by building inspectors, fire inspectors, health inspectors, or personnel of any law enforcement agency. 
(11)  The establishment shall keep current records of the names and addresses of its massage technicians, agents, managers and employees and the date of employment and termination of each. Such records shall be open to inspection by any of the personnel listed in subsection (a)(10) of this section. 
(12)  The establishment shall report any change of fact required on the application form and all personnel changes to the village administrator within ten days after such change. 
(13)  Massage establishments shall keep a record of the date and hour of each massage, the name and address of the patron receiving the massage and the name of the masseur practicing or administering the massage. Such records shall be kept for the limited purpose of tracing any communicable disease which may have been contracted by any patron in such massage establishment and shall be made readily available to the inspecting officials and shall be used only for the purpose of tracing communicable diseases and to prevent any further contamination. 
(14)  Massage establishments shall at all times be equipped with an adequate supply of clean sanitary towels, coverings and linens. Clean towels, coverings, and linens shall be stored in cabinets. Towels shall have first been laundered and disinfected. Disposable coverings and towels shall not be used on more than one patron. Soiled linens and paper towels shall be deposited in approved receptacles. 
(15)  Instruments utilized in performing massage shall not be used on more than one patron unless they have first been sterilized, using disinfecting agents or sterilizing equipment approved by the village and appropriate health officials. Massage table pads and reusable table coverings shall be disinfected between each massage with approved chemicals. Chemicals used during massage shall be stored separately in containers clearly labeled as to contents. All chemical containers shall be stored in cabinets reserved solely for such purpose. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person: 
(1)  In a massage parlor, to place such person's hand upon or to touch with any part of such person's body or to fondle or massage a sexual or genital part of any other person. 
(2)  In a massage parlor, to offer for a consideration to place such person's hand upon or to touch with any part of such person's body or to fondle or massage a sexual or genital part of any other person. 
(3)  In a massage parlor, to expose such person's sexual or genital parts or any portion thereof to any other person. It shall also be unlawful for any person in a massage parlor to expose the sexual or genital parts or any portion thereof of any other person. 
(4)  While in the presence of any other person in a massage parlor, to fail to conceal with a fully opaque covering, the sexual or genital parts of such person's body. 
(5)  Owning, operating or managing a massage parlor to knowingly cause, allow or permit in or about such massage parlor any agent, employee, or any other person under such person's control or supervision to perform such acts prohibited in subsections (b)(1) through (3) of this section. 
(Code 1998, § 22-106) 
Secs. 18-92-18-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 18-111. - Massage establishment license. 
(a)  No person shall suffer, cause or permit the conduct of a massage establishment without having first obtained a license from the village board. A separate license shall be acquired for each such establishment. The operation of a massage establishment without a license or the activity of an individual as a massage technician without a license is deemed a public nuisance and may be enjoined by the village. 
(b)  No license shall be granted for any establishment, the main entrance to which is within 75 feet of the main entrance to a residence or of the common entry hall to residences, or for any room in any hotel or motel. 
(c)  Applications shall be made in writing on forms supplied by the village clerk. 
(d)  All applications shall include the following: 
(1)  A nonrefundable fee in the amount established by resolution. 
(2)  The location and mailing address of the proposed establishment. 
(3)  For an individual or for each person of a partnership or joint venture or agent of a corporation: 
a.  The name and present address. 
b.  The two immediately previous addresses, and dates of residence at each. 
c.  Height, weight, color of hair and eyes; written proof of age; a full set of fingerprints; and two photographs not less than 30 days old and at least two inches by two inches. 
d.  The business or occupation for the two years immediately preceding the date of application. 
e.  Whether a similar license has been revoked or suspended and, if so, the reason therefor and the location thereof. 
f.  Whether convicted of any crime or ordinance violation other than traffic offenses within the past three years and, if so, a listing of such and the locations thereof. 
(4)  If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of each officer and director and of the stockholders of such corporation, together with the extent of the ownership of each and a statement whether such officer, director or stockholder holds office or stock in any other corporation conducting a similar business in the state. Such application shall be made by an agent registered as such who shall have been a resident of the village for at least 90 days. 
(5)  All phone numbers of the proposed establishment. 
(6)  The names, addresses and phone numbers of all persons employed by the applicant at the proposed establishment at the time of application. 
(7)  Certification of compliance of the proposed premises with the building code and fire code, or in the alternative, the applicant shall file a bond ensuring that any work required to be done to bring the premises into compliance therewith shall be accomplished prior to the opening of business. Compliance with such codes and with the standards contained in this article for health and sanitary operation and the acquisition of a health permit shall be conditions precedent to the opening of business. 
(8)  A statement signed by the applicant and each individual of a partnership or joint venture that all information contained therein is true and correct. 
(e)  The issuance of this license shall allow for the licensing of up to three additional managers for each establishment. 
(Code 1998, §§ 22-103, 22-109) 
Sec. 18-112. - Massage manager's license. 
(a)  No person shall act or operate for a consideration as a massage manager without having first obtained a license to so do. 
(b)  The application for a license shall be in writing on forms supplied by the village clerk and shall include the following: 
(1)  A nonrefundable fee established by resolution. 
(2)  The applicant's full name and present address; written proof of age in excess of 18 years; height, weight, color of hair and eyes; a full set of fingerprints; and two photographs not less than 30 days old and at least two inches by two inches. 
(3)  The applicant's two previous addresses and dates of residence at each. 
(4)  The applicant's business, occupation or employment during the two years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(5)  Whether the applicant has had a similar license revoked or suspended and, if so, the reason therefor and the location thereof. 
(6)  Whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime or ordinance violation other than traffic offenses within the past three years and, if so, a listing of such and the location thereof. 
(7)  The name and address of the licensed massage establishment by which the applicant is employed. 
(8)  A statement signed by the applicant that all information contained therein is true and correct. 
(Code 1998, § 22-104) 
Sec. 18-113. - Granting of license. 
(a)  A license required under this article may be granted by the village board after a hearing at which the applicant may be heard at the applicant's option. 
(b)  The village board shall grant a license within 30 days of application unless it is shown, for a massage establishment license, that the operation as proposed by the applicant does not comply with all applicable state laws and village ordinances, and for all licenses unless it is shown that the applicant or any partner or any officer, director or stockholder of a corporate applicant has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense under Wis. Stats. ch. 944 or involving substances included in Wis. Stats. ch. 961, subchapter II (Wis. Stats. § 961.11 et seq.), or of an offense against the person or property of another within the past three years; that the information required on the application is incomplete or that any applicant has knowingly or with the intent to deceive made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the application or any other document required by the village in conjunction therewith; or that the applicant has not resided in the village for at least 90 days prior to the date of application. 
(c)  If the license is denied, the applicant shall receive written notification thereof setting forth the reasons of the denial within ten days after such denial. 
(d)  Licenses granted by the village board shall expire one year from the date of granting. Reapplication therefor shall be not less than 60 days prior to such expiration date and shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. 
(e)  No license shall be transferred between locations or persons and no massage establishment license shall be sold or be subject to transfer of corporate assets or change of corporate officers or directors. 
(Code 1998, § 22-105) 
Sec. 18-114. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)  Generally. Any license granted in this article may be revoked or suspended, indefinitely, or not renewed by the village board as follows: 
(1)  If the applicant has made or recorded any statement required by this article knowing it to be false or fraudulent or intentionally deceptive. 
(2)  For the violation of any section of this article, except for establishment license matters involving a violation of building codes, in which case the license shall be revoked after the second conviction thereof in any license year. 
(3)  After one conviction of any establishment personnel of an offense under Wis. Stats. ch. 944 or of an offense against the person or property of a patron of the property or of an offense involving a substance in Wis. Stats. ch. 961, subch. II (Wis. Stats. § 961.11 et seq.), where there is shown the participation or knowledge of any other establishment personnel or of any individual within the business structure of the applicant. 
(b)  Notice of hearing. No license shall be revoked, suspended, or not renewed by the village board except upon due notice and hearing to determine whether grounds for such action exist. Such hearing shall be held before the village board. Notice of such hearing shall be in writing and shall state the grounds of the complaint against the licensee. The notice shall be served upon the licensee at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing and shall state the time and place thereof. The licensee shall be entitled to be heard, to be represented by counsel, to cross examine opposing witnesses, to present witnesses on such person's own behalf under subpoena by the village board if such is required, and the hearing may be stenographically recorded at the licensee's option and expense. At the conclusion of such hearing, the village board shall prepare findings of fact and conclusions as to what, if any, action the village board should take with respect to the license. The board shall provide the complainant and licensee with a copy of the report. 
(Code 1998, § 22-107) 
Secs. 18-115-18-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-142. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any form of consideration, or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store. 
(1)  The term "adult bookstore," "adult novelty" or "adult video store" means a commercial establishment which has a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade or a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising to the sale or rental for any form of consideration of any one or more of the following: 
a.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
b.  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
(2)  A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(3)  Video stores that sell and/or rent only video tapes or other photographic or computer generated reproductions, and associated equipment shall come within this definition if 20 percent or more if its stock-in-trade or revenues comes from the rental or sale of video tapes or other photographic reproductions or associated equipment which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment at which on 20 or more days in any 12-month period: 
(1)  Persons appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude; or 
(2)  Live performances occur which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions are shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed establishment with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting materials having as its dominant theme, or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on, matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed establishment with a capacity of 50 or more persons where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
    Booth, room, or cubicle means such enclosures as are specifically offered to the public or members of a sexually oriented business for hire or for a fee as part of a business operated on the premises which offers as part of its business the entertainment to be viewed within the enclosure; which shall include, without limitation, such enclosures wherein the entertainment is dispensed for a fee, but a fee is not charged for mere access to the enclosure. However, the term "booth," "room," or "cubicle" does not mean such enclosures that are private offices used by the owners, managers or persons employed on the premises for attending to the tasks of their employment, which enclosures are not held out to the public or members of the establishment for hire or for a fee or for the purpose of viewing entertainment for a fee, are not open to any persons other than employees; nor shall this definition apply to hotels, motels, or other similar establishments licensed by the state pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 50. 
    Employee means a person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business. The term "employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
    Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
    Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
    Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually oriented business. 
    Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a state of nudity, or who displays specified anatomical areas and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. The term "nude model studio" shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the state or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure: 
(1)  That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; and 
(2)  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
(3)  Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
    Nudity or a state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the entire nipple and areola, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
    Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
    Public indecency means a person knowingly or intentionally, in a public place: 
(1)  Engages in sexual intercourse; 
(2)  Engages in deviant sexual conduct; 
(3)  Appears in a state of nudity; or 
(4)  Fondles the genitals of self or another person. 
    Public place means any location frequented by the public, or where the public is present or like to be present, or where a person may reasonably be expected to be observed by members of the public. The term "public place" includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks, parks, beaches, business and commercial establishments (whether for profit or not-for-profit and whether open to the public at large or where entrance is limited by a cover charge or membership requirement), bottle clubs, hotels, motels, restaurants, night clubs, country clubs, cabarets and meeting facilities utilized by religious, social, fraternal or similar organizations. Premises used solely as a private residence, whether permanent or temporary in nature shall not be deemed to be a public place. A public place shall not include enclosed single sex public restrooms, enclosed single sex functional showers, locker and/or dressing room facilities, enclosed motel rooms and hotel rooms designed and intended for sleeping accommodations, doctors' offices, portions of hospitals and similar places in which nudity or exposure is necessarily and customarily expected outside of the home and the sphere of privacy constitutionally protected therein. The term "public place" does not include a private facility which has been formed as a family-oriented clothing optional facility, properly licensed by the state. 
    Semi-nude or in a semi-nude condition means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
    Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or 
(2)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
    Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or 
(3)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition. 
    Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor area exists on the date this article takes effect. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Code 1998, § 22-137; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-112, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-143. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the village. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the Board, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), and on studies in other communities including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and Beaumont, Texas, the board finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises. 
(2)  Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses defined in this section as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher incidences of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments. 
(3)  Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows. 
(4)  Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. 
(5)  Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses. 
(6)  At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV/AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, and trichomoniasis. 
(7)  Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States-600 in 1982, 2,200 in 1983, 4,600 in 1984, 8,555 in 1985 and 253,448 in 1992, and 886,575 through 2002. HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report, United States Health and Human Services Department, Center for Disease Control, 2003. 
(8)  As of December 30, 2003, there have been 5,386 reported cases of AIDS and 8,233 reported cases of HIV infection in the State of Wisconsin. Wisconsin HIV/AIDS Quarterly Surveillance Summary, Wisconsin Department of Health and Family Services, September 30, 2003. 
(9)  Since 1981 and to the present, there have been an increasing cumulative number of persons testing positive for the HIV antibody test in the State of Wisconsin. 
(10)  In the United States each year, 3,000,000 people are infected with chlamydia, 650,000 with gonorrhea, 70,000 with syphilis, 1,000,000 with herpes, 5,500,000 with human papillomavirus, 120,000 with hepatitis B, and 5,000,000 with trichomoniasis. Overall, the CDC estimates there are 15,000,000 new cases of sexually transmitted diseases each year. (Tracking the Hidden Epidemics: Trends in STDs in the United States, United States Health and Human Services Department, Center for Disease Control, 2000.) 
(11)  The surgeon general of the United States in his report of October 22, 1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn. 
(12)  According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. 
(13)  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
(14)  Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view adult-oriented films. 
(15)  The consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually oriented business exacerbates the deleterious secondary effects of such businesses on the community. 
(16)  The findings noted in subsections (b)(1) through (15) of this section raise substantial governmental concerns. 
(17)  Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect these substantial governmental concerns. 
(18)  A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the public. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein. 
(19)  Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments. 
(20)  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(21)  It is necessary to license entertainers in the adult entertainment industry to prevent the exploitation of minors, to ensure that each such entertainer is an adult and to ensure that such entertainers have not assumed a false name, which would make regulation of the entertainer difficult or impossible. 
(22)  It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this article is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity. 
(23)  Proximity between entertainers and patrons during adult entertainment performances can facilitate sexual contact, prostitution and related crimes. 
(24)  Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters. 
(25)  The license fees required in this article are necessary as nominal fees imposed as necessary regulatory measures designed to help defray the substantial expenses incurred by the village in regulating sexually oriented businesses. 
(26)  The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the village will be promoted by the enactment of this article. 
(27)  It is not the intent of this article to suppress or censor any expressive activities protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article I, Section 3 of the Wisconsin Constitution, but rather to enact time, place and manner regulations which address the compelling interests of the village in mitigating the secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses. 
(Code 1998, § 22-136; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-111, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-144. - Violations. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of any provisions of this article is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for violations of this article. Such violations shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in section 1-32, plus costs. Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate offense or violation. The remedies found in this article are not exclusive, and the village may seek any other legal or equitable relief, including but not limited to, enjoining any acts or practices which constitute or will constitute a violation of any business license ordinances or other regulations herein adopted. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) of this section that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school, licensed by the state; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and 
b.  Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(Code 1998, §§ 22-159, 22-160; Ord. No. 04-03, §§ 22-134, 22-135, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-145. - Classification of regulated uses. 
    All sexually oriented businesses are subject to the regulations in this article, and are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theater; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Escort agencies; 
(8)  Nude model studios; and 
(9)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Code 1998, § 22-138; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-113, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-146. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the village to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits a violation of this article if he refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is open for business. 
(Code 1998, § 22-155; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-130, 3-1-2004) 
Secs. 18-147-18-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 18-176. - Required. 
(a)  It is unlawful: 
(1)  For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the village pursuant to this section. 
(2)  For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the village pursuant to this section. 
(3)  For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license pursuant to this section. 
(4)  For any person to substantially enlarge a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the village pursuant to this section. 
(b)  A license may be issued only for one adult oriented establishment located at a fixed and certain place. Any person who desires to operate more than one adult oriented establishment must have a license for each. 
(c)  A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(d)  All adult oriented businesses existing at the time of the passage of this section must submit an application for a license within 60 days of the passage of this section. All adult oriented businesses located in an area newly annexed into the village submit an application for a license within 60 days of the effective date of the annexation. 
(Code 1998, § 22-139; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-114, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-177. - Activities not subject to a license requirement. 
(a)  This article shall not be construed to restrict or prohibit the following activities or products: 
(1)  Plays, operas, musicals or other dramatic works that are not obscene; 
(2)  Classes, seminars, or lectures which are held for a serious scientific or educational purpose and that are not obscene; and 
(3)  Exhibitions, performances, expressions or dances that are not obscene. 
(b)  The provisions of this article are not intended to and do not prohibit the simulation of sex acts which are part of non-obscene expression. 
(c)  Whether or not an activity is obscene shall be judged by consideration of the following factors: 
(1)  Whether the average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find that the activity taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interest in sex; and 
(2)  Whether the activity depicts or describes sexual conduct in a patently offensive way, as measured against community standards; and 
(3)  Whether the activity taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(Code 1998, § 22-140; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-115, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-178. - Application for a license. 
(a)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the village. 
(b)  All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this section. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such information necessary to enable the village to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this section. 
(c)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, the person must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20 percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 18-179. 
(d)  The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)  If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual, the individual shall state his legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he is at least 18 years of age; 
b.  A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; 
c.  A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process. 
(2)  If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant; he must state the sexually oriented business's fictitious name and submit the required registration documents. 
(3)  The classification of sexually oriented business license for which the applicant is filing. 
(4)  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number, if any. 
(5)  The applicant's mailing address. 
(6)  A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
(7)  If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room or booth of less than 150 square feet of floor space, films, video cassettes, other video reproductions, or live entertainment which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall comply with the application requirements set forth in this section. 
(8)  Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the village the following information: 
a.  The applicant's name and/or any other name (including "stage" names) or aliases used by the individual; 
b.  Present business address and telephone number; 
c.  Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age. 
(Code 1998, § 22-141; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-116, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-179. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the village shall issue a temporary license to the applicant. The application shall then be referred to the appropriate village officials for an investigation to be made on such information as is contained on the application. The application process shall be completed within 30 days from the date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, the village shall issue a license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
(2)  The applicant is under the age of 18 years; 
(3)  The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this article; or 
(4)  The license fee required by this section has not been paid. 
(b)  Within 30 days after receipt of a completed sexually oriented business application, the village shall approve or deny the issuance of a license to an applicant. The village shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the village police, fire and building officials as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(4)  The license fee required by this section has not been paid. 
(5)  An applicant of the proposed establishment is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this section. 
(c)  The license, if granted shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business and the regulated use for which the license is issued pursuant to section 18-176. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that they may be easily read at any time. 
(d)  The village police, fire and building officials shall complete their certification that the premises is in compliance or not in compliance within 30 days of receipt of the application by the village. 
(e)  A sexually oriented business license shall be issued for only one classification as found in section 18-145. 
(f)  A sexually oriented business license shall not be issued unless all exterior windows are blackened and all doors closed. 
(g)  Whenever an application is denied, or a license is not renewed, the village administrator shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for such action. If the applicant requests a hearing within ten days of receipt of notification of denial, a public hearing shall be held within ten days thereafter in conformity with Wis. Stats. § 68.11(2) and (3). A final determination stating the reasons therefor, together with a copy of any official recording or transcript of the hearing, shall be rendered within 20 days of the commencement of the hearing. Judicial review shall be governed by Wis. Stats. § 68.13. 
(Code 1998, § 22-142; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-117, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-180. - Fees. 
(a)  Every application for a sexually oriented business license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application and investigation fee established by resolution. 
(b)  In addition to the application and investigation fee required above, every sexually oriented business that is granted a license (new or renewal) shall pay to the village an annual nonrefundable license fee established by resolution within 30 days of license issuance or renewal. 
(c)  Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by an annual nonrefundable application, investigation and license fee established by resolution. 
(d)  All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the village clerk. 
(Code 1998, § 22-154; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-129, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-181. - Posting and display of license. 
(a)  Every entertainer shall post his license in his work area so that it is readily available for public inspection. 
(b)  Every person, corporation, partnership, or association licensed under this article shall display its license in a prominent place within the establishment. In the case of adult cabarets, the name of the manager on duty shall be prominently posted during business hours. 
(Code 1998, § 22-143; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-118, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-182. - Expiration of license. 
(a)  Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 18-178. Application for renewal shall be made at least 60 days before the expiration date, and shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. 
(b)  When the village denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the village finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
(Code 1998, § 22-156; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-131, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-183. - Appeals. 
    All appeals of the village's decision not to issue or renew a license shall follow the procedure in section 18-1. 
(Code 1998, § 22-162; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-137, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-184. - Suspension. 
    The village shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with this article; 
(2)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article. 
(Code 1998, § 22-157; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-132, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-185. - Revocation. 
(a)  The village shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 18-184 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The village shall revoke a license if it determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises; or 
(6)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the village, county, or state for any taxes or fees past due. 
(c)  When the village revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the village finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. 
(d)  An existing business may remain open pending the review of license denials and failures to renew, and all businesses can remain open pending review of suspensions and revocations. 
(Code 1998, § 22-158; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-133, 3-1-2004) 
Secs. 18-186-18-208. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESTRICTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 18-209. - Additional regulations for adult cabarets. 
(a)  Separation of sexually oriented adult entertainment performance area. The portion of the adult cabaret premises in which sexually oriented adult entertainment is performed shall be a stage or platform that is separated from all patron seating areas in the following ways: 
(1)  Be at least 24 inches in elevation; and 
(2)  Be separated by a distance of at least ten feet; and 
(3)  Have a continuous railing at least three feet in height, extending from the floor, and located at least ten feet from all points of the sexually oriented adult entertainment performance area. 
(b)  Lighting. Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally distributed in and about the parts of the premises which are open to and used by patrons so that all objects are plainly visible at all times, and so that on any part of the premises which are open to and used by patrons a program, menu, or list printed in eight point type will be readable. 
(c)  Submittal of plans. Building plans showing conformance with the requirements of this section shall be included with any application for a sexually oriented business license for an adult cabaret. 
(d)  Standards of conduct for employees. All holders of a sexually oriented business employee license must adhere to the following standards of conduct: 
(1)  No employee shall appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude on any part of the premises open to view of members of the public, except on or in the entertainment performance area described in this section. 
(2)  No employee shall allow, encourage or knowingly permit any person upon the premises to touch, caress, or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus, pubic area or genitals of any other person. 
(3)  No employee of an adult cabaret shall be visible from any public place outside the premises during the actual or apparent hours of his employment or performance on the premises. 
(e)  Manager on premises. A manager, who shall be a licensed employee and not an entertainer, shall be on duty at an adult cabaret business premises at all times, and shall verify that any employee who works or appears within the premises possess a current and valid employee's license posted in the manner required by this article. 
(f)  Signs. Signs in letters at least three-fourths inches high shall be conspicuously displayed in the public area of the establishment stating the following: 
THIS ADULT CABARET IS REGULATED BY THE VILLAGE OF WAUNAKEE. ENTERTAINERS ARE: 
(1)  Not permitted to engage in any type of sexual conduct; 
(2)  Not permitted to appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude, except on stage; 
(3)  Not permitted to dance or model where patrons are congregated. 
(Code 1998, § 22-144; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-119, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-210. - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this section. 
(b)  A person commits a violation of this article if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented license, he rents or subrent a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the term "rent" or "subrent" means the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Code 1998, § 22-145; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-120, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-211. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films, video or live entertainment in view rooms. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, live entertainment, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The village may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the village. 
(3)  It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(4)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(4) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(6)  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five foot-candles as measured at the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(9)  No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths. 
(10)  No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths or rooms. 
(11)  The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. 
(12)  The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (12) of this section commits an offense if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Code 1998, § 22-146; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-121, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-212. - Additional regulations for escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1998, § 22-147; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-122, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-213. - Additional regulations for nude model studios. 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if the person appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or visible to any other person. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if the person appears in a state of nudity, or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(d)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Code 1998, § 22-148; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-123, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-214. - Additional regulations concerning public nudity. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for a person who knowingly and intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appears in a state of nudity. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for a person who knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appears in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, shall be at least ten feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least 24 inches from the floor. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this article for an employee, while semi-nude, to touch a customer or the clothing of a customer. 
(Code 1998, § 22-149; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-124, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-215. - Prohibition against children in a sexually oriented business. 
    A person commits a violation of this article if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(Code 1998, § 22-150; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-125, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-216. - Prohibition against alcohol in a sexually oriented business. 
    The sale, use, or consumption of alcohol beverages on the premises of a sexually oriented business is prohibited. A person commits a violation of this article if the person knowingly allows, or otherwise participates in, the sale, use, or consumption of alcohol beverages on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(Code 1998, § 22-151; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-126, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-217. - Prohibition against indecency. 
    A person commits a violation of this article if the person knowingly or intentionally commits a public indecency. 
(Code 1998, § 22-152; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-111, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-218. - Hours of operation. 
    Sexually oriented businesses, except for an adult motel, must remain closed at all times between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday. No Sunday open hours are permitted for sexually oriented businesses except for an adult motel. 
(Code 1998, § 22-153; Ord. No. 04-03, § 22-111, 3-1-2004) 
Secs. 18-219-18-244. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WEIGHTS AND MEASURES REGULATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Weights and measures, ch. 98. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-245. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial weighing or measuring devices means devices used or employed in establishing the size, quantity, extent, area or measurement of quantities, things, produce or articles for sale, hire or award, or in computing any basic charge or payment for services rendered on the basis of weight or measure. 
    Weights and measures program means the program that includes administration and enforcement of this article, Wis. Stats. ch. 98, and applicable Wisconsin Administrative Code provisions, and any related actions. 
(Code 1998, § 22-193; Ord. No. 04-01, § 1, 1-5-2004) 
Sec. 18-246. - Penalty. 
    In addition to any other remedy, any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1998, § 22-200; Ord. No. 04-01, § 1, 1-5-2004) 
Sec. 18-247. - Application of state codes. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, the statutory provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 98, Weights and Measures, and Wis. Admin. Code ch. ATCP 92, Weighing and Measuring Devices, are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute or code incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this article. Any further amendments, revisions or modifications of the state statutes incorporated herein or Wisconsin Administrative Code provisions incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this article. This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 98. 
(Code 1998, § 22-191; Ord. No. 04-01, § 1, 1-5-2004) 
Sec. 18-248. - Appointment of inspectors. 
    In order to ensure compliance with this article, the village hereby grants the authority and duties of sealers and inspectors required by this article to the State of Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection. 
(Code 1998, § 22-192; Ord. No. 04-01, § 1, 1-5-2004) 
Secs. 18-249-18-274. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-275. - Required. 
(a)  General requirements. Except as provided in subsection (b), no person shall operate or maintain any commercial weighing or measuring devices or any other weights and measures or systems and accessories related thereto which are used commercially within the village for determining the weight, measure or count unless each such device is licensed by an annual weights and measures license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Exemptions. Sales permitted at a farmers market or sales permitted by direct sellers, transient merchants and solicitors are exempt from licensing under this article. 
(Code 1998, § 22-194; Ord. No. 04-01, § 1, 1-5-2004) 
Sec. 18-276. - Application. 
    An application for a weights and measures license shall be made in writing on a form provided for such purpose by the village clerk by March 1 of each year and shall be signed by the owner of the commercial business, or by its authorized agent. Such applications shall state the type and number of weighing and measuring devices to be licensed either owned or leased, as of January 1 of each year, location of the devices, the applicant's full name and post office address, and whether such applicant is an individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other entity. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall state the names and addresses of each partner. If the applicant is a corporation of limited liability company the application shall state the name and address of all officers and agents of the applicant, including the registered agent thereof. 
(Code 1998, § 22-195; Ord. No. 04-01, § 1, 1-5-2004) 
Sec. 18-277. - Issuance; fee. 
    Upon compliance with this article, the village clerk shall issue a license to the applicant upon payment of an annual license fee as established by resolution. Each business location shall require a separate license. The license fee shall not be prorated for a partial year. 
(Code 1998, § 22-196; Ord. No. 04-01, § 1, 1-5-2004) 
Sec. 18-278. - License term. 
    A license issued under this article shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
(Code 1998, § 22-197; Ord. No. 04-01, § 1, 1-5-2004) 
Sec. 18-279. - Enforcement for nonrenewal. 
    It shall be the duty of the village clerk to notify the appropriate village officials and to order the immediate enforcement of the provisions of this article in cases involving a failure to renew a weights and measures license. A licensee shall be prohibited from operating or maintaining a weighing or measuring device until such time as a valid license has been obtained under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1998, § 22-198; Ord. No. 04-01, § 1, 1-5-2004) 
Sec. 18-280. - Fees assessment. 
(a)  Annual assessment. The village shall annually assess device fees, in addition to the license fee, to each licensee based on the number and types of weighing and measuring devices licensed as of July 1 of each year. The total of the fees assessed and the fees collected shall not exceed the actual costs of the weights and measures program. 
(b)  Clerk to prepare assessment schedule. The village clerk shall at least annually prepare a proposed schedule of assessments and mail to each business an invoice of the amount of the fee assessment each business shall pay and each licensee shall pay the fee assessed within 30 days after the date the invoice is mailed. 
(c)  Failure to pay assessment. If the assessed fee is not paid within 30 days of the date of mailing of the invoice, an additional administrative collection charge of ten percent of the fee shall be added to the amount due, plus interest shall accrue thereon at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof until paid. If the licensee is the owner of the real estate premises where the licensed weights and measures devices are located, any delinquent assessment shall be extended upon the current or the next tax roll as a charge against the real estate premises for current services. No licenses shall be issued or renewed under this article if the licensee is delinquent in the payment of a fee assessed under this article. 
(d)  Mailing of notices. Schedules, notices and invoices shall be considered mailed to a licensee when mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the licensee's address as shown on the application form. 
(e)  Change of ownership. If the ownership of a commercial business licensed under this article is transferred during a license year, the owner of the business as of July 1 of the license year shall be liable and responsible for the payment of the fees assessed under this article. 
(Code 1998, § 22-199; Ord. No. 04-01, § 1, 1-5-2004) 
Secs. 18-281-18-308. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-309. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mobile food business means any person or business selling food, drinks, or materials incidental to food or drinks from a motor vehicle, trailer, food cart, or similar apparatus. 
    Person means all human beings, partnerships, corporations, associations, groups, organizations, and any other description of a collection of human beings working in concert or for the same purpose or objective. 
(Code 1998, § 22-232; Ord. No. 15-2, § 1 (22-102), 2-16-2015) 
Sec. 18-310. - Penalty. 
    In addition to having a license revoked under section 18-114, any person who violates this article shall be subject to forfeiture as provided in section 1-32. 
(Code 1998, § 22-238; Ord. No. 15-2, § 1 (22-108), 2-16-2015) 
Sec. 18-311. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempt from this article: 
(1)  Any person selling agricultural products which the person has grown, so long as there is no food preparation. 
(2)  Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who engages in direct sales for or on behalf of the charitable organization, provided there is submitted to the village proof that the charitable organization is registered under Wis. Stats. § 202.12. A charitable organization not registered under Wis. Stats. § 202.12 or exempt from the registration requirements of Wis. Stats. § 202.12 shall be required to obtain a mobile food business license from the village. 
(3)  Any person operating a mobile food business entirely inside a permanent business establishment. 
(4)  Any permanent business establishment that places food or drinks sold at its establishment directly outside of its permanent business. 
(5)  Any person selling food or drinks at a farmer's market/flea market. 
(Code 1998, § 22-233; Ord. No. 15-2, § 1 (22-103), 2-16-2015) 
Sec. 18-312. - Prohibited practices. 
(a)  A mobile food business vendor shall be prohibited from: 
(1)  Violating or failing to comply with any federal, state, or local rules or regulations pertaining to the handling, preparation, or sale of food or drinks. 
(2)  Operating its business between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless a specific exception is granted by the village. 
(3)  Remaining on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or other person having authority over such premises. 
(4)  Selling food or beverages in glassware. 
(5)  Selling alcoholic beverages. 
(6)  Disposing of food, water waste, or other materials into storm drains, manholes, grass, sidewalks, or streets. 
(b)  No mobile food business shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles in parking spaces, all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed. 
(c)  No mobile food business shall make any loud noises or use any sound amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced is capable of being plainly heard outside a 100-foot radius of the source. 
(d)  No mobile food business shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around the area in which the mobile business is operating. 
(Code 1998, § 22-236; Ord. No. 15-2, § 1(22-106), 2-16-2015) 
Secs. 18-313-18-342. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-343. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a mobile food business within the village without first having obtained a mobile food business license in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1998, § 22-231; Ord. No. 15-2, § 1(22-101), 2-16-2015) 
Sec. 18-344. - Application and fees. 
(a)  Application. An application for a mobile food business license shall be completed and returned to the village on a form furnished by the village. 
(b)  Identification and certification. An applicant shall present to the village for review: 
(1)  A completed mobile food business license application. 
(2)  A state issued driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be reasonably required. 
(3)  Proof of liability insurance or indemnity bond for the mobile food business. 
(4)  All appropriate permits and licenses as required by the county and the state. 
(c)  Fees. When filing the application, the applicant shall pay a license fee in an amount set by the village to cover the cost of reviewing and processing the application. In addition, there also shall be an annual fee in an amount set by the village for each day the mobile business is approved for operation. All such fees shall be established by resolution. 
(d)  Appointment of agent for service of process. The applicant shall sign a statement authorizing any employee or agent of the mobile food business to accept service of process in any civil action brought against the applicant or the mobile food business arising out of any sale or service performed in connection with the mobile food business, if the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be served personally. 
(Code 1998, § 22-234; Ord. No. 15-2, § 1(22-101), 2-16-2015) 
Sec. 18-345. - Issuance or denial. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a completed application, the village clerk shall refer the application to the police department, or any other applicable village department, to review the application. 
(b)  Following review of the application, the village clerk shall issue the license, deny the license, or issue the license with conditions. If issued, the license shall be valid for the calendar year in which it is issued, subject to revocation in section 18-114. Each calendar year, a person wishing to operate a mobile food business within the village shall obtain a new license. 
(c)  The village may refuse to issue a license if it is determined that: 
(1)  The application contains material omission or materially inaccurate statement. 
(2)  Complaints of a material nature have been received against the applicant in cities, villages or towns in which the applicant conducted similar business. 
(3)  Subject to applicable state statutes, the applicant has been arrested or convicted of a crime, statutory violation, or ordinance violation. 
(4)  The applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision of section 18-112. 
(5)  In the village's sole discretion, there is a public safety, health or general welfare reason or reasons that support denial of the license. 
(Code 1998, § 22-235; Ord. No. 15-2, § 1(22-105), 2-16-2015) 
Sec. 18-346. - Revocation. 
(a)  A mobile food business license may be revoked by the village after notice and hearing if the licensee: 
(1)  Made any material omission or materially inaccurate statement in the application for license. 
(2)  Made any fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation in the course of engaging in sale of food, drinks, or materials incidental to food or drinks. 
(3)  Violated any section of this article, including, but not limited to, section 18-91. 
(4)  Subject to applicable state statutes, the licensee was arrested or convicted of a crime, statutory violation, or ordinance violation. 
(b)  Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally on the licensee at least 72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing. The notice shall contain the time and place of the hearing and a statement of the facts upon which the proposed revocation of the license is based. 
(Code 1998, § 22-237; Ord. No. 15-2, § 1(22-107), 2-16-2015) 
Chapter 22 - COURTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Constable and marshal positions abolished. 
    The positions of village constable and marshal are abolished. 
(Code 1998, § 30-26) 
Secs. 22-2-22-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, Wis. Stats. ch. 755. 

Sec. 22-21. - Municipal judge and fees. 
(a)  Office of municipal judge created. Pursuant to the authority granted by Wis. Stats. ch. 755, there is created the office of municipal judge for the municipal court for the village. The municipal judge shall be licensed to practice law in the state and have been so licensed for two years immediately prior to election or appointment. 
(b)  Salary of judge. The salary of the municipal judge may be increased for a new term prior to the beginning of the term for the judge or for the second year of a term before the start of the second year of the term of the judge, but the salary shall not be decreased during the term of the judge. Salaries may be paid annually or in equal installments as determined by the village board, but no judge may be paid a salary for that portion of any term during which portion the judge has not executed the official bond or official oath as required by Wis. Stats. § 755.03, and filed under Wis. Stats. § 19.01(4)(c). 
(c)  Bond, oath. The municipal judge shall execute and file with the clerk of the circuit court for the county the oath prescribed by Wis. Stats. § 755.03 and an official bond in such an amount as shall be fixed by the village board. 
(d)  Office. The municipal judge shall keep the municipal judge's office and hold court in the municipal building. 
(e)  Court to abide by rules of evidence, deposit schedule; bond schedule prepared. The court shall abide by the Wisconsin Rules of Evidence and shall abide by the Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule. In nontraffic matters, the municipal judge shall prepare a bond schedule, which shall become effective upon approval by the village board. No bond shall exceed the maximum penalty which could be imposed for the ordinance violation. 
(f)  Fees. 
(1)  Bonds for appearance, partial payments and other funds collected by the court shall be treated as escrow funds and deposited with the village treasurer. 
(2)  The clerk of the municipal court shall collect all forfeitures and costs in any action or proceeding before the clerk of the municipal court and shall pay over such moneys to the village treasurer not later than the seventh business day succeeding the receipt thereof. At the time of payment, the municipal court clerk shall report to the village treasurer the title of the action, the offense for which the forfeiture was imposed and the total amount of the forfeiture, fees, penalty assessments and costs, if any. The village treasurer shall disburse the fees as provided in Wis. Stats. § 814.65 and shall disburse any penalty assessments pursuant to law. 
(g)  Contempt of court. 
(1)  The municipal judge may punish for contempt of municipal court persons guilty of any of the following acts: 
a.  Intentional misconduct in the presence of the court which interferes with a court proceeding or with the administration of justice, or which impairs the due respect for the court; 
b.  Intentional disobedience, resistance or obstruction of authority, process or order of the municipal court; 
c.  Refusal as a witness to appear, be sworn or answer a question; or 
d.  Refusal to produce a record, document or other object. 
(2)  No person may be punished for contempt before a municipal judge until an opportunity has been given the person to be heard in the person's defense. If the contempt alleged involves disrespect or criticism of a municipal judge, that judge is disqualified from presiding at the trial of contempt unless the person charged consents to the judge presiding at the trial. For the purpose of hearing a person's defense, the municipal judge may, if the alleged defendant does not appear for trial, issue a warrant for the person to be brought before the municipal judge. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-11; Code 1998, § 30-27; Ord. No. 07-09, 8-20-2007; Ord. No. 10-7, § 1, 6-21-2010; Ord. No. 11-7, § 1, 8-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-22. - Clerk. 
(a)  Appointment. The municipal judge shall, in writing, appoint a clerk of the municipal court. The clerk's salary shall be fixed by the village board. The oath and bond of the clerk of the municipal court shall be filed with the village clerk. The cost of such bond shall be paid by the village. 
(b)  Duties. The court clerk shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Pre-court. 
a.  Determine and schedule court dates and facilities. 
b.  Obtain citations from the police department and verify accuracy. 
c.  Prepare a court calendar from information on citations. 
d.  Answer inquiries from defendants scheduled to appear in court via mail, phone, email or attorney. 
e.  Order all court supplies and process court mail. 
f.  Maintain the court program. 
g.  Prepare docket sheets and documents needed. 
h.  Gather all materials, reports and driver/vehicle records pertinent to cases. 
i.  Create sign-in sheets and court handouts for defendants. 
(2)  Court sessions. 
a.  Open court, supervise sign-in and distribute court handouts. 
b.  Tape record proceedings when necessary. 
c.  Collect payments of forfeitures and issue receipts. 
d.  Issue 60-day good cause notices to pay if permitted to do so by judge. 
e.  Set up payment plans for those who plead not guilty in person. 
f.  Issue pre-trial notices to those who plead not guilty in person. 
g.  Have OWI defendants sign necessary forms and issue appropriate forms to them. 
h.  Have defendants of held open cases sign necessary forms and issue appropriate forms to them. 
i.  Record pleas, amendments and dispositions on docket sheets for each case. 
(3)  Post-court. 
a.  Enter all payments and address changes into the court program. 
b.  Prepare a report for the local paper. 
c.  Process citations and enter dispositions into the court program. 
d.  File citations in appropriate files depending on pleas/dispositions/status. 
e.  Maintain case files; separate files for juvenile cases. 
f.  Transmit citations to the department of transportation (DOT). 
g.  Prepare and mail out default judgment papers for a good cause hearing. 
h.  Prepare and send commitment paperwork to the police department. 
i.  Prepare and suspend defendants' driver's licenses, when applicable. 
j.  Prepare and send state debt collection letters, when applicable. 
k.  Send an assessment form and officer's report, when applicable, to AODA facility for OWI cases. 
l.  Provide the police department with a completed disposition report. 
m.  Balance money, compile and submit a financial report for a weekly deposit. 
(4)  Other clerical duties. 
a.  Photocopy information for pre-trials and send to the village attorney. 
b.  Maintain active warrant/commitment files, collection files, state debt and suspension files. 
c.  Transfer OWI cases to the circuit court on jury requests. 
d.  Schedule trials and notify all parties. 
e.  Receive and forward notice of appeal with supporting documents and necessary fees to the circuit court clerk. 
f.  Release information under the direction of the municipal court judge. 
g.  Answer questions from the public, defendants and attorneys regarding scheduling, monies due, extensions and general procedures. 
h.  Communicate with the police department, attorneys, defendants and schools regarding court proceedings and cases. 
i.  Collect full/partial payments on forfeitures. 
j.  Investigate any letters returned to the court, and determine the defendants' correct addresses. 
k.  Maintain confidential records with regard to juvenile cases and medical/AODA reports. 
l.  Prepare a quarterly statistic report. 
m.  Prepare a monthly report of financial activity. 
n.  Attend the annual municipal court clerk's conference. 
o.  Perform such other duties as may be required by the municipal court judge. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-12; Code 1998, § 30-28) 
State Law reference- Clerk generally, Wis. Stats. §§ 755.12-755.14, 766.18. 
Chapter 26 - ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Removal of abandoned underground flammable liquid storage tanks. 
    Underground flammable liquid storage tanks which are abandoned, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 292.41, shall not be abandoned in place. Such tanks shall be removed within 90 days from the date they become abandoned and the excavation filled with clean, well-compacted fill to the surface of the adjacent grade. 
(Code 1988, § 5-3-4; Code 1998, § 38-1) 
Sec. 26-2. - Private well abandonment. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prevent unused and improperly constructed wells from serving as a passage for contaminated surface or near-surface waters or other materials to reach the usable groundwater. These wells must be properly filled and sealed. Certain wells may be operated, upon the issuance of a well operation permit, subject to conditions of maintenance and operation. 
(b)  Filling required. Every private well located on any premises which is served by the public water system of the village shall be properly filled. Only a well for which a well operation permit has been granted by the village administrator may be exempted from this subsection, subject to conditions of maintenance and operation. 
(c)  Well operation permits. A permit may be granted to a well owner to operate a well for a period not to exceed three years if the requirements of this subsection are met. A permit may be renewed after the three-year period, provided water is tested and a safe water sample has been obtained from the well annually. The results of such tests shall be submitted annually to the village or as requested by the village engineer. Application shall be made on forms provided by the village administrator. The requirements are as follows: 
(1)  The well and pump installation meet the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 112 and a well constructor's report is on file with the department of natural resources, or certification of the acceptability of the well has been granted by the private water supply section of the department of natural resources. 
(2)  The well has a history of producing safe water and presently produces bacteriologically safe water as evidenced by three samplings two weeks apart. 
(3)  The proposed use of the well can be justified as being necessary in addition to water provided by the public water system. 
(4)  No physical connection shall exist between the piping of the public water system and the private well. 
(d)  Methods of filling. Wells to be abandoned shall be filled according to the procedures outlined in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 112. The pump and piping must be removed and the well checked for obstructions prior to plugging. Any obstruction or liner must be removed. 
(e)  Reports and inspection. A well abandonment report must be submitted by the well owner to the department of natural resources on forms provided by that agency, available at the office of the village administrator. The report shall be submitted immediately upon completion of the filling of the well. The filling must be observed by a representative of the village. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-52; Code 1998, § 98-154) 
Sec. 26-3. - Junked vehicles and appliances on private property. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Disassembled, inoperable, junked or wrecked motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors, trailers means motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, truck bodies, tractors, farm machinery or trailers in such state of physical or mechanical ruin as to be incapable of propulsion, being operated upon the public streets or highways or which are otherwise not in safe or legal condition for operation on public streets or highways due to missing or inoperative parts, flat or removed tires, expired or missing license plates or other defects. 
    Inoperable appliance means any stove, washer, refrigerator or other appliance that is no longer operable in the sense for which it was manufactured. 
    Motor vehicle means as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(35). 
    Unlicensed motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors or trailers means motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors, recreational vehicles or trailers that do not bear lawful current license plates. 
(b)  Storage. No disassembled, inoperable, unlicensed, junked or wrecked motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors, trailers, farm machinery, vehicle parts or tires, or appliances shall be stored upon private residential property or unenclosed within a building upon nonresidential property for a period exceeding ten days unless such is in connection with an authorized business enterprise located in a properly zoned area maintained in such a manner as to not constitute a public nuisance. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to any motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories stored within an enclosed building or on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner in a properly zoned area when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; in a storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner; or seasonal use vehicles such as snowmobiles, motorcycles, motor scooters and nonmotorized campers, provided such vehicles are stored in compliance with this Code. Also excepted are motor vehicles registered pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 341.265 and 341.266. In other situations, the village board may issue a temporary permit permitting an extension of not to exceed an additional 30 days' time to comply with this section where exceptional facts and circumstances warrant such extension. 
(d)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Whenever the police department shall find any vehicles, vehicle parts or tires or appliances, as described in this section, placed or stored in the open upon private property, the police department shall notify the owner of the property on which the vehicle or appliance is stored of the violation of this section. If the vehicle, parts thereof or appliance is not removed within five days, the police department shall cause to be issued a citation to the property owner or tenant of the property upon which the vehicle or appliance is stored. 
(2)  If such vehicle or appliance is not removed within 20 days after issuance of a citation, the police chief shall cause the vehicle or appliance to be removed and impounded, and it shall thereafter be disposed of as prescribed in sections 70-150 through 70-153 by the police chief. Any cost incurred in the removal and sale of the vehicle or appliance shall be recovered from the owner. However, if the owner of the vehicle or appliance cannot readily be found, the cost of such removal shall be charged to the property from which it is removed, which charges shall be entered as a special charge on the tax roll. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person who shall interfere with enforcement of this section and who shall be found guilty thereof shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-32. Each motor vehicle or appliance involved shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1988, § 10-5-8; Code 1998, § 94-154) 
State Law reference- Vehicle abandonment prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 342.40. 
Sec. 26-4. - Storage of junk. 
    No person shall store junked or discarded property, including automobiles, automobile parts, trucks, tractors, refrigerators, furnaces, washing machines, stoves, machinery or machinery parts, wood, bricks, cement blocks or other unsightly debris without a permit issued by the village board. The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 175.25 shall apply to permits required by this section. The police chief or building inspector may require by written order any premises violating this section to be put in compliance within the time specified in such order and, if the order is not complied with, may have the premises put in compliance and the cost thereof assessed as a special tax against the property. 
(Code 1988, § 11-3-5; Code 1998, § 66-63) 
State Law reference- Storage of junked automobiles, Wis. Stats. § 175.25. 
Secs. 26-5-26-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Nuisances generally, Wis. Stats. ch. 823, 

Sec. 26-27. - Public nuisances offending morals and decency. 
(a)  The acts, omissions, places, conditions and things in subsection (b) of this section are specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and decency. 
(b)  Any place or premises within the village where village ordinances or state laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated shall be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1988, § 11-6-4; Code 1998, § 34-26) 
Sec. 26-28. - Abatement procedures. 
(a)  Enforcement. The police chief, the chief of the fire department, the director of public works and the building inspector shall enforce those sections of this article that come within the jurisdiction of their offices, and they shall make periodic inspection and inspection upon complaint to ensure that such sections are not violated. No action shall be taken under this section to abate a public nuisance, unless the officer shall have inspected or caused to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and the officer is satisfied that a nuisance does in fact exist. 
(b)  Summary abatement. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists within the village and that there is great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the village president, upon the recommendation of the appropriate department head, may direct the proper officer to cause the nuisance to be abated and shall charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be. 
(c)  Abatement after notice. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the inspecting officer shall serve notice on the person causing or maintaining the nuisance to remove the nuisance within ten days. If such nuisance is not removed within such ten days, the proper officer shall cause the nuisance to be removed as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Other methods. Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the village or its officials in accordance with state laws. 
(Code 1988, § 11-6-6; Code 1998, § 34-27) 
Sec. 26-29. - Cost of abatement. 
    In addition to any other penalty imposed by this article for the erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the village shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance. Such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge. 
(Code 1988, § 11-6-7; Code 1998, § 34-28) 
Secs. 26-30-26-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE 

Sec. 26-47. - General prohibition. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any noise that would be loud and unnecessary noise to a reasonable person. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-9(a); Code 1998, § 34-56) 
Sec. 26-48. - Types of loud and unnecessary noises. 
(a)  Generally. The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the village for longer than three seconds in any period of one minute or less, except as a danger warning; the creation of any sound that to a reasonable person is unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of any signaling device and the sounding of any plainly audible device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, similar devices. The playing, using or operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound that a reasonable person would deem to be loud and unnecessary manner. The operation of any set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner as to be plainly audible at the property line of the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The playing, using or operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of advertising or attracting attention of the public to any building or structure. Announcements over loudspeakers can only be made by the announcer in person and without the aid of any mechanical device. 
(4)  Animals, birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which causes frequent or long continued noise that a reasonable person would find unnecessary. 
(5)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of proper village authorities. 
(6)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motorboat except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  Construction or repair of buildings. The erection including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building, as well as the operation of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or any other similar equipment attended by noise that a reasonable person would find to be loud or unusual, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. However, the building inspector shall have the authority, upon determining that the loss or inconvenience which would result to any party in interest would be extraordinary and of such nature as to warrant special consideration, to grant a permit for a period necessary within which time such work and operation may take place within the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
(8)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any noise that a reasonable person would find excessive on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while in use or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the normal operation of that institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in those streets indicating a school, hospital or court street. 
(b)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the village while engaged in necessary public business. 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of streets or other public construction by or on behalf of the village, county, or state at night when public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-9(b); Code 1998, § 34-57) 
Sec. 26-49. - Maximum permissible sound levels. 
(a)  Noise from a stationary source shall not exceed the following standards for maximum sound pressure levels measured at the property line: 
Noise Rating Zone Daytime 
(dB) Nighttime 
(dB) Residential 60 50 Commercial 70 70 All other zones 75 75  
(b)  Ambient noise is the all-encompassing noise associated with a given source, usually being a composite of sounds with many sources near and far, but excluding the noise source being measured. Ambient noise is a factor and the subject noise shall exceed the ambient noise by five dB in any octave band to be designated excessive. 
(c)  Pure tones and impulsive noises are factors. Five noise rating numbers shall be taken from the table in subsection (a) of this section if the subject noise consists primarily of a pure tone or if it is impulsive in character. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-9(c)(1); Code 1998, § 34-59) 
Sec. 26-50. - Construction noise. 
    Construction equipment in any zone may be operated between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., provided that such equipment does not exceed a maximum sound level of 80 dB(A) measured at the property line of the location at which such equipment is in use. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-9(c)(2); Code 1998, § 34-59) 
Sec. 26-51. - Noise in residential districts. 
    In residential zones, the person in violation of this article shall be ordered to reduce the sound pressure to acceptable levels immediately by the monitoring officer. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-9(c)(3); Code 1998, § 34-60) 
Sec. 26-52. - Operation of certain equipment. 
    Lawn mowers, chain saws, powered garden equipment, electric insect killing/repelling devices, and other nonconstruction maintenance equipment shall be operated only during the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. unless within the specified noise levels measured at the property line of the location at which such equipment is in use. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-9(c)(4); Code 1998, § 34-61) 
Sec. 26-53. - Exemptions. 
    Operations of emergency equipment shall be exempt from this article. Snow blowers not operated on a commercial basis shall be exempt from this article when used to gain access to a village street. Emergency equipment shall include ambulance, police, fire, snow removal, civil defense sirens, etc., necessary for the health, safety, and protection of the citizens of the village. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-9(c)(5); Code 1998, § 34-62) 
Sec. 26-54. - Methods of measurement. 
(a)  Equipment. Noise measurement shall be made with a sound level meter. 
(b)  Location of noise meter. Noise measurement shall be made at the nearest lot line of the premises from which a noise complaint is received. The noise meter shall be placed at a height of at least three feet above the ground and at least three feet away from walls, barriers, obstructions, and all other sound-reflective surfaces. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-9(c)(6); Code 1998, § 34-63) 
Sec. 26-55. - Appeals for exemptions. 
    The village board may grant an exemption to this article to individuals proving evidence of substantial hardship. Evidence that reasonable technological attempts have been made to correct the problem shall be considered grounds for granting an exemption to this article for existing industries. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-9(c)(7); Code 1998, § 34-64) 
Sec. 26-56. - Permits for amplifying devices. 
(a)  Required. The use of loudspeakers or amplifying devices on the streets or in the parks of the village is prohibited unless the person desiring to use such loudspeaker or amplifying device first obtains a permit from the police chief. 
(b)  Grounds for revocation. The police chief shall have the authority to revoke such permit when the police chief believes such loudspeaker or amplifying device is becoming a nuisance because of the volume, the method in which it is being used or the location in which it is being operated. 
(c)  Time restrictions. The police chief shall not grant a permit to use a loudspeaker or amplifying device before the hours of 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m., nor shall a permit be granted to anyone who, in the opinion of the police chief, uses such loudspeaker or amplifying device in such a manner or for such a purpose as to constitute a nuisance. 
(d)  Exceptions. The regulation of the use and times for use of amplifying devices may be modified by the village board. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-9(d); Code 1998, § 34-65) 
Secs. 26-57-26-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NONMETALLIC MINING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Nonferrous metallic mining, Wis. Stats. ch. 293. 

Sec. 26-86. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nonmetallic mining or nonmetallic mining operation means operations or activities for the extraction from the earth for sale or use by the operator of mineral aggregates such as stone, sand and gravel, fill material and nonmetallic minerals such as asbestos, beryl, clay, feldspar, peat and talc; related operations or activities such as excavation, grading or dredging if the purpose of those operations or activities is the extraction of mineral aggregates and nonmetallic minerals; and related processes such as crushing, screening, scalping, dewatering and blending. 
    Nonmetallic mining refuse means waste soil, rock, mineral, liquid, vegetation and other waste material resulting from a nonmetallic mining operation. This term does not include merchantable byproducts resulting directly from or displaced by the nonmetallic mining operation. 
    Nonmetallic mining site or site means the location where a nonmetallic mining operation is proposed or conducted, including all surface areas from which materials are removed, related storage and processing areas, areas where nonmetallic mining refuse is deposited and areas disturbed by the nonmetallic mining operation by activities such as the construction or improvement of roads or haulageways. 
    Operator means any person who is engaged in a nonmetallic mining operation or nonmetallic mining site reclamation or who applies for or holds a nonmetallic mining permit issued under this article, whether individually, jointly or through subsidiaries, agents, employees, contractors or subcontractors. 
    Reclamation means the rehabilitation of a nonmetallic mining site, including but not limited to, removal of nonmetallic mining refuse, grading of the site, replacement of topsoil, stabilization of soil conditions, establishment of vegetative cover, control of surface water and groundwater, prevention of environmental pollution, construction of fences and, if practical, restoration of plant, fish and wildlife habitat. 
    Replacement of topsoil means the replacement of the topsoil which was removed or disturbed by a nonmetallic mining operation or the provision of soil which is at least as adequate as the topsoil which was removed or disturbed for the purposes of providing adequate vegetative cover and stabilization of soil conditions. 
(Code 1988, § 7-10-2; Code 1998, § 34-97) 
Sec. 26-87. - Existing operations. 
    This article shall apply to any portion of a nonmetallic mining site, including unreclaimed portions of a site which were mined prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(Code 1988, § 7-10-3; Code 1998, § 34-98) 
Sec. 26-88. - Exempt activities. 
    This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Excavations or grading by a person solely for domestic use at the person's residence. 
(2)  Excavations or grading conducted for highway construction purposes within the highway right-of-way. 
(3)  Grading conducted for farming, preparing a construction site or restoring land following a flood or natural disaster. 
(4)  Excavations for building construction purposes. 
(5)  Any mining operation, the reclamation of which is required in a permit obtained under Wis. Stats. ch. 293. 
(6)  Any activities conducted at a solid or hazardous waste disposal site required to prepare, operate or close a solid waste disposal facility under Wis. Stats. ch. 289, or a hazardous waste disposal facility under Wis. Stats. ch. 291, but this article may apply to activities related to solid or hazardous waste disposal which are conducted at a nonmetallic site separate from the solid or hazardous waste disposal facility such as activities to obtain nonmetallic minerals to be used for lining, capping, covering or constructing berms, dikes or roads. 
(Code 1988, § 7-10-4; Code 1998, § 34-99) 
Sec. 26-89. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. No person shall operate any nonmetallic mining site or operation within the village unless such person obtains a nonmetallic mining permit from the village board. The fee for such permit shall be as established by resolution plus any actual village administrative expenses, payable by certified check. 
(b)  Application. An application for a nonmetallic mining permit shall be submitted by the operator and shall include the following: 
(1)  An adequate description of the operation, including a legal description of the property; 
(2)  A plan of the site showing the proposed and existing roads and drives, and the sources, quantity and disposition of water to be used, if any; 
(3)  Estimated dates for completion of the extraction and commencement and completion dates for the reclamation; 
(4)  A reclamation plan and such other information as may be necessary to determine the nature of the operation and the effect on the surrounding area; 
(5)  Methods of screening from adjacent properties; 
(6)  Hours of operation; 
(7)  Dust and noise control; 
(8)  Maximum depth; 
(9)  Blasting procedures; 
(10)  Location and height of stockpiles; and 
(11)  Such other information the village board deems pertinent to the operation. 
(c)  Reclamation plan. The reclamation plan shall contain adequate provisions that: 
(1)  All final slopes around the area be flatter than a three to one horizontal slope in a sand, gravel or borrow pit operation, or in a safe angle of repose in a quarrying operation. 
(2)  Excavations below the grade of the nearest abutting public street or highway shall be set back from the street or highway a distance not less than that required for buildings and structures in the same zoning district. 
(3)  Excavations made to a water-producing depth shall be not less than three feet measured from the low water mark. 
(4)  All final slopes shall be covered with adequate topsoil and seeded to prevent erosion. 
(5)  The plan shall require that, after completion of the anticipated operation, the area shall be cleared of all debris and left in a workmanlike condition, subject to the approval of the village board. 
(6)  There is a timetable for completion of various stages of reclamation of the nonmetallic mining site. 
(d)  Action on applications. Every application for a permit shall be made in writing upon the written form provided by the village and distributed by the village administrator. The application for the permit shall be signed by the applicant and filed with the village administrator at least 60 days prior to the permitting period. The administrator shall immediately refer every application for a permit to the village board for public hearing and approval. The operator shall receive written notice of the public hearing. The permit shall be for a period of time as stated in the application or as modified by the village board. Modification of the application or the reclamation plan may be permitted or additional conditions may be required upon application. The board shall consider the effect of the operation and the proposed reclamation upon existing and future conditions, including streets, neighboring land development, land use drainage, water supply, water pollution, air pollution, soil erosion, natural beauty and land value of the locality. The village board may approve, approve conditionally or reject the application and reclamation plan. 
(e)  Financial assurance. Before a permit and reclamation plan is approved by the village board, the operator shall submit an agreement and performance bond or cash escrow agreement to ensure the following: 
(1)  The operator shall pay for the cost of all improvements required in the reclamation plan by the village board. 
(2)  Guaranteed completion of the required reclamation within a period determined by the village board. 
(3)  Payment by the operator for all costs incurred by the village for review and inspection. This would include preparation and review of plans and specifications by the village engineer and attorney, as well as other costs of a similar nature. 
(4)  The village may elect to have stages of the reclamation plan performed under the terms of a cash escrow agreement. 
(5)  The required performance bond or cash escrow agreement shall be equal to 11/4 times the village engineer's estimated cost of the required improvements. 
(6)  If the required reclamation is not complete within the designated period, all amounts held under the escrow agreement or performance bond shall be turned over and delivered to the village and applied to the cost of the required reclamation. Any balance remaining after such reclamation has been done shall be returned to the operator. The village board, at its option, may extend the bond period for additional periods. 
(f)  Fences. Prior to reclamation, nonmetallic mining sites abutting areas zoned residential shall be enclosed by a security fence of not less than four feet in height. Fence gates shall be locked or secured when the site is unattended to prevent uncontrolled access by children to the site. 
(g)  Inspection. An authorized agent of the village may enter the premises of a nonmetallic mining operation in the performance of such agent's official duties by permission of the property owner or operator or pursuant to a special inspection warrant issued under Wis. Stats. § 66.0119, in order to inspect those premises and to ascertain compliance with this article. 
(h)  Prohibitions and orders. Nonmetallic mining operations within the village are prohibited if the nonmetallic mining site cannot be reclaimed in compliance with the standards of this article or if other requirements of this article are not met. 
(i)  Enforcement officer. The director of public works and village administrator shall be responsible for the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 7-10-5; Code 1998, § 34-100) 
Sec. 26-90. - Permit revocation. 
    If any permit issued pursuant to this article is revoked, cancelled, rescinded or terminated, the operator shall be given written notice of any charges or violations against the operator or the reasons proposed for revocation and shall have an opportunity to be heard before the village board. 
(Code 1988, § 7-10-6; Code 1998, § 34-101) 
Sec. 26-91. - Blasting and rock crushing. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Blasting means a method of loosening, moving or shattering masses of solid matter by use of explosive compounds to prepare stone for crushing, to prepare stone for building or ornamental use, or to prepare property for development. 
    Person means any individual, partner, corporation, company, trustee or association, together with the respective servants, agents and employees thereof. 
    Rock crusher means any device, machine, apparatus or equipment used either individually or in conjunction with any other device, machine, apparatus or equipment for the purpose of crushing, grinding, breaking or pulverizing rock or stone. 
(b)  Operation. No person within the village shall operate a rock crusher or perform blasting in such a manner so that any dust, dirt or vibration from such operation shall, in any way, damage or injure any person or property within the village. All blasting within the village shall be performed according to the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 307, Explosives and Blasting Agents, and all subsequent amendments thereto. 
(c)  Permit. A permit for blasting or rock crushing operations shall be obtained in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Required. No person shall operate a rock crusher or perform blasting who does not possess a proper permit from the village. 
(2)  Applications. Every application for such permit shall be made in writing upon the written form provided by the village and distributed by the village clerk. Every application for a permit shall be signed by the applicant and filed with the village clerk at least 60 days prior to the permitting period, except that this time period may be waived by the village engineer. The village clerk shall immediately refer all applications for permits to the village engineer. The village clerk shall issue a permit only after first receiving the recommendation of the village engineer, the duly executed certified check for the permit fee as provided in this section and the submittal of the plan of operation, if required, as approved by the village engineer. 
(3)  Certified check. Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a certified check in the sum of the required permit fee, as provided in this section, or a renewal thereof, such to be payable to the village. 
(4)  Plan of operation. Each application for a permit for a rock crusher or renewal thereof shall be accompanied by a plan of operation which shall include methods of screening from adjacent properties, hours of operation, hours of blasting and operation of the rock crusher, dust and noise control, blasting procedures, location and height of stockpiles, whether a rock crusher will be needed and how often, water supply, drainage course, maximum depth, legal description of the property in question and other information the village engineer deems pertinent to the proposed operation. Such plan of operation shall be approved by the village engineer. 
(5)  Insurance. Each application for a blasting permit shall be accompanied by a certificate of insurance identifying the village as a party insured in the amount of $500,000.00 for damage to property, $500,000.00 for injury to one person and $1,000,000.00 for injury to more than one person caused by the blasting. 
(d)  Renewal. All requests for renewal of a permit issued under this section shall be made at least 60 days prior to the expiration date of the permit and must comply with all requirements of subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Blasting procedures and controls. 
(1)  Energy ratio. The allowable vibration of any blast at the nearest occupied or used building off the subject premises shall not exceed an energy ratio of 0.5 or resultant particle velocity of 1.35 inches per second based on the following formula: 
Energy ratio = 0.5 = 10.823 f 2 A 2 
Where: 
f = Frequency in cycles per second 
A = Amplitude or displacement in inches 
Energy ratio = 0.274 V 2 
Where: 
V = Resultant particles velocity expressed in inches per second 
(2)  Measurement of blasts. The operator of the quarry operation, when requested to do so by the village engineer, shall measure and submit data to substantiate compliance with the formula, and the operator of the quarry operation, when requested to do so by the village engineer, shall measure air blast. This verification shall be performed by a seismological engineering firm acceptable to the village or by the village engineer. Instrumentation shall be by seismograph similar to the VME Seismolog Model B and approved seismograph sound measuring equipment or approved equivalents. All expenses for these tests shall be paid by the quarry operator. 
(3)  Blasting log. A log in duplicate shall be kept of each blast on forms similar to the one on file with the village engineer. The original copy of this blasting log shall be filed with the engineer within 48 hours after the blast, and a copy shall be kept on file at the quarry office. 
(4)  Cover material. Operators of quarries for building or ornamental stone removal shall cover primacord, other detonating cord or surface-laid blasting devices with at least one foot of dirt or other suitable cover material. 
(f)  Permit fee. The permit fee for any permit issued pursuant to this section shall be as set forth in this subsection. No permit fee shall be prorated. All permits issued shall expire on December 31 following the date of issue. The fees shall be as established by resolution for the following: 
(1)  Quarries using blasting to supply building or ornamental stone. 
(2)  Gravel crushing operations using portable or fixed crushing equipment less than 30 days per year. 
(g)  Penalty. Any person who shall violate this section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-32. However, upon conviction for the violation of this section by the holder of a permit issued under this section and in addition to the forfeiture provided, such permit shall thereupon be cancelled, revoked, rescinded and terminated. 
(h)  Enforcement. Before renewal of any permit issued under this section is refused or any permit is revoked, cancelled, rescinded or terminated, the permittee shall be given written notice of any charges or violations against the permittee or the reasons proposed for nonrenewal or revocation and shall have an opportunity to be heard before the village board. 
(Code 1988, § 7-10-7; Code 1998, § 34-102) 
Secs. 26-92-26-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SMOKING 

Sec. 26-111. - State statutes adopted. 
    The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 101.123, relating to the regulation of smoking and clean indoor air, except provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed, are adopted by reference and made a part of this article as if fully set forth in this section. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated by reference in this section is required or prohibited by this article. Any future amendment, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated in this section are intended to be made a part of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-14(a); Code 1998, § 34-131) 
Sec. 26-112. - Smoking prohibited in all buildings and equipment owned, leased or rented by village. 
(a)  In recognition of a need to protect the health and comfort of the public and village employees from the detrimental effects of smoking, pursuant to the authority granted to the village by Wis. Stats. § 101.123(2)(c), smoking, as defined by Wis. Stats. § 101.123(1)(h), is prohibited by any person within or upon all buildings and enclosed equipment owned, leased or rented by the village, except in places specifically designated as smoking areas by action of the village board. 
(b)  Facilities specifically included within the scope of this section, but not limited thereto, are village-owned facilities such as the village hall, police department and fire department headquarters and the public library. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-14(b); Code 1998, § 34-132) 
Secs. 26-113-26-137. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Wellhead protection, Wis. Stats. § 281.62(2)(a)5. 

Sec. 26-138. - Title. 
    This article shall be known, cited, and referred to as the Wellhead Protection Ordinance (hereinafter, the "WHP ordinance"). 
(Code 1998, § 34-151; Ord. No. 11-9, 8-15-2011) 
Sec. 26-139. - Purpose and authority. 
(a)  The residents of the village and residents in surrounding towns depend exclusively on groundwater for a safe drinking water supply. Certain land use practices and activities seriously threaten or degrade groundwater quality. The purpose of the WHP ordinance is to protect the village's municipal water supply and areas from which the village wells draw water, and to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the village and surrounding towns. 
(b)  These regulations are established pursuant to the authority granted by 42 USC 300h-7 and Wis. Stats. §§ 61.34, 61.35, 62.23, 66.0415 and 281.62(2)(a)5., and pursuant to the authority granted by the Wisconsin Legislature in 1983 Wisconsin Act 410 (effective May 11, 1984), which specifically added groundwater protection to the statutory authorization for municipal planning and zoning in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Areas appropriate for protection in the WHP ordinance are established in the Wellhead Protection Plan for the Village of Waunakee, Wisconsin prepared by Strand Associates, Inc. (the "plan"). The plan, including the wellhead protection map shown as figure 2.05-1 in the plan (the "map"), is incorporated herein by reference, and a copy is on file in the village clerk's office. 
(Code 1998, § 34-152; Ord. No. 11-9, 8-15-2011) 
Sec. 26-140. - Permitting of new wells within municipal boundaries. 
    All individuals and properties in the village shall use the village utilities potable water source for all uses. No new wells for residential, commercial or industrial use may be approved. Notwithstanding the preceding sentences, a person who has obtained a private well permit pursuant to section 26-2 of the village code may continue to use the private well so long as compliance with section 26-2 is maintained. 
(Code 1998, § 34-153; Ord. No. 11-9, 8-15-2011) 
Sec. 26-141. - Applicability. 
    The regulations contained in the WHP ordinance shall apply to land that is located: 
(1)  Within the village corporate limits and/or in the Waunakee/Westport Joint planning area or the expanded ETZ area, as those terms are defined in section 133-18 of the village code; and 
(2)  Within a wellhead protection area for well numbers 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 as shown on the map. 
(Code 1998, § 34-154; Ord. No. 11-9, 8-15-2011) 
Sec. 26-142. - Wellhead protection area. 
(a)  Definition. The term "wellhead protection area" means the surface or subsurface area surrounding wells or well fields that supply the village public water system through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move forward or reach a particular municipal well. 
(b)  Establishment. Wellhead protection areas are hereby established consisting of wellhead protection zones in which land uses are regulated. The wellhead protection areas for well numbers 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 are shown on the map as blue, green, purple, gold, and yellow circles, respectively. The regulations of this WHP ordinance overlay the regulations for the underlying zoning district designated for the area. Whenever the regulations in the wellhead protection area and the underlying zoning district conflict, the more restrictive regulation shall apply. 
(Code 1998, § 34-155; Ord. No. 11-9, 8-15-2011) 
Sec. 26-143. - Uses within a wellhead protection area. 
(a)  Prohibited uses. Wellheads shall be adequately separated from potential sources of contamination and, therefore, the following uses are prohibited in the wellhead protection areas for well numbers 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5: 
(1)  Any use that violates the minimum separation distances identified in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 811.12(5)(d). Any future amendments, revisions or modifications to Wis. Admin. Code § NR 811.12(5)(d) are intended to be made part of and adopted in this article. 
(2)  All other uses prohibited in a wellhead protection area by federal or state laws or regulations. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Any use of property that does not constitute a prohibited use under subsection (a) of this section is permitted in the wellhead protection areas for well numbers 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, so long as the use complies with the regulations applicable to the underlying zoning district of chapter 133, as amended from time-to-time by the village board. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses. The continued lawful use of a building, premises, structure or fixture existing at the time of the adoption of the WHP ordinance shall not be prohibited although the use does not conform to the WHP ordinance. Nonconforming uses shall be governed by Wis. Stats. § 62.23, as amended from time to time. Improvements made to a nonconforming use that facilitate or enhance groundwater protection shall not be considered when determining whether the total structural repairs or alterations in a nonconforming building, premises, structure or fixture during its life exceed 50 percent of the assessed value of the building, premises, structure or fixture. In addition, the following requirements apply to the owner of the property on which there is a nonconforming use: 
(1)  The owner shall provide copies of all federal, state, and local facility operation approvals or certificates to the village director of public works. 
(2)  The owner shall provide all ongoing environmental monitoring results to the village director of public works. 
(3)  The owner shall provide additional environmental or safety structures or monitoring as deemed necessary by the village, which may include, but is not limited to, stormwater runoff management and monitoring. 
(4)  The owner shall replace or expand equipment in a manner that improves the existing environmental and safety technologies already in existence. 
(5)  The owner shall prepare and file with the village a contingency plan satisfactory to the village director of public works for the immediate notification of village officials in the event of an unauthorized release of a contaminant to the ground, groundwater, or surface water within a wellhead protection area. 
(Code 1998, § 34-156; Ord. No. 11-9, 8-15-2011) 
Sec. 26-144. - Variances. 
    A request for a variance to the WHP ordinance may be made using the process, procedure and standards contained in section 133-98. 
(Code 1998, § 34-157; Ord. No. 11-9, 8-15-2011) 
Sec. 26-145. - Enforcement. 
(a)  If any contaminants that endanger the wellhead protection area are released, the owner of the property causing the release, or the person or entity causing the release if the person or entity does not own property within the wellhead protection area, shall immediately halt the activity that caused the release and shall commence a cleanup satisfactory to the village. The owner, person or entity shall be responsible for all costs of cleanup, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The cost of village employees' time associated in any way with the cleanup. The cost shall be the employees' hourly rate multiplied by a factor determined by the village to represent the village's cost for expenses, benefits, insurance, sick leave, holidays, overtime, vacation, and similar benefits provided to the employee. 
(2)  Village consultant fees associated in any way with the cleanup, including attorney and engineering fees. 
(3)  The cost of village equipment employed. 
(4)  The cost of mileage reimbursed to village employees attributed to the cleanup. 
(b)  Following any unauthorized discharge within a wellhead protection area, the village may require additional test monitoring and/or bonds or sureties as it deems necessary and reasonable. 
(c)  Penalties for noncompliance with the WHP ordinance shall be as provided in section 1-32. 
(Code 1998, § 34-158; Ord. No. 11-9, 8-15-2011) 
Chapter 30 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fire safety generally, Wis. Stats. ch. 101. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Key boxes. 
(a)  Required. Key boxes shall be installed as follows: 
(1)  The fire chief or designee shall require the installation of a key box in an accessible location on all construction of new structures that are places of employment or public buildings as defined in Wis. Stats. § 101.01 in which the building permit is issued after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, as well as when any alterations or other remodeling occurs of existing places of employment or public buildings in which the building permit is issued after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(2)  When access to or within a structure or an area is unduly difficult because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for lifesaving or firefighting purposes, the fire chief or designee shall require that a key box be installed in an accessible location. 
(3)  The key box shall be a type approved by the fire department and shall contain those keys found to be necessary to provide emergency access. 
(b)  Property owner's responsibility. The property owner is responsible to ensure that keys maintained within a key box are those of the current type. When the property owner directs changes of locks within the building, the property owner shall notify the fire department prior to changing the locks so that new keys may be placed in the key box. 
(c)  Removal of key prohibited. Removal of any key by other than fire department, police department or emergency medical service personnel shall subject the violator to a penalty as provided in section 1-32. 
(Code 1998, § 38-2; Ord. No. 97-3, § 1(5-3-5), 4-7-1997) 
Sec. 30-2. - Open burning. 
(a)  Restricted. No person shall build or maintain any outdoor fire within the corporate limits of the village except as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. This prohibition on burning includes burning of construction waste and debris at construction sites. 
(b)  Exceptions. Exceptions to the prohibition stated in subsection (a) of this section are as follows: 
(1)  Outdoor cooking over a fire contained in a device or structure designed for such use is permissible. 
(2)  Dry wood may be burned in an outdoor recreational fireplace that is certified by a nationally recognized listing agency and which is screened and which contains a lid or in a non-commercially constructed brick fireplace with a chimney that is approved by the building inspector according to applicable building codes, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The fireplace must be an assembly that includes a bowl, pit or device for holding the wood and a method of containing embers and sparks. 
b.  Only dry wood, entirely contained within the device, is permitted to be burned. 
c.  The fireplace shall not be used within 15 feet of any structure or five feet of any lot line unless the fireplace is a brick fireplace and the location of the fireplace is approved by the building inspector according to applicable building codes. 
d.  The smoke shall not create a nuisance for other properties, obstruction of vehicle travel, or health concerns of others. 
e.  No fireplace shall be located or used on a deck, porch, or patio that is combustible. 
f.  An ABC type fire extinguisher, charged garden hose, or other method of first aid fire control must be readily available. 
g.  The fireplace must be supervised or attended at all times while in use by a responsible adult over the age of 18 years. The fire must be completely extinguished before the fireplace is left unsupervised. 
h.  Use of the fireplace shall be discontinued when atmospheric conditions are unfavorable or make the use of the fireplace hazardous. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, winds in excess of ten miles per hour or excessive dry weather conditions as declared by the fire department. Fireplace operators shall be responsible for checking with the fire department by phone or other means prescribed by the fire chief or his designee to determine whether hazardous conditions exist. No burning shall be allowed if wind conditions cause smoke, embers or other burning materials to be carried toward any building or other combustible material. 
i.  Burning of dry wood under this subsection shall not be permitted at commercial facilities or on commercial property unless prior written approval is obtained from the fire chief or his designee. 
(3)  With the prior written approval of the fire chief or his designee, controlled burning of grass or similar vegetation for environmental management purposes may be permitted. This exception shall not be used for the burning of grass, leaves or other lawn debris. 
(4)  With the prior written approval of the fire chief or his designee, ceremonial campfires or bonfires may be permitted. 
(5)  With the prior written approval of the fire chief or his designee, other occasions of desirable outdoor burning not specified by this subsection, but not as an alternative to refuse removal or disposal of which other methods are available, may be granted on single occasions. 
(6)  Whenever prior written approval is obtained from the fire chief or his designee under this subsection, the written approval may specify and be conditioned on observance of safety restrictions and insurance requirements set forth therein. 
(c)  Authority to prohibit. The fire chief or his designee is permitted to prohibit any or all outdoor fires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous. 
(d)  Burning on streets. No materials may be burned upon any street, curb, gutter or sidewalk. 
(e)  Liability. Any person who violated this section shall be responsible for any liability resulting from damages caused by the fire and/or the violation of this section, including, but not limited to, all costs associated with the fire department or departments responding to the fire call. 
(Code 1988, § 5-2-9; Code 1998, § 38-37; Ord. No. 10-9, § 1, 8-16-2010; Ord. No. 13-2, 4-15-2013; Ord. No. 17-4, § 1, 7-24-2017) 
Secs. 30-3-30-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-23. - Organization; agreement for operation of fire district; appropriations; goals. 
(a)  Department recognized. The Company No. 1, Waunakee Area Fire Department is officially recognized as the fire department serving the village, and the duties of firefighting and fire prevention in the village are delegated to such department. The Waunakee Area Fire Department hall be responsible for the program of fire defense for the citizens and property within the village. 
(b)  Fire protection agreement. The village and the Towns of Vienna, Westport and Springfield have entered into a contract under Wis. Stats. ch. 66, subch. III (Wis. Stats. § 66.0301 et seq.) for the operation of a fire district. Such contract is on file with the village clerk and shall govern the operation of the department and the relation of the village thereto. 
(c)  Appropriations. The fire district shall appropriate funds for operations and for such apparatus and equipment for the use of the fire district as it may deem expedient and necessary to maintain efficiency and to properly protect life and property from fire. 
(d)  Goals of fire defense program. The objectives of the fire defense program shall be as follows: 
(1)  The primary objective is to serve all citizens, without prejudice or favoritism, by safeguarding, collectively and individually, their lives against the effects of fires and explosions. 
(2)  The second objective is to safeguard the general economy and welfare of the community by preventing major conflagrations and the destruction by fire of industries and businesses. 
(3)  The third objective is to protect the property of all citizens against the effects of fire and explosions. All property deserves equal protection, regardless of location or monetary value. 
(e)  Organization. The Waunakee Area Fire Department is authorized and directed to adopt a constitution and bylaws for the control, management, government and regulation of its business and proceedings. 
(Code 1988, § 5-2-1; Code 1998, § 38-31) 
Sec. 30-24. - Authority to enter property; destruction of property to prevent spread of fire. 
(a)  Entering adjacent property. It shall be lawful for any firefighter, while acting under the direction of the fire chief or any other officer in command, to enter upon the premises adjacent to or in the vicinity of a building or other property then on fire for the purpose of extinguishing such fire. If any person shall hinder, resist or obstruct any firefighter in the discharge of such duty as is provided in this subsection, the person so offending shall be deemed guilty of resisting firefighters in the discharge of their duty. 
(b)  Destruction of property to prevent spread of fire. During the progress of any fire, the fire chief shall have the power to order the removal or destruction of any property necessary to prevent the further spread of fire, provided it is inevitable that, unless such property is removed, other property is in danger of being destroyed by fire. 
(Code 1988, § 5-2-5; Code 1998, § 38-33) 
Sec. 30-25. - Duty to obey orders at fire. 
    Every person who shall be present at a fire shall be subject to the orders of the fire chief or officer in command. Such officer shall have the power to cause the arrest of any person refusing to obey such orders. 
(Code 1988, § 5-2-6; Code 1998, § 38-34) 
Secs. 30-26-30-53. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIRE CHIEF 

Sec. 30-54. - Appointment. 
    The fire chief shall be appointed pursuant to the bylaws of the fire department. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-6(a); Code 1998, § 38-66) 
Sec. 30-55. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The fire chief shall have general supervision of the department, subject to division 1 of article III of chapter 2 and the bylaws of the department, and shall be responsible for the personnel and general efficiency of the department. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the fire chief to preside at all meetings of the department, to call special meetings, to preserve order, to decide all points of order that may arise and to enforce a rigid observance of this division and the bylaws of the department. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the fire chief or ranking officer of the department to be present at all fires, to have complete command of and entire responsibility for all firefighting operations, to plan the control of the firefighting operations, to direct the action of the company when they arrive at a fire, to observe that the department does its duty, to grant leaves of absence at a fire when the fire chief may deem it proper and to see that the fire apparatus is kept in proper condition at all times. 
(d)  The fire chief shall enforce all sections of this Code and state laws and regulations pertaining to fire prevention and shall keep citizens informed on fire prevention methods and on the activities of the department. 
(e)  The fire chief shall keep a fire record book of every fire to which the department is called and shall enter in such book the locality of fire, the time the alarm was received, the cause of the fire, where the fire started, the cause of delay if any in responding, the method of extinguishment and equipment used, the amount of insurance carried on the building and contents, the estimated fire loss, the time the fire was extinguished, the names of firefighters responding and general remarks. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-6(b); Code 1998, § 38-67) 
Secs. 30-56-30-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 30-84. - Adoption of state codes, national standards. 
    The following orders, rules and regulations of the state and the following national standards are incorporated by reference and adopted as part of this chapter: 
(1)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 310-Flammable and Combustible Liquids. 
(2)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 328-Smoke and Carbon Monoxide Detectors. 
(3)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 330-Fire Department Safety and Health. 
(4)  Wis. Admin. Code chs. SPS 341 and 341 Appendix-Boiler and Pressure Vessels. 
(5)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 343-Anhydrous Ammonia. 
(6)  Wis. Admin. Code chs. SPS 361-366-Commercial Building Code and Wis. Admin. Code chs. SPS 361-66 Appendixes A and B. 
(7)  Wis. Admin. Code chs. SPS 320-324 and Wis. Admin. Code chs. SPS 320-325 Appendix-Residential Building Code. 
(8)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 366-Existing Buildings. 
(9)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 305-Licenses, Certifications and Registrations. 
(10)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 307-Explosives and Fireworks. 
(11)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. ATCP 93-Flammable, Combustible and Hazardous Liquids. 
(12)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 314-Fire Prevention. 
(13)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 316-Electrical. 
(14)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 318-Elevators, Escalators and Lift Devices. 
(15)  Fire Prevention Code (NFPA 1), 2015 Edition, and Life Safety Code (NFPA 101), 2015 Edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association. 
(Code 1988, § 5-3-1; Code 1998, § 38-96; Ord. No. 03-06, § 1, 4-7-2003) 
Secs. 30-85-30-111. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Fireworks regulation, Wis. Stats. § 167.10. 

Sec. 30-112. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fireworks means anything manufactured, processed or packaged for exploding, emitting sparks or combustion which does not have another common use, but does not include any of the following: 
(1)  Fuel or a lubricant. 
(2)  A firearm cartridge or shotgun shell. 
(3)  A flare used or possessed or sold for use as a signal in an emergency or in the operation of a railway, aircraft, watercraft or motor vehicle. 
(4)  A match, cigarette lighter, stove, furnace, candle, lantern or space heater. 
(5)  A cap containing not more than one-quarter grain of explosive mixture, if the cap is used or possessed or sold for use in a device which prevents direct bodily contact with a cap when it is in place for explosion. 
(6)  A toy snake which contains no mercury. 
(7)  A model rocket engine. 
(8)  Tobacco and a tobacco product. 
(9)  A sparkler on a wire or wood stick not exceeding 36 inches in length that is designed to produce audible or visible effects or to produce audible and visible effects. 
(10)  A device designed to spray out paper confetti or streamers and which contains less than one-quarter grain of explosive mixture. 
(11)  A fuseless device that is designed to produce audible or visible effects or audible and visible effects, and that contains less than one-quarter grain of explosive mixture. 
(12)  A device that is designed primarily to burn pyrotechnic smoke-producing mixtures, at a controlled rate, and that produces audible or visible effects, or audible and visible effects. 
(13)  A cylindrical fountain that consists of one or more tubes and that is classified by the federal department of transportation as a Division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50. 
(14)  A cone fountain that is classified by the federal department of transportation as a Division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50. 
(15)  A novelty device that spins or moves on the ground. 
(Code 1988, § 7-7-1(a); Code 1998, § 38-126) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 167.10(1). 
Sec. 30-113. - Sale. 
    No person may sell or possess with intent to sell fireworks, unless any of the following apply: 
(1)  The person sells the fireworks, or possesses the fireworks with intent to sell them, to a person holding a permit under section 30-114. 
(2)  The person sells the fireworks, or possesses the fireworks with intent to sell them, to a city, village or town. 
(3)  The person sells the fireworks, or possesses the fireworks with intent to sell them, to a person who is not a resident of this state. 
(4)  The person sells the fireworks, or possesses the fireworks with intent to sell them, for a purpose specified under section 30-114(b)(2) to (b)(6). 
(Code 1988, § 7-7-1(b); Code 1998, § 38-127) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 167.10(2). 
Sec. 30-114. - User's permit. 
(a)  No person shall possess or use fireworks without a user's permit from the village clerk. No person may use fireworks or a device listed under section 30-112(e) to (g) or (i) to (n) while attending a fireworks display for which a permit has been issued to a person listed under subsections (d)1. to 5., or under subsection (d)6. of this section if the display is open to the general public. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to: 
(1)  The village fire and law enforcement officials shall be notified of the proposed use of fireworks at least two days in advance. 
(2)  The possession or use of explosives in accordance with rules or general orders of the state department of safety and professional services. 
(3)  The disposal of hazardous substances in accordance with rules adopted by the state department of natural resources. 
(4)  The possession or use of explosive or combustible materials in any manufacturing process. 
(5)  The possession or use of explosive or combustible materials in connection with classes conducted by educational institutions. 
(6)  A possessor or manufacturer of explosives in possession of a license or permit under 18 USC 841 to 848 if the possession of the fireworks is authorized under the license or permit. 
(7)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the possession of fireworks in the village while transporting the fireworks to a city, town or village where the possession of the fireworks is authorized by permit or ordinance. 
(c)  Subsection (a) of this section applies to a person transporting fireworks under subsection (b)(7) of this section if, in the course of transporting the fireworks through a city, town or village, the person remains in that city, town or village for a period of at least 12 hours. 
(d)  A permit under this subsection may be issued only to the following persons: 
(1)  A public authority. 
(2)  A fair association. 
(3)  An amusement park. 
(4)  A park board. 
(5)  A civic organization. 
(6)  Any individual or group of individuals. 
(7)  An agricultural producer for the protection of crops from predatory birds or animals. 
(e)  A person issued a permit for crop protection shall erect appropriate warning signs disclosing the use of fireworks for crop protection. 
(f)  The person issuing the permit may require an indemnity bond with good and sufficient sureties or policy of liability insurance for the payment of all claims that may arise by reason of injuries to person or property from the handling, use or discharge of fireworks under the permit. The bond or policy, if required, shall be taken in the name of the village and any person injured thereby may bring an action on the bond or policy in the person's own name to recover the damage the person has sustained, but the aggregate liability of the surety or insurer to all persons shall not exceed the amount of the bond or policy. The bond or policy, if required, together with a copy of the permit shall be filed in the office of the village clerk. 
(g)  A permit under this section shall specify all of the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the permit holder. 
(2)  The date on and after which fireworks may be purchased. 
(3)  The general kind and approximate quantity of fireworks which may be purchased. 
(4)  The date and location of permitted use. 
(5)  Other special conditions prescribed by ordinance. 
(h)  A copy of a permit under this subsection shall be given to the municipal fire or law enforcement official at least two days before the date of authorized use. This subsection does not apply to a permit authorizing only the sale or possession of fireworks that are classified by the federal department of transportation as Division 1.4 explosives, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50. 
(i)  A permit under this section may not be issued to a minor. 
(j)  Out-of-state and in-state shipping. This section does not prohibit a vendor from selling fireworks to a nonresident person or to a person or group granted a permit under subsection (d) of this section. A vendor that ships fireworks sold under this subsection shall package and ship the fireworks in accordance with applicable state and federal law 
(Code 1988, § 7-7-1(c); Code 1998, § 38-128) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 167.10(3). 
Sec. 30-115. - Storage and handling. 
(a)  Fire extinguishers required. No wholesaler, dealer or jobber may store or handle fireworks on the premises unless the premises are equipped with fire extinguishers approved by the fire chief. 
(b)  Smoking prohibited. No person may smoke where fireworks are stored or handled. 
(c)  Notice of location. A person who stores or handles fireworks shall notify the fire chief of the location of the fireworks. 
(d)  Storage distance. No wholesaler, dealer or jobber may store fireworks within 500 feet of a dwelling. 
(e)  Restrictions on storage. No person may store fireworks within 500 feet of a public assemblage or a place where gasoline or volatile liquid is sold in quantities exceeding one gallon. 
(Code 1988, § 7-7-1(d); Code 1998, § 38-129) 
Sec. 30-116. - Parental liability. 
    A parent, foster parent, treatment foster parent, family-operated group home parent or legal guardian of a minor who consents to the use of fireworks by the minor is liable for damages caused by the minor's use of the fireworks. 
(Code 1988, § 7-7-1(e); Code 1998, § 38-130) 
Chapter 34 - HUMAN RELATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOUSING DISCRIMINATION 

Sec. 34-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Advertise means to publish, circulate, issue or display, or cause to be published, circulated, issued or displayed, any communication, notice, advertisement or sign in connection with the sale, financing or rental of housing. 
    Age, in reference to a member of a protected class, means at least 18 years of age. 
    Condominium has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 703.02(4). 
    Condominium association means an association, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 703.02(1m). 
    Disability means a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, a record of having such an impairment or being regarded as having such an impairment. The term "disability" does not include the current illegal use of a controlled substance, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 961.01(4), or a controlled substance analog, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 961.01(4m), unless the individual is participating in a supervised drug rehabilitation program. 
    Discriminate means to segregate, separate, exclude, or treat a person or class of persons unequally in a manner described in section 34-23, 34-24 or 34-25 because of sex, race, color, sexual orientation, disability, religion, national origin, marital status, family status, status as a victim of domestic abuse, sexual assault, or stalking, lawful source of income, age, or ancestry. 
    Dwelling unit means a structure or that part of a structure that is used or intended to be used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one person or by two or more persons who are maintaining a common household, to the exclusion of all others. 
    Family includes one natural person. 
    Family status means any of the following conditions that apply to a person seeking to rent or purchase housing or to a member or prospective member of the person's household regardless of the person's marital status: 
(1)  A person is pregnant. 
(2)  A person is in the process of securing sole or joint legal custody, periods of physical placement or visitation rights of a minor child. 
(3)  A person's household includes one or more minor or adult relatives. 
(4)  A person's household includes one or more adults or minor children in his legal custody or physical placement or with whom he has visitation rights. 
(5)  A person's household includes one or more adults or minor children placed in his care under a court order, under a guardianship or with the written permission of a parent or other person having legal custody of the adult or minor child. 
    Hardship condition means a situation under which a tenant in housing for older persons has legal custody or physical placement of a minor child or a minor child is placed in the tenant's care under a court order, under a guardianship or with the written permission of a parent or other person having legal custody of the minor child. 
    Housing means any improved property, or any portion thereof, including a mobile home as defined in Wis. Stats. § 101.91(10), manufactured home, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 101.91(2), or condominium, that is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as a home or residence. The term "housing" includes any vacant land that is offered for sale or rent for the construction or location thereon of any building, structure or portion thereof that is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as a home or residence. 
    Housing for older persons means any of the following: 
(1)  Housing provided under any state or federal program that the secretary determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons, as defined in the state or federal program. 
(2)  Housing solely intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or older. 
(3)  Housing primarily intended and primarily operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older per dwelling unit. 
    Interested person means an adult relative or friend of a member of a protected class, or an official or representative of a private agency, corporation or association concerned with the welfare of a member of a protected class. 
    Member of a protected class means a group of natural persons, or a natural person, who may be categorized because of sex, race, color, disability, sexual orientation, religion, national origin, marital status, family status, status as a victim of domestic abuse, sexual abuse, or stalking, lawful source of income, age, or ancestry. 
    Relative means a parent, grandparent, great-grandparent, stepparent, step grandparent, brother, sister, child, stepchild, grandchild, step grandchild, great-grandchild, first cousin, second cousin, nephew, niece, uncle, aunt, stepbrother, stepsister, half-brother or half-sister or any other person related by blood, marriage or adoption. 
    Rent means to lease, to sublease, to let or to otherwise grant for a consideration the right of a tenant to occupy housing not owned by the tenant. 
    Sexual orientation has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 111.32(13m). 
    Status as a victim of domestic abuse, sexual assault, or stalking means the status of a person who is seeking to rent or purchase housing or of a member or prospective member of the person's household having been, or being believed by the lessor or seller of housing to be, a victim of domestic abuse, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 813.12(1)(am), sexual assault under Wis. Stats. §§ 940.225, 948.02, or 948.025, or stalking under Wis. Stats. § 940.32. 
(Code 1988, § 15-7-2; Code 1998, 54-57) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 106.50(1m). 
Sec. 34-20. - Statement of policy. 
    It is declared to be the policy of the village to ensure equal opportunity to all persons to live in adequate housing facilities regardless of age sex, race, color, disability, sexual orientation, religion, national origin, marital status, family status, status as a victim of domestic abuse, sexual assault, or stalking, lawful source of income, age, or ancestry and, to that end, to prohibit discrimination in housing by any person. 
(Code 1988, § 15-7-1; Code 1998, 54-56) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 66.1011 
Sec. 34-21. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(a)  Nothing in this article prohibits discrimination based on age or family status with respect to housing for older persons. Under this subsection, housing may qualify as housing for older persons only if the owner of the housing maintains records containing written verification that all of the following factors apply to the housing: 
(1)  At least 80 percent of the dwelling units that constitute housing primarily intended and primarily operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older per dwelling unit are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older. 
(2)  Policies are published and procedures are adhered to that demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for older persons as defined in the definition of housing for older persons for persons 55 years of age or older. The owner or manager may document compliance with this subsection by maintaining records containing written verification of the ages of the occupants of the housing. 
(b)  No person may discriminate by refusing to continue renting to a person living in housing for older persons as defined in the definition of housing for older persons who is subject to a hardship condition. Under this subsection, housing may qualify as housing for older persons with respect to persons first occupying the housing on or after September 1, 1992, regardless of whether a person who had not attained the age of 62 resided in the housing on that date or regardless of whether one or more dwelling units were unoccupied on that date, if the persons who first occupy the housing on or after that date have attained the age of 62. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a person from exacting different or more stringent terms or conditions for financing housing based on the age of the individual applicant for financing if the terms or conditions are reasonably related to the individual applicant. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit the development of housing designed specifically for persons with disabilities and preference in favor of persons with disabilities in relation to such housing. 
(e)  Nothing in this article requires that housing be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the safety of other tenants or persons employed on the property or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others, if the risk of direct threat or damage cannot be eliminated or sufficiently reduced through reasonable accommodations. A claim that an individual's tenancy poses a direct threat or a substantial risk of harm or damage must be evidenced by behavior by the individual that caused harm or damage, that directly threatened harm or damage, or that caused a reasonable fear of harm or damage to other tenants, persons employed on the property, or the property. No claim that an individual's tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the safety of other persons or would result in substantial damage to property may be based on the tenant's status as a victim of domestic abuse, sexual assault, or stalking. 
(f)  It is not discrimination based on status as a victim of domestic abuse, sexual assault, or stalking for a landlord to bring an action for eviction of a tenant based on a violation of the rental agreement or of a statute that entitles the landlord to possession of the premises, unless section 34-22 or 34-23 applies. A tenant has a defense to an action for eviction brought by a landlord if the tenant proves by a preponderance of the evidence that the landlord knew or should have known any of the following: 
(1)  That the tenant is a victim of domestic abuse, sexual assault, or stalking and that the basis for the action for eviction is conduct that related to the commission of domestic abuse, sexual assault, or stalking by a person who was not the invited guest of the tenant. 
(2)  That the tenant is a victim of domestic abuse, sexual assault, or stalking, that the basis for the action for eviction is conduct that related to the commission of domestic abuse, sexual assault, or stalking by a person who was the invited guest of the tenant, and that the tenant has done one of the following: 
a.  Sought an injunction under Wis. Stats. § 813.12, 813.122, 813.123, or 813.125 enjoining the person from appearing on the premises. 
b.  Upon receiving notice under Wis. Stats. § 704.17, provided a written statement to the landlord indicating that the person will no longer be an invited guest of the tenant and has not subsequently invited the person to be a guest of the tenant. 
(g)  It is not discrimination based on family status to comply with any reasonable federal, state or local government restrictions relating to the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling unit. 
(h)  Subject to section 34-23, nothing in this article applies to a decision by an individual as to the person with whom he will, or continues to, share a dwelling unit, except that dwelling unit does not include any residence occupied by more than five persons. Any advertisement or written notice published, posted or mailed in connection with the rental or lease of a dwelling unit under subdivision 1. may not violate section 34-23(d), 42 USC 3604(c), or any rules or regulations promulgated under this article or 42 USC 3601 to 3619, except that such an advertisement or written notice may be for a person of the same sex as the individual who seeks a person to share the dwelling unit for which the advertisement or written notice is placed. 
(i)  Nothing in this article prohibits an owner or agent from requiring that a person who seeks to buy or rent housing supply information concerning family status, and marital, financial, and business status but not concerning race, color, disability, sexual orientation, ancestry, national origin, religion, creed, status as a victim of domestic abuse, sexual assault, or stalking, or, subject to section 34-23, age. Notwithstanding the prior sentence an owner or agent may require that a person who seeks to buy or rent housing primarily intended and primarily operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older per dwelling, supply information concerning his age for the purpose of verifying compliance with the third paragraph of the definition of housing for older persons contained in section 34-19. 
(Code 1988, § 15-7-4; Code 1998, 54-61) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 106.50(5m). 
Sec. 34-22. - Enforcement. 
    Any person aggrieved by an unlawful practice prohibited by this division may file a complaint with the village board within 30 days after the aggrieved person becomes aware of the alleged unlawful practice and in no event more than 60 days after the alleged unlawful practice has occurred. The village board or its duly authorized representative shall receive each complaint and attempt to resolve each complaint. Failure to achieve a resolution acceptable to both parties and compliance with this division shall cause the village board to forward the complaint and findings to appropriate state and federal agencies. 
(Code 1988, § 15-7-5; Code 1998, 54-62) 
Sec. 34-23. - General discrimination practices prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to discriminate: 
(1)  By refusing to sell, rent, finance or contract to construct housing or by refusing to negotiate or discuss the terms thereof. 
(2)  By refusing to permit inspection or exacting different or more stringent price, terms or conditions for the sale, lease, financing or rental of housing. 
(3)  By refusing to finance or sell an unimproved residential lot or to construct a home or residence upon such lot. 
(4)  By advertising in a manner that indicates discrimination by a preference or limitation. 
(5)  For a person in the business of insuring against hazards, by refusing to enter into, or by exacting different terms, conditions or privileges with respect to, a contract of insurance against hazards to a dwelling. 
(6)  By refusing to renew a lease, causing the eviction of a tenant from rental housing or engaging in the harassment of a tenant. 
(7)  In providing the privileges, services or facilities that are available in connection with housing. 
(8)  By falsely representing that housing is unavailable for inspection, rental or sale. 
(9)  By denying access to, or membership or participation in, a multiple listing service or other real estate service. 
(10)  By coercing, intimidating, threatening or interfering with a person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised or enjoyed, a right granted or protected under this section, or with a person who has aided or encouraged another person in the exercise or enjoyment of a right granted or protected under this section. 
(11)  In making available any of the following transactions, or in the terms or conditions of such transactions for a person whose business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions: 
a.  The making or purchasing of loans or the provision of other financial assistance for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining housing or the making or purchasing of loans or the provision of other financial assistance secured by residential real estate. 
b.  Selling, brokering or appraising residential real property. 
(12)  By otherwise making unavailable or denying housing. 
(Code 1988, § 15-7-3; Code 1998, 54-58) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 106.50(2). 
Sec. 34-24. - Representations designed to induce panic sales. 
    No person may induce or attempt to induce a person to sell or rent housing by representations regarding the present or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular economic status or a member of a protected class, or by representations to the effect that such present or prospective entry will or may result in any of the following: 
(1)  The lowering of real estate values in the area concerned. 
(2)  A deterioration in the character of the area concerned. 
(3)  An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area concerned. 
(4)  A decline in the quality of the schools or other public facilities serving the area. 
(Code 1988, § 15-7-3; Code 1998, 54-59) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 106.50(2m). 
Sec. 34-25. - Discrimination against persons with disabilities prohibited. 
(a)  Types of discrimination prohibited. In addition to discrimination prohibited under sections 34-58 and 34-59, no person may do any of the following: 
(1)  Segregate, separate, exclude or treat unequally in the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, housing to a buyer or renter because of a disability of that buyer or renter, a disability of a person residing in or intending to reside in that housing after it is sold, rented or made available or a disability of a person associated with that buyer or renter. 
(2)  Segregate, separate, exclude or treat unequally a person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of housing, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with such housing, because of a disability of that person, a disability of a person residing in or intending to reside in that housing after it is sold, rented or made available or a disability of a person associated with that person. 
(3)  Refuse to permit, at the expense of a person with a disability, reasonable modifications of existing housing that is occupied, or is to be occupied, by such a person if the modifications may be necessary to afford the person full enjoyment of the housing, except that in the case of rental housing the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the tenant's agreement to restore the interior of the housing to the condition that existed before the modification, other than reasonable wear and tear. The landlord may not increase any customarily required security deposit. Where it is necessary to ensure that funds will be available to pay for the restorations at the end of the tenancy, the landlord may negotiate as part of a restoration agreement a requirement that the tenant pay into an interest-bearing escrow account, over a reasonable period, a reasonable amount of money not to exceed the cost of the restorations. The interest in any such account shall accrue to the benefit of the tenant. If escrowed funds are not used by the landlord for restorations, they shall be returned to the tenant. 
(4)  Refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or services that are associated with the housing, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford the person equal opportunity to use and enjoy housing, unless the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the owner of the housing. 
(b)  Animals assisting persons with disabilities. 
(1)  If an individual's vision, hearing or mobility is impaired, it is discrimination for a person to refuse to rent or sell housing to the individual, cause the eviction of the individual from housing, require extra compensation from an individual as a condition of continued residence in housing or engage in the harassment of the individual because he keeps an animal that is specially trained to lead or assist the individual with impaired vision, hearing or mobility if all of the following apply: 
a.  Upon request, the individual shows to the lessor, seller or representative of the condominium association credentials issued by a school recognized by the department as accredited to train animals for individuals with impaired vision, hearing or mobility. 
b.  The individual accepts liability for sanitation with respect to, and damage to the premises caused by, the animal. 
(2)  Subsection (b)(1) of this section does not apply in the case of the rental of owner-occupied housing if the owner or a member of his immediate family occupying the housing possesses and, upon request, presents to the individual a certificate signed by a physician which states that the owner or family member is allergic to the type of animal the individual possesses. 
(Code 1998, 54-60) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 106.50. 
Sec. 34-26. - Physically disabled persons; housing requirements. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessible means able to be approached, entered and used by persons with disabilities. 
    Accessible route means a continuous, unobstructed path connecting accessible elements and spaces in a building, within a site or from a site to a vehicular route, that can be negotiated by all persons with a disability. 
    ANSI A117.1 means the 1986 edition of the American National Standards Institute's code for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usability for people with physical disabilities. 
    Covered multifamily housing means any of the following: 
(1)  Housing that is first ready for occupancy on or after October 1, 1993, consisting of 3 or more dwelling units if the housing has one or more elevators. 
(2)  Grade-level dwelling units, in housing without elevators, that are first ready for occupancy on or after October 1, 1993, consisting of 3 or more dwelling units. 
    Remodel means to substantially improve, alter, extend or otherwise change the structure of a building or change the location of exits, but does not include maintenance, redecoration, reroofing or alteration of mechanical or electrical systems. 
    Vehicular route means a route intended for vehicular traffic including, but not limited to, a street, driveway or parking lot. 
(b)  Discrimination against persons with physical disabilities prohibited. 
(1)  Standards. In addition to discrimination prohibited by other sections of this article, no person may design or construct covered multifamily housing unless it meets all of the following standards: 
a.  There is at least one accessible entrance for each building and that entrance is on an accessible route. All other entrances that are at grade level shall be accessible to the greatest extent feasible as defined by state rule. If the covered multifamily housing units are at grade level and are served by separate entrances, each unit shall be on an accessible route. If the units have a minimum number of required exits, as determined by state rules, all required grade-level exits shall be accessible. 
b.  Public and common use areas are accessible to persons with disabilities. 
c.  Interior and exterior doors, and interior passages, are sufficiently wide to allow passage by persons with disabilities who use wheelchairs. 
d.  Light switches, electrical outlets, circuit controls, thermostats and other environmental controls are all located in accessible locations; reinforcements in bathroom walls are installed to allow later installation of grab bars around the toilet, tub, shower stall and shower seat, when such facilities are provided; kitchens and bathrooms allow an individual in a wheelchair to maneuver about the space; and, upon the request of a renter and without cost to a renter, lever door handles are on all doors and single lever controls, or other controls that are approved by state rule, are on all plumbing fixtures used by residents. 
(2)  Remodeling. 
a.  If more than 50 percent of the interior square footage of any housing with three or more dwelling units is to be remodeled, the entire housing shall conform to the standards in subsection (b)(1) of this section, regardless of when the housing was first intended for occupancy. 
b.  If 25 percent to 50 percent of the interior square footage of any housing with three or more dwelling units is to be remodeled, that part of the housing that is to be remodeled shall conform to the standards in subsection (b)(1) of this section, regardless of when the housing was first intended for occupancy. 
c.  If less than 25 percent of the interior square footage of any housing with three or more dwelling units is to be remodeled, the remodeling is not subject to the standards in subsection (b)(1) of this section unless the alteration involves work on doors, entrances, exits or toilet rooms, in which case the doors, entrances, exits or toilet rooms shall conform to the standards in subsection (b)(1) of this section regardless of when the housing was first intended for occupancy. 
d.  This section is inapplicable to exterior accessibility requirements if a variance to or waiver from same has been granted pursuant to state law. 
(3)  Safe harbor. This subsection does not apply to remodeled or covered multifamily housing for which a building permit is issued on or after January 1, 1995. Except as provided in this section, covered multifamily housing and remodeled housing are accessible for purposes of this section if they comply with one of the following: 
a.  The applicable requirements of ANSI A117.1. 
b.  Final guidelines issued by the federal department of housing and urban development, published in the federal register on March 6, 1991. 
c.  Another standard that affords persons with disabilities access that is essentially equivalent to or greater than that required by ANSI A117.1. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 101.132, 106.50(2r). 
Chapter 38 - LAW ENFORCEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Police departments, Wis. Stats. § 61.65; law enforcement agency policies on use of force and citizen complaint procedures, Wis. Stats. § 66.0511; police pay when acting outside of city, Wis. Stats. § 66.0513. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-19. - Organization. 
    The police department shall consist of a police chief and such other officers, assistants and police officers as from time to time may be hired through the police commission, pursuant to state law. 
(Code 1988, § 5-1-1; Code 1998, § 58-26) 
Sec. 38-20. - Records and reports. 
(a)  Quarterly reports. The police chief shall submit a quarterly general report to the village board of all activities of the police department during the preceding quarter. 
(b)  Police records. There shall be kept by the police department a suitable record in which shall be entered the name of every person arrested in the village, the name of the person making the arrest, the date and cause of the arrest, the court from which the warrant was issued, the disposition made of the case, the amount of fine and costs paid and to whom paid, the bond posted, and all complaints in full. 
(Code 1988, § 5-1-2; Code 1998, § 58-27) 
Sec. 38-21. - Rules and policies. 
    The police chief shall establish and promulgate rules of conduct, directives and policies and procedures and shall prescribe such duties for individual members as the police chief may deem necessary for the effective and efficient command and operation of the police department, provided no such rules of conduct, directive, policy or procedure, duties or assignment shall be in conflict with state law, village ordinances and approved village personnel rules and regulations. 
(Code 1988, § 5-1-5; Code 1998, § 58-28) 
Sec. 38-22. - Maintenance of personnel records and performance evaluations. 
    The police chief shall cause to be maintained adequate personnel records of employment, assignment, promotions, attendance, performance and training for all members of the police department. Such personnel records shall be filed with the village administrator. The police chief shall also comply with all provisions of the law enforcement standards board in regard to background investigations. The police chief shall remain adequately informed of the activities of the department and shall be assured that the duties of subordinates are properly discharged. The police chief shall formulate procedures for recognizing outstanding performance by department members, for investigating complaints of misconduct by any department member and for taking appropriate disciplinary action subject to the provisions of the applicable statutes, rules of the department and the jurisdiction of the police committee. 
(Code 1988, § 5-1-6; Code 1998, § 58-29) 
Sec. 38-23. - Civilians to assist. 
    All persons in the village, when called upon by any police officer or peace officer, shall promptly aid and assist such officer in the execution of the officer's duties. Whoever shall neglect or refuse to give such aid or assistance shall be subject to the general penalty as provided in section 1-32. 
(Code 1988, § 5-1-8; Code 1998, § 58-30) 
Secs. 38-24-38-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POLICE CHIEF 

Sec. 38-50. - Appointment; duties. 
(a)  Appointment. The police chief shall be appointed and removed by the police commission. The chief shall exercise the powers and duties of village marshals and village constables and any other powers and duties prescribed by the village board, village ordinances or state law. Upon a vacancy, the ranking officer shall temporarily replace the chief until the vacancy is filled by the village board. 
(b)  Compensation; employment criteria. The compensation to be paid the police chief for services, the hours of active duty, rest days, vacation periods and other involvement of the chief's employment shall be such as may be determined by the village board from time to time. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-5(a); Code 1998, § 58-61) 
State Law reference- Removal of officers, Wis. Stats. § 61.65(1)(am). 
Sec. 38-51. - Responsibilities. 
(a)  Duties. In addition to the duties imposed upon the police chief elsewhere in this Code, the police chief shall: 
(1)  Have command, general administration and control of the police department and be responsible for the department's government, efficiency and general good conduct. The chief shall perform all duties prescribed by state laws and village ordinances and shall obey all lawful orders of the village board or its designee. 
(2)  Cause the public peace to be preserved and may arrest and with reasonable diligence take before the proper court every person found in the village engaged in any disturbance of the peace or in violation of any state law or village ordinance. The chief shall cooperate with other law enforcement officers in the arrest or apprehension of any person charged with a crime. 
(3)  Cause to be maintained accurate records of complaints, crimes, traffic accidents, ordinance violations, arrests, summons, incidents, and calls for police service and provide a system of periodic summary and analysis to ensure the most efficient and effective deployment and use of the department's resources. The police chief shall submit or cause to be submitted to the various agencies such reports and summaries as are required by state statutes or village ordinances and shall participate in voluntary programs designed to improve law enforcement and public safety. 
(4)  Submit such reports and comply with such administrative procedures as may be prescribed by the village board relative to fiscal and administrative matters. 
(5)  Submit such reports and information and comply with such policies as may be prescribed by the village board. 
(6)  Have control of the assignment, hours of duty, and transfer of all members of the department. 
(7)  Plan, organize, staff, direct, and control all of the human and material resources of the department for the most effective and efficient discharge of its duty to protect persons and property, preserve the peace, protect the rights of citizens and enforce the state statutes and the village ordinances as are within its jurisdiction. The chief shall supervise the preparation and presentation of annual reports and budgets for the police department and be required to certify to the correctness of all bills incurred by the department. 
(8)  Strive to maintain suitable, productive relationships with other village departments and with other governmental agencies and private organizations concerned with law enforcement, crime prevention, administration of justice and public safety. The chief shall cooperate and exchange information with other village departments in matters relating to their various functions. 
(9)  Plan and execute programs designed to prevent and repress crime, apprehend and prosecute offenders, recover property, and regulate noncriminal conduct, giving highest priority in the allocation of resources to crime and other offenses most hazardous to life and property. 
(b)  Custody of department equipment. The police chief shall be the custodian of all village property, equipment and supplies under the control of or used by the police department and shall be responsible for the care, maintenance, safeguarding and accurate records of such property, equipment, and supplies. 
(c)  Custody of department property. The police chief shall be the custodian of all property of the police department and shall be responsible for the safekeeping, lawful disposition and accurate record of such. The police chief shall see that all property is returned to its lawful owner or otherwise disposed of according to the applicable statutes. 
(Code 1988, §§ 2-3-5(a), (b), 5-1-4; Code 1998, § 58-62) 
Sec. 38-52. - Training of members of department. 
    The police chief is responsible for the training of all members of the police department. The chief shall cause adequate and progressive programs of training to be organized and conducted to prepare department members in the knowledge, procedures, and techniques of their duties and responsibilities. The chief will ensure that, within budgetary limitations, members of the department attend training courses, seminars, and conferences necessary to maintain and improve their job skills and professional knowledge. The chief shall encourage department members to further their education in law enforcement through study, special courses, college attendance, extension programs, and independent readings. 
(Code 1988, § 5-1-7; Code 1998, § 58-63) 
Chapter 42 - LIBRARY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal libraries, Wis. Stats. § 43.52. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIBRARY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Library board, Wis. Stats. § 43.54. 

Sec. 42-19. - Organization; terms; quorum. 
(a)  There is created, pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 43, a municipal library board for the village consisting of seven members. Membership shall consist of one village trustee and six citizens appointed as provided in Wis. Stats. § 43.54. 
(b)  Terms of such members shall be as provided in Wis. Stats. § 43.54. The trustee member shall be appointed annually by the village president, subject to confirmation by the village board. The village president shall appoint as one of the library board members the school district administrator or the school district administrator's representative to represent the public school district in which the library is located. 
(c)  A quorum shall be as provided in Wis. Stats. § 43.54 
(d)  As soon as practicable after the first appointments, at a date and place fixed by the appointing officer, and annually thereafter, within 30 days after the time designated in this section for the beginning of terms, the members of the library board shall organize by election from among their number a president and such other officers that they deem necessary to prescribe and adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the library. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-5(a); Code 1998, § 62-26; Ord. No. 11-3, § 1, 5-16-2011) 
Sec. 42-20. - Duties and powers. 
    The library board shall have the duties and powers as prescribed by Wis. Stats. ch. 43, and more particularly set forth in Wis. Stats. § 43.58. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-5(b); Code 1998, § 62-27) 
Chapter 46 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Offenses against state laws subject to forfeiture. 
    All offenses or crimes provided for in the state statutes that are not felonies are hereby adopted by reference and shall be a violation of this Code. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of such statutes are intended to be made part of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 11-1-1; Code 1998, § 66-1; Ord. of 12-20-1993, § 1; Ord. No. 06-10, § 1, 10-16-2006; Ord. No. 11-15, § 1, 10-17-2011) 
State Law reference- Crimes generally, Wis. Stats. ch. 954 et seq. 
Secs. 46-2-46-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST GOVERNMENTAL ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 46-21. - Failure to obey lawful order of police. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey the direction or order of a police officer while such police officer is acting in an official capacity in carrying out such police officer's duties. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-13; Code 1998, § 66-31) 
Secs. 46-22-46-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 46-46. - Penalties. 
    In addition to the general penalty in section 1-32 or any other penalty imposed for violation of any section of this article, any person who shall cause physical damage to or destroy any public property shall be liable for the cost of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed property. The parent of any unemancipated minor child who violates Wis. Stats. § 943.01(1) may also be held liable for the cost of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed property in accordance with state law. Nothing in this Code shall prevent the police department from referring violation of this article to the district attorney's office in the interest of justice. 
(Code 1988, § 11-3-11; Code 1998, § 66-64) 
Sec. 46-47. - Littering. 
(a)  Prohibited generally. No person shall throw any glass, refuse or waste, filth or other litter upon the streets, alleys, highways, public parks or other property of the village or upon property within the village owned by the Waunakee School District or any private person or upon the surface of any body of water within the village. 
(b)  Litter from conduct of commercial enterprise. 
(1)  Scope. This subsection shall apply to all sales, promotions and other commercial ventures that result in litter being deposited on any street, alley or other public way. 
(2)  Cleanup by operator. Any person carrying on an enterprise that results in litter being deposited on any street, alley or other public way shall clean up the litter within 12 hours of the time the litter is deposited or immediately if such litter or debris presents a traffic or safety hazard. If any such litter is subject to being blown about, it shall be picked up immediately. If any such litter is likely to attract animals or vermin, such litter shall be picked up immediately. 
(3)  Cleanup by village. If any person fails to pick up any litter as required by subsection (b)(2) of this section within the time specified, the village shall arrange to have the litter picked up by village crews or by private enterprise. The entire expense of picking up such litter, together with an additional charge of 20 percent for administrative expenses, shall be charged to the person who did the littering, in accordance with law. If such sum is not promptly paid, steps shall be taken, with the advice of the village attorney's office, to collect the charges. This charge shall be in addition to any forfeiture or other penalty for violation of this section. 
(c)  Dumping refuse and grass in gutters. No person shall deposit any refuse, leaves or grass clippings in any gutter along any public street, road, alley or highway. 
(d)  Handbills. 
(1)  Scattering prohibited. It shall be unlawful to deliver any handbill or advertising material to any premises in the village unless it is being handed to the recipient, placed on the porch, stoop or entranceway of the building or firmly affixed to a building so as to prevent any such article from being blown about, becoming scattered or in any way causing litter. 
(2)  Papers in public places. It shall be unlawful to leave any handbill, advertising material or newspaper unattended in any street, alley, public building or other public place, provided that this shall not prohibit the sale of newspapers in vending machines. 
(3)  Advertisements upon public or private property. No person shall place any advertisement upon any public property or any street, alley or public ground or upon any private property situated and fixed in any street, alley or public ground or upon any other private property, without the permission of the owner thereof, but this subsection shall not apply to the posting of notices required by law. 
(Code 1988, § 11-3-2; Code 1998, § 66-61) 
State Law reference- Littering, Wis. Stats. § 287.21. 
Secs. 46-48-46-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY 

Sec. 46-70. - Throwing or shooting arrows, stones and other missiles; discharge firearms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or throw by any means any dangerous missile, object, arrow, stone, snowball or other missile within the village. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  The discharge of weapons at lawfully established archery and shooting ranges; or 
(2)  The use of bow and arrows as provided in section 46-160. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-4; Code 1998, § 66-91) 
Sec. 46-71. - Loitering. 
    No person shall loiter or prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of a police officer or peace officer, refuses to identify oneself or manifestly endeavors to conceal oneself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impracticable, a police officer or peace officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting identification and an explanation for such presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the police officer or peace officer did not comply with the preceding sentence or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and, if believed by the police officer or peace officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-8; Code 1998, § 66-92) 
Sec. 46-72. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Noise made with motor vehicle. No driver of any vehicle, including motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles and bicycles, shall cause, by excessive and unnecessary acceleration, the tires of such vehicle or cycle to spin and emit loud noises or to unnecessarily throw stones or gravel, nor shall such driver cause to be made by excessive and unnecessary acceleration any loud noise as would disturb the public peace. 
(b)  Defecating or urinating in public places. It shall be unlawful for any person to defecate or urinate outside of designed sanitary facilities; upon any sidewalk, street, alley, public parking lot, park, playground, cemetery or other public area within the village; upon any private property in open view of the public; in the halls, stairways or elevators of public or commercial buildings. 
(Code 1988, §§ 10-1-40, 11-2-10(c); Code 1998, § 66-93) 
Sec. 46-73. - Controlled substances. 
(a)  Possession generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a controlled substance contrary to the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Wis. Stats. ch. 961. 
(b)  Possession of marijuana. No person shall possess an amount of marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol or any derivative thereof, unless the substance was obtained directly from or pursuant to a valid prescription or order of a licensed physician or pharmacist for a valid medical purpose. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-11; Code 1998, § 66-94; Ord. No. 00-7, § 2, 3-6-2000) 
State Law reference- Controlled substances, Wis. Stats. ch. 961. 
Sec. 46-74. - Unauthorized presence on school property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, to be present in, loiter or enter into any public school building, school parking lot or on any public school grounds without the permission of the school principal, custodian or other person in charge thereof between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on official school days. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Students regularly enrolled in public schools who have not been properly ordered by the school principal, custodian or other person in charge thereof to leave the school building or school grounds. 
(2)  Persons coming into the school building or school grounds for the purpose of attending scheduled school or civic functions or making use of the recreational facilities located upon or within school premises. However, as to such attendance or use, this exception shall apply only to the portion of the premises on which facilities are located and during the hours such facilities are specifically open to the general public or an invited portion thereof. 
(3)  Parents or legal guardians of a regularly enrolled student. However, such parent or legal guardian may be required to register at the school office. 
(c)  The exceptions set forth in subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to any person who, while in a school building or on school grounds, commits or attempts to commit any act prohibited by statute or ordinance. 
(d)  All entrances to the school buildings shall be posted with a notice stating, "Entry into school building by unauthorized persons prohibited." All school grounds shall be posted with a notice stating, "Entry upon school grounds by unauthorized persons prohibited." 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-12; Code 1998, § 66-95) 
Sec. 46-75. - Storage of polluting substances. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to store any potentially polluting substances unless such substances are stored in such manner as to securely prevent them from escaping onto the ground surface or into any street, sewer, ditch or drainageway, lake or stream within the jurisdiction of the village. 
(Code 1988, § 8-2-2; Code 1998, § 66-96) 
Sec. 46-76. - Private alarm systems. 
(a)  Permits. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (a)(2) of this section, a permit is required for each private alarm system on premises within the village. There shall be a permit fee in the amount established by resolution. 
(2)  A permit is not required for an alarm system which gives visual or audible signals, solely within the interior of the building in which it is located. 
(3)  Application for a permit required under this section shall be filed with the village. The village shall prescribe the form of the application and request such information as is necessary to evaluate and act upon the permit application. 
(4)  The village shall issue permits and collect fines under this section. The village shall deny a permit if the alarm system for which it is sought does not comply with this section. 
(5)  Any person, business, corporation or other entity ("person") required by this section to have a permit, who has been denied such a permit by the village, shall have the right to appeal that decision to the village board through the procedure described in subsection (e)(3) of this section. 
(b)  Direct connections to the police department. Unless authorized pursuant to the direct connection policies of each department, copies of which are on file with the village and fire chief, and a permit has been issued, direct connections to the police or fire department are prohibited. 
(c)  Testing. 
(1)  Alarm systems designed to transmit emergency messages, either through an intermediate service or directly to the police department, shall not be tested or demonstrated without prior notification and approval of the police department dispatcher. The tester will be advised on proper test procedures. 
(2)  The police department may inspect or test on-site alarm systems issued a permit under this section. 
(3)  Alarm systems shall be in compliance with all pertinent policies of the police department. 
(d)  Fee for false alarms. 
(1)  False alarms that require response of public safety personnel involve unnecessary expense to the village, increases the risk of injury to persons or damage to property, and dilutes the overall public safety protection to the village. Such false alarms constitute a public nuisance. 
(2)  No person shall intentionally cause the activation of an alarm device knowing that no criminal activity, fire or other emergency exists, unless authorized under this subsection (d). 
(3)  Any person having an alarm system shall pay to the village a charge for false alarms responded to by the police or fire department. Each false alarm shall be recorded according to location of the device. Every calendar year a separate record shall be kept of false alarms for criminal activity and false alarms for fire or other emergencies at each location. Charges shall be as established by resolution. This subsection is intended to impose strict liability on persons having an alarm connection to the police department or to an intermediate service. It shall apply regardless of the cause of the false alarm. Failure to pay charges imposed by this subsection shall constitute a violation of this subsection, and unpaid charges shall be collectible as forfeitures upon prosecution and conviction for failure to pay such charges. Any person violating this section through any act or omission for which a forfeiture has not been imposed by this section, shall be subject to forfeiture as provided in section 1-32. 
(4)  When any premises located in the village is owned, leased or occupied by two or more persons as joint tenants, tenants in common, joint lessees, or in any other manner, each person shall see that the provisions of this section are complied with, and each person is jointly and severally liable for the charges pursuant to subsection (d)(3) of this section. 
(5)  Upon nonpayment of the charges imposed under subsection (d)(3) of this section, the amount due may be placed on the tax roll as a special assessment pursuant to law. 
(e)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Before a permit issued pursuant to this section may be revoked, a hearing shall be held before the village. Notice setting forth the time, place and nature of the hearing shall be sent by mail or delivered to the permittee at the address shown on the permit application not less than seven days prior to the hearing. 
(2)  The village may revoke a permit on the following grounds: 
a.  The application for a permit contains a false statement of a material fact. 
b.  A licensee has repeatedly failed to comply with the provisions of this section. 
c.  An alarm system repeatedly activates false alarms. 
(3)  Any person may appeal any decision of the village under this section by filing a written notice of appeal with the village within ten days after the decision. Such appeal shall be heard by the village board within 30 days after filing the appeal. The village board may affirm, amend or reverse the decision or take other action deemed appropriate. An appeal timely taken for revocation of a permit suspends the revocation until the village board gives its decision. The village shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant by certified mail or personal delivery not less than seven days before the hearing. In conducting the hearing, the village board shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. 
(f)  Notification. When an alarm business becomes aware that its service to its subscribers is disrupted for any reason, whether or not by fault of the alarm business, it shall promptly notify its subscribers, by telephone, that protection is not currently being provided. If, however, the alarm business has written instructions from its subscriber not to make such notification by telephone during certain hours, the alarm business may comply with such instruction. 
(g)  Village liability. The village shall be under no duty or obligation to a subscriber or to any other person concerning any provision of this section, including, but not limited to, any defects in an alarm system or any delays in transmission or response to any alarm; however, this in no way shall be construed to mean that it is not the proper function of law enforcement to respond to alarms. 
(Code 1998, § 66-97; Ord. No. 00-5, § 1, 2-21-2000) 
Sec. 46-77. - Possession, manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia. 
    It is unlawful for any person to violate Wis. Stats. § 961.573(1), (2) and 961.574(1), (2) or 961.575(1), (2), which provisions are hereby adopted by reference. Any person who this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture under section 1-32, and, for violations by person under the age of 17, the penalties available under Wis. Stats. ch. 938. 
(Code 1988, § 11-5-9; Code 1998, § 66-98; Ord. No. 96-8, § 1, 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 00-7, § 1, 3-6-2000; Ord. No. 06-10, § 3, 10-16-2006) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Wis. Stats. § 66.0107(1)(bp). 
Secs. 46-78-46-97. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MINORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-98. - Village jurisdiction over juveniles. 
(a)  Adoption of state statutes. The provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 938.02 and 938.17(2) are adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. 
(b)  Complaints and prosecution of juveniles. Subject to the provisions and limitations of Wis. Stats. § 938.17(2), complaints alleging a violation of any section of this Code against a juvenile may be brought on behalf of the village and may be prosecuted utilizing the same procedures in such case as are applicable to adults charged with the same offense. 
(c)  Incarceration as penalty. The court shall not impose incarceration as a penalty for any person convicted of an offense prosecuted under this section. 
(Code 1988, § 11-5-5; Code 1998, § 66-126; Ord. No. 96-8, § 1, 9-3-1996) 
Sec. 46-99. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Citation process. For violations of sections 46-98 and 46-101, juveniles may be cited by the citation process on a form approved by the village. The citation shall contain on the reverse side the penalties that the juvenile may receive simultaneously with issuing the citation to the juvenile. A carbon copy will be mailed to the parent or legal guardian. 
(b)  Penalties. Violations of sections 46-98 and 46-101 by a person under the age of 17 shall be punishable according to Wis. Stats. §§ 938.17(2), 938.343 and 938.344. Nothing in this section shall prevent the juvenile officer, in such officer's discretion, from referring cases directly to the district attorney's office. 
(Code 1988, § 11-5-6; Code 1998, § 66-127; Ord. No. 96-8, § 1, 9-3-1996) 
Sec. 46-100. - Truancy. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Acceptable excuse means an acceptable excuse under Wis. Stats. § 118.15 and Wis. Stats. § 118.16(4). 
    Habitual truant means a pupil who is absent from school without an acceptable excuse for part or all of five or more days on which school is held during a school semester. 
    Operating privilege has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(40). 
    Prohibited conduct means a person under 18 years of age is prohibited from being a truant or a habitual truant. 
    Truant means a pupil who is absent from school without an acceptable excuse for part or all of any day on which school is held during a school semester. 
(b)  Penalties. 
(1)  Parent or guardian liability for truancy. 
a.  Unless the child is excepted or excused under Wis. Stats. § 118.15 or has graduated from high school, any person having under control a child who is between the ages of six and 18 years shall cause the child to attend school regularly during the full period of hours, religious holidays excepted, that the public or private school in which the child should be enrolled is in session until the end of the school term, quarter or semester of the school year in which the child becomes 18 years of age. 
b.  A person found to have violated subsection (b)(1)a. of this section, after evidence is provided by a school official that the activities under Wis. Stats. § 118.16(5) have been completed, shall be subject to a forfeiture of up to $500.00. 
c.  Subsection (b)(1)b. of this section does not apply to a person who has been sanctioned under Wis. Stats. § 49.26(1)(h), nor does it apply if the person provides that he is unable to comply with subsection (b)(1)a. of this section because of the disobedience of the child. 
(2)  Child liability for truancy. 
a.  Upon a finding that a person is a truant, the court may enter an order making one or more of the following dispositions: 
1.  Order the person to attend school. 
2.  Impose a forfeiture of not more than $50.00 plus costs for a first violation, or a forfeiture of not more than $100.00 plus costs for any second or subsequent violation committed within 12 months of a previous violation, subject to Wis. Stats. § 938.37 and subject to a maximum cumulative forfeiture amount of not more than $500.00 for all violations committed during a school semester. All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be assessed against the person, the parent or guardian of the person, or both. 
3.  Order the person to report to a youth report center after school, in the evening, on weekends, on other nonschool days, or at any other time that the person is not under immediate adult supervision, for participation in the social, behavioral, academic, community service, and other programming of the center. Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g) applies to any community service work performed by a person under this subsection. 
b.  Upon a finding that a person is a habitual truant, the court may enter an order making one or more of the following dispositions: 
1.  Suspend the person's motor vehicle operating privilege for not less than 30 days nor more than one year. The court shall immediately take possession of the suspended license and forward it to the department of transportation together with a notice stating the reason for and duration of the suspension. 
2.  Order the person to participate in counseling or a supervised work program or other community service work as described in Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g). The costs of any such counseling, supervised work program or other community service work may be assessed against the person, the parents or guardian of the person, or both. Any county department, community agency, public agency or nonprofit charitable organization administering a supervised work program or other community service work to which a person is assigned pursuant to an order under this subsection acting in good faith has immunity from any civil liability in excess of $25,000.00 for any act or omission by or impacting on that person. 
3.  Order the person to remain at home except during hours in which the person is attending religious worship or a school program, including travel time required to get to and from the school program or place of worship. The order may permit a person to leave his home if the person is accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
4.  Order the person to attend an educational program under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(7d). 
5.  Order the department of workforce development to revoke, under Wis. Stats. § 103.72, a permit under Wis. Stats. § 103.70 authorizing the employment of the person. 
6.  Order the person to be placed in a teen court program if all of the following conditions apply: 
(i)  The chief judge of the judicial administrative district has approved a teen court program established in the person's county of residence and the judge determines that participation in the teen court program will likely benefit the person and the community. 
(ii)  The person admits or pleads no contest in open court, with the person's parent, guardian or legal custodian present, to the allegations that the person violated the municipal ordinance enacted under Wis. Stats. § 118.163(2). 
(iii)  The person has not successfully completed participation in a teen court program during the two years before the date of the alleged municipal ordinance violation. 
7.  Order the person to attend school. 
8.  Impose a forfeiture of not more than $500.00 plus costs, subject to Wis. Stats. § 938.37. All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be assessed against the person, the parent or guardian of the person, or both. 
9.  Order the person to comply with any other reasonable conditions that are consistent with this subsection, including a curfew, restrictions as to going to or remaining on specified premises and restrictions on associating with other juveniles or adults. 
10.  Place the person under formal or informal supervision, as described in Wis. Stats. § 938.34(2), for up to one year. 
11.  Order the person to report to a youth report center after school, in the evening, on weekends, on other nonschool days, or at any other time that the juvenile is not under immediate adult supervision, for participation in the social, behavioral, academic, community service, and other programming of the center. Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g) applies to any community service work performed by a person under this subsection. 
12.  Order the person's parent, guardian or legal custodian to participate in counseling at the parent's, guardian's or legal custodian's own expense or to attend school with the person, or both. 
(c)  Orders against parent, guardian or legal custodian. No order requiring payments to be made by any parent, guardian or legal custodian under subsections (b)(2)a.2., (b)(2)b.2., or (c)(2)b.8. of this section may be entered until the parent, guardian or legal custodian is given an opportunity to be heard on the contemplated order of the court. The court shall cause notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing to be served on the parent, guardian or legal custodian personally at least ten days before the date of the hearing. The procedure in these cases shall, as far as practicable, be the same as in other cases to the court. At the hearing, the parent, guardian or legal custodian may be represented by counsel and may produce and cross-examine witnesses. Any parent, guardian or legal custodian who fails to comply with any order issued by a court under subsections (b)(2)a.2., (b)(2)b.2., or (b)(2)b.10. of this section may be proceeded against for contempt of court. 
(d)  School attendance. If school attendance under subsection (b)(2)a.1. or (b)(2)b.7. of this section is a condition of an order under subsections (b)(2)a. or (b)(2)b. of this section, the order shall specify what constitutes a violation of the condition and shall direct the school board of the school district, or the governing body of the private school, in which the person is enrolled to notify the court or, if the person is under the supervision of an agency under subsection (b)(2)b.10. of this section, the agency that is responsible for supervising the person within five days after any violation of the condition by the person. 
(e)  Prerequisites for conviction of compulsory school attendance violations. No parent or other person having control of a child may be found guilty of violating this section, unless appropriate personnel of the school or school district in which the child is enrolled have, within one year prior to the commencement of prosecution under this section, done all of the following: 
(1)  Met with the pupil's parent or guardian to discuss the pupil's truancy, or attempted to do so and had been refused; 
(2)  Provided an opportunity for educational counseling to the pupil to determine whether a change in the curriculum would resolve the pupil's truancy and considered curriculum modifications under Wis. Stats. § 118.15(1)(d); 
(3)  Evaluated the pupil to determine whether learning problems may be a cause of the pupil's truancy and, if so, taken steps to overcome the learning problems; and 
(4)  Conducted an evaluation to determine whether social problems may be a cause of the pupil's truancy and, if so, taken appropriate action or made appropriate referrals. 
(Code 1988, § 11-5-7; Code 1998, §§ 66-128, 66-129; Ord. of 12-20-1993, §; Ord. No. 96-8, § 1, 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 06-10, § 2, 10-16-2006; Ord. No. 13-12, 10-7-2013) 
State Law reference- Truancy ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 118.163. 
Sec. 46-101. - Purchase or possession of tobacco products. 
    The provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 254.92, 134.66 and 778.25(1)(a) are adopted by reference and incorporated in this section. 
(Code 1988, § 11-5-8; Code 1998, § 66-130; Ord. No. 96-8, § 1, 9-3-1996) 
Sec. 46-102. - Unlawful sheltering of minors. 
(a)  No person shall intentionally shelter or conceal a person under the age of 18 who is: 
(1)  A runaway minor, meaning a person under the age of 18 who has run away from such person's parent, guardian or legal or physical custodian; or 
(2)  A juvenile who may be taken into custody pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 938.19. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section applies when the following conditions are present: 
(1)  The person knows or should have known that the minor is a person described in either subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  The minor has been reported to a law enforcement agency as a missing person or as a minor described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  A person who shelters or conceals a minor at the request or with the consent of the minor's parent, guardian or legal or physical custodian, except if the sheltering or concealment violates Wis. Stats. § 946.71 or 946.715; or 
(2)  A person who immediately notifies a law enforcement agency, county department of public welfare or social services, or the intake worker of the court exercising jurisdiction under Wis. Stats. § 48.01 et seq. or Wis. Stats. § 938.01 et seq., that such person is sheltering or concealing such minor and provides the person or agency notified with all information requested. 
(Code 1988, § 11-5-10; Code 1998, § 66-132; Ord. No. 96-8, § 1, 9-3-1996) 
Secs. 46-103-46-132. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW 

Sec. 46-133. - Established. 
    It shall be unlawful for any juvenile under 16 years of age to be on foot, bicycle or in any type of vehicle on any public street, avenue, highway, road, alley, park, school grounds, swimming beach, cemetery, playground, public building or any other public place in the village between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless accompanied by such juvenile's parent or guardian or person having lawful custody and control of such person or unless there exists a reasonable necessity therefor. The fact that the juvenile, unaccompanied by parent, guardian or other person having legal custody, is found upon any such public place during the hours mentioned in this section shall be prima facie evidence that the juvenile is there unlawfully and that no reasonable excuse exists therefor. 
(Code 1988, § 11-5-1(a); Code 1998, § 66-161) 
Sec. 46-134. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This division shall not apply to a juvenile: 
(1)  Who is performing an errand as directed by such juvenile's parent, guardian or person having lawful custody. 
(2)  Who is on such juvenile's own premises or in the areas immediately adjacent thereto. 
(3)  Whose employment makes it necessary to be upon the streets, alleys or public places or in any motor vehicle during such hours. 
(4)  Who is attending or returning home from a supervised school, church or civic function. 
(5)  Who is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of speech, assembly, or exercise of religion. 
(6)  Who is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for travel. 
(b)  The exceptions in subsection (a) of this section shall not, however, permit a juvenile to unnecessarily loiter about the streets, alleys or public places or be in a parked motor vehicle on the public streets. 
(Code 1988, § 11-5-1(b); Code 1998, § 66-162) 
Sec. 46-135. - Parental responsibility. 
    It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the lawful care, custody and control of any juvenile under 16 years of age to allow or permit such juvenile to violate sections 46-133 or 46-134. The fact that prior to the present offense a parent, guardian or custodian was informed by any law enforcement officer of a separate violation of this division occurring within 30 days of the present offense shall be prima facie evidence that such parent, guardian or custodian allowed or permitted the present violation. Any parent, guardian or custodian who shall have made a missing person notification to the police department shall not be considered to have allowed or permitted any juvenile under 16 years of age to violate this division. 
(Code 1988, § 11-5-1(c); Code 1998, § 66-163) 
Sec. 46-136. - Responsibility of places of amusement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating or in charge of any place of amusement, entertainment, refreshment or other place of business to permit any minor under 16 years of age to loiter, loaf or idle in such place during the hours prohibited by this division. Whenever the owner or person in charge or in control of any place of amusement, entertainment, refreshment or other place of business during the hours prohibited by this division shall find a juvenile under 16 years of age loitering, loafing or idling in such place of business, the owner or person in charge shall immediately order such juvenile to leave. If such juvenile refuses to leave the place of business, the operator shall immediately notify the police department and inform the police of the violation. 
(Code 1988, § 11-5-1(d); Code 1998, § 66-164) 
Sec. 46-137. - Detaining juvenile. 
    Law enforcement officers are authorized to detain any juvenile violating this division until such time as the parent, guardian or person having legal custody of the juvenile shall be immediately notified and the person so notified shall as soon as reasonably possible thereafter report to the police department for the purpose of taking custody of the juvenile and shall sign a release for the juvenile, or such juvenile may be taken directly from the scene of the apprehension to such juvenile's home. If such juvenile's parents or relative living nearby cannot be contacted to take custody of such juvenile and it is determined by the apprehending officer that the juvenile's physical or mental condition is such as would require immediate attention, the police officer may make such necessary arrangements as may be necessary under the circumstances for the juvenile's welfare. 
(Code 1988, § 11-5-1(e); Code 1998, § 66-165) 
Sec. 46-138. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any parent, guardian or person having legal custody of a juvenile described in sections 47-133 through 47-137 who has been warned in the manner provided in section 46-135 and who thereafter violates any of the sections of this division shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-32. After a second violation within a six-month period, if the defendant, in a prosecution under this division, proves that such defendant is unable to comply with this division because of the disobedience of the child, the action shall be dismissed and the child shall be referred to the court assigned to exercise jurisdiction under Wis. Stats. § 938.01 et seq. 
(b)  Any minor juvenile under 16 years of age who shall violate this division shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Wis. Stats. § 938.343. 
(Code 1988, § 11-5-1(f); Code 1998, § 66-166; Ord. No. 96-8, § 1, 9-3-1996) 
Secs. 46-139-46-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WEAPONS 

Sec. 46-160. - Firearms and explosives. 
(a)  Definition. For purposes of this section, the term "firearm" means any instrumentality from or with which a shot, bullet or pellet may be discharged or expelled, regardless of whether the propelling force is provided by air, spring or other similar mechanical device, or gunpowder. 
(b)  Discharge and possession of firearms. No person, except a police officer or other law enforcement officer in the performance of an official duty, shall fire or discharge any firearm, rifle, spring gun, air gun or pneumatic pellet gun of any description or any bow and arrow within the village nor shall any person have any rifle, spring gun, air gun or pneumatic pellet gun or bow and arrow in such person's possession or under such person's control unless it is unloaded and enclosed or encased within a carrying case or other suitable container pursuant to state law. 
(c)  Shooting into village limits. No person shall, in the territory adjacent to the village, discharge any firearm in such manner that the discharge shall enter or fall within the village. 
(d)  Shooting ranges. This section shall not prevent the maintenance and use of duly supervised rifle or pistol ranges or shooting galleries as provided in chapter 133. 
(e)  Explosive devices. No person shall discharge or detonate any dynamite, nitroglycerin or other explosive within the village without first obtaining a permit from the village board. 
(f)  Hunting prohibited. 
(1)  No person shall enter upon any land owned or leased by the village for the purpose of hunting. 
(2)  A person shall not hunt with a bow and arrow or crossbow within 100 yards, from a building located on another person's land. This subsection does not apply if the person who owns the land on which the building is located allows the hunter to hunt within 100 yards of the building. 
(3)  A person who hunts with a bow and arrow or crossbow shall discharge the arrow or bolt from the respective weapon toward the ground. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-1; Code 1998, § 66-196) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 29.038(3)(b)3; local regulation of hunting, Wis. Stats. § 167.31; local firearms ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0409. 
Sec. 46-161. - Certain weapons prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Churkin means a round throwing knife consisting of several sharp points protruding from a rounded disc. 
    Nunchuk or nunchaku means an instrument consisting of two or more sticks, clubs or rods connected by a rope, cord, wire or chain. 
    Sucbai means a short length of wood or metal or similar material which when gripped in the hand protrudes on either side of the fist. Such prohibited instrument may or may not have spikes or short pointed protrusions from either end. 
(b)  No person shall sell, manufacture, purchase, possess or carry a nunchuk, a nunchaku, a churkin or a sucbai or similar weapon within the village. 
(c)  Any such device shall be seized by a law enforcement officer and destroyed or turned over to the state crime laboratory for destruction. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-2(d); Code 1998, § 66-197) 
Sec. 46-162. - Firearms and dangerous weapons in public buildings. 
(a)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 943.13(1m)(c)4., no person shall enter or remain in any part of a building owned, occupied or controlled by the village if the village has notified the person not to enter or remain in the building while carrying a dangerous weapon. 
(b)  The village administrator shall cause signs to be erected at all entrances to all buildings owned, occupied or under the control of the village providing notice that no person is to enter or remain in any such building while carrying a firearm or dangerous weapon. Such signs shall be five inches by seven inches or larger. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the carrying of a dangerous weapon contrary to Wis. Stats. §§ 941.23 or 941.235. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, the term "dangerous weapon" is as defined in Wis. Stats. § 939.22. 
(Code 1998, § 66-199; Ord. No. 11-15, § 2, 10-17-2011) 
Chapter 50 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1-50-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE OF PARKS 

Sec. 50-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Park means and includes all grounds, structures and watercourses which are or may be located within any area dedicated to the public use as a park, parkway, recreation facility or conservancy district in the village. 
(Code 1988, § 12-1-1(a); Code 1998, § 70-27) 
Sec. 50-20. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect the parks, parkways, recreational facilities and conservancy areas within the village from injury, damage or desecration. 
(Code 1988, § 12-1-1(a); Code 1998, § 70-26) 
Sec. 50-21. - Hours of operation; closing and opening dates. 
(a)  Park hours. Except for authorized events and subject to certain exceptions listed in this section, all village parks shall be closed from 10:30 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. the following day, and it shall be unlawful to enter in or be upon any park, playground, or swimming pool after the hour designated. 
(b)  Exceptions to closing hours. Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to a person driving through a park on a public road; however, stopping shall not be permitted within a park. The village board may modify closing hours for particular events. 
(c)  Closing and opening dates. The village board will have full authority to open and close any park, swimming pool, recreational facility or area because of season, condition, construction or when, in the interest of public safety, it is deemed necessary. 
(Code 1988, § 12-1-4; Code 1998, § 70-31; Ord. No. 07-12, § 1, 9-17-2007) 
Sec. 50-22. - Miscellaneous regulations. 
    In addition to other restrictions on park use in this article or in other sections of this Code, the following are specifically prohibited: 
(1)  Sound devices. No person shall operate or play any amplifying system unless specific authority is first obtained from the parks and recreation committee. 
(2)  Pets. Except as provided in Wis. Stats. § 106.52(3)(am): 
a.  No person shall allow pets to enter any public building, picnic shelter/area, ball field or playground, or to run at large at any time in any park, except in designated pet areas. 
b.  Leashed pets shall be allowed on sidewalks, trails and pathways within the parks. All persons shall secure their animal on a leash six feet or shorter in length and maintain their animal under control, meaning connected to a leash held by a person at all times. 
c.  All pet waste must be immediately picked up and disposed of. Bags, scoops or other appropriate implements for the removal of pet waste must be carried by any person bringing a pet onto park property. 
d.  Pets must display current rabies tag and current registration tags. 
e.  This subsection shall not apply to any canine or police work dog that is assisting the village police department. 
(3)  Billposting. No person shall post, paste, fasten, paint or attach any placard, bill, notice, sign or advertising matter upon any structure, tree or other natural object in any park, except in accordance with park regulations and other signs authorized by the parks and recreation committee. 
(4)  Removal of park equipment. No person shall remove benches, seats, tables or other park equipment from any park, unless authorized by the parks and recreation committee for specified events. 
(5)  Trapping. No person shall trap in any park unless specific written authority is first obtained from the parks and recreation committee. 
(6)  Fires. No person shall start, tend or maintain a fire, except in personal grills or designated fireplaces. Personal grills shall be used only in designated picnic areas. The use of personal grills is permitted, provided lawns and vegetation are not endangered. Unburned fuel and ashes shall be disposed of in such a manner as to prevent fire or damage to any park property. 
(7)  Motorized vehicles. Except for authorized maintenance vehicles, no person shall operate an unlicensed or licensed motorized vehicle outside of areas specifically designated as parking areas or areas where the operation of such vehicles is specifically permitted. Motor vehicles are restricted to the roads and drives and parking areas. No motor vehicle of any nature may be used on the seeded areas, except for vehicles which have village authorization for shows, rides or exhibits and then only for the purpose of loading and unloading. No person shall operate any off-the-road vehicle, motorcycle, trail bike, all-terrain vehicle, truck or other motorized vehicle in any park, playground or other public ground where pathways or trails have been developed or designated for walking, hiking, jogging, running, bicycling, cross-country skiing, sledding or other pedestrian use. All motorized vehicles are limited to use of roadways specifically for their use and according to other restrictions in this Code. 
(8)  Snowmobiles. No person shall operate a snowmobile in a village park except in designated areas. 
(9)  Speed limit. No person shall operate any vehicle in a village park in excess of 15 mph, unless otherwise posted. 
(10)  Glass beverage bottles. No person shall bring into, carry onto or possess while in any public park glass bottles or glass beverage containers, including those containing or normally used for containing soda water, fermented malt beverages or alcohol. 
(11)  Horseback riding and horse-driven vehicles. No person shall ride a horse or drive a horse-driven vehicle in any park, except on roads or designated bridle paths, unless approval of the parks and recreation committee is first obtained. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse or drive a horse-driven vehicle in a careless, negligent or reckless manner which may endanger the safety and well-being of others. Horseback riding shall be allowed only during the daylight hours. No person shall ride a horse which cannot be held under such control that it may be easily turned or stopped. No horse shall be ridden in a reckless manner. Pedestrians shall have the right-of-way when crossing a bridle path, and whenever groups of people are visible within 300 feet horses shall be ridden at slow gait. 
(12)  Golfing and sporting activities. No golfing or practicing golf in village parks or recreation areas shall be allowed unless a whiffle ball is used. All sporting activities must be held in areas so designated for that purpose. 
(13)  Fish cleaning. Cleaning of fish in shelters, toilet facilities or picnic areas is prohibited in all village parks. 
(14)  Camping. Overnight camping is not permitted in any village park. 
(15)  Utility installation and construction. Any private construction which may in any manner encroach upon or affect the parks and parkways shall be under the direction and jurisdiction of the parks and recreation committee, and no such installation, repair or construction shall commence without the written permission therefor from the parks and recreation committee. All public works, including construction and installation of power lines, hydrants, sewers and the like, shall be commenced only after notice to the board of the village's intention so to do. Where practicable, such construction and installation shall be performed pursuant to recommendations by the board. 
(Code 1988, § 12-1-1(b); Code 1998, § 70-28; Ord. No. 09-10, § 1, 9-21-2009) 
Sec. 50-23. - Radio-controlled model airplanes. 
    No person shall fly a radio-controlled model airplane or helicopter in any park in the village, except in areas specifically designated and posted for such purposes. 
(Code 1988, § 12-1-2; Code 1998, § 70-29) 
Sec. 50-24. - Turf protection on public property. 
    Except as authorized by the parks and recreation committee, no person shall dig into the turf of any village-owned property for any purposes whatsoever or remove any trees or flowers. Absent authorization by the parks and recreation committee, the use of metal detectors and digging for buried objects on village property, except beaches where no vegetation is present, is prohibited. 
(Code 1988, § 12-1-3; Code 1998, § 70-30) 
Sec. 50-25. - Ultralight aircraft. 
(a)  Definition. For the purpose of this section, an ultralight aircraft, vehicle or hang glider is an unpowered or powered aircraft which is not subject to extensive regulation by the Federal Aviation Administration by virtue of its characteristics and which is defined as an ultralight vehicle by 14 CFR 103.1 and which is defined as an ultralight aircraft by Wis. Stats. § 114.195. 
(b)  Regulations regarding use. Operation of an ultralight aircraft shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  No person shall operate any ultralight aircraft within the village in such a manner or in such a location as to endanger or injure any person or property. No person shall operate an ultralight aircraft in the village in violation of any applicable state and federal regulations and standards. No person shall cause an ultralight aircraft to land or to take off from any property without permission of the owner or occupant of the property, provided that an emergency landing may be made to prevent a catastrophe. In landing or taking off from a village public park or other village property, the operator of such ultralight aircraft shall first obtain a permit from the parks and recreation committee. No fee shall be charged by the parks and recreation committee for such permit, which may be issued for a period up to 30 days, nor shall the parks and recreation committee sponsor such activity. 
(2)  Any person desiring to land or to take off from any property owned by the village shall, prior to receiving a permit, procure evidence of insurance providing for not less than $500,000.00 of coverage for each occurrence for damage to property or for personal injury. Evidence of such insurance shall include a certificate of insurance naming the village as an additional insured, and the certificate shall be filed with the village administrator at the time the applicant seeks a permit. 
(Code 1988, § 12-1-5; Code 1998, § 70-32) 
Sec. 50-26. - Reservation of park space. 
(a)  Policy. The village-owned park, park facilities, gazebo and shelter areas are primarily for the nonexclusive use of the residents and visitors of the village. However, under proper circumstances, exclusive use of the park, park facilities, gazebo and shelter areas or parts thereof may be permitted. This section is intended to regulate exclusive use of village-owned parks, park facilities, park shelters or parts thereof in the village to the end that the general welfare of the village is protected. 
(b)  Reservation of park space. A person or group may reserve the use of a park facility, park shelter or gazebo by written application filed with the village administrator for a permit for exclusive use of such. The village administrator shall issue permits for exclusive use of a portion of a park or park shelter, while the village board shall issue permits for the exclusive use of village parks. Park facilities are reserved on a first-requested, first-reserved basis. 
(c)  Application. An application shall be filed with the village administrator at least 14 days prior to the date on which the exclusive use of the entire park is requested or at least three days prior to the date on which a park shelter or a portion of a park is to be used and shall set forth the following information regarding the proposed exclusive use: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  If the exclusive use is proposed for a group, firm, organization, partnership or corporation, the name, address and phone number of the headquarters of such and the responsible and authorized heads or partners of such. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be responsible for the use of the park, area or facility. 
(4)  The date when the exclusive use is requested and the hours of the proposed exclusive date. 
(5)  The anticipated number of persons to use the park, area or facility. 
(6)  Any additional information which the village board finds reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(d)  Deposit. Every applicant for reservation of park space, a gazebo or a shelter for which a permit is required shall pay a fee as established by resolution of the village board to pay for the village's maintenance and cleanup expenses. 
(e)  Action on application. The village board or parks and recreation committee thereof shall act promptly on all applications for permits for exclusive park use (not shelter use) after consulting with the applicant, if necessary. 
(f)  Reasons for denial. An application may be denied for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  It is for a use which would involve a violation of federal or state law or any section of this Code. 
(2)  The granting of the permit would conflict with another permit already granted or for which application is already pending. 
(3)  The application does not contain the information required by subsection (c) of this section. 
(4)  The application is made less than the required days in advance of the scheduled exclusive use. 
(5)  It is for a use of the park or park facility at a date and time when, in addition to the proposed use, anticipated nonexclusive use by others of the park or park facility is expected and would be seriously adversely affected. 
(6)  The law enforcement requirements of the exclusive use will require so large a number of persons as to prevent adequate law enforcement to the park, park facility or shelter area involved or of the rest of the village. 
(7)  The exclusive use will reasonably create a substantial risk of injury to persons or damage to property. 
(8)  The exclusive use is so poorly organized that participants are likely to engage in aggressive or destructive activity. 
(g)  Indemnification. Prior to granting any permit for exclusive use of the park, the village may require the permittee to file evidence of good and sufficient sureties, insurance in force or other evidence of adequate financial responsibility, running to the village and such other third parties as may be injured or damaged, in an amount depending upon the likelihood of injury or damage as a direct and proximate result of the exclusive use sufficient to indemnify the village and such third parties as may be injured or damaged thereby, caused by the permittee, its agents or participants. 
(h)  Exception for village activity. A permit is not required for exclusive use of the park or a park facility sponsored by the village. 
(i)  Permit revocation. The village board or police chief after granting a permit may revoke a permit already issued if it is deemed that such action is justified by an actual or potential emergency due to weather, fire, riot, other catastrophe or likelihood of a breach of the peace or by a major change in the conditions forming the basis of the issuance of the permit. 
(j)  Form of permit. Each permit shall be in a form prescribed by the village board and shall designate the park, park facility or shelter area involved; the date and hours of the exclusive use; the purpose of the exclusive use; and the name of the person or group to which the permit is issued. 
(k)  Special class B fermented malt beverage licenses. When fermented malt beverages are sold at any event authorized by this section, a valid fermented malt beverage license shall be obtained and section 6-5 and Wis. Stats. § 125.04(12) hall be fully complied with. Such license must be held by the person who filed the original license, and it shall be presented to any law enforcement officer upon request. 
(Code 1988, § 12-1-6; Code 1998, § 70-33) 
Chapter 54 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Solid waste generally, Wis. Stats. chs. 287-289. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Deposit of objectionable substances; improper placement. 
(a)  No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any public street or on any public ground or on any private property not such person's own any refuse, garbage, litter, waste material or liquid or any other objectionable material or liquid. When any such material is placed on the person's own private property, it shall be properly enclosed and covered so as to prevent the material from becoming a public nuisance. 
(b)  No person shall deposit, throw, or place any garbage, offal, dead animals, combustible refuse or other deleterious matters in any park, lane, alley, street, public grounds, or public place within the village, nor shall any person place any garbage, offal, dead animals or other refuse matter upon any private property not owned by such person without the consent of the person in charge of such property. If not deemed uncollectible, these materials may be placed for collection on the owner's property if the materials are enclosed in proper vessels or containers which shall be watertight and kept so with tightly fitting covers. 
(Code 1988, §§ 8-1-4, 8-3-19; Code 1998, § 78-1) 
Secs. 54-2-54-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - METROPOLITAN REFUSE DISTRICT BOARD 

Sec. 54-21. - Composition; representation by village. 
    The City of Middleton, the Village of Shorewood Hills and this village comprise the Metropolitan Refuse District, Inc. This village shall be represented on the district board by a citizen at large who is appointed by the village president, subject to confirmation by the village board, for a term of three years. Such person may be a village official. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-6; Code 1998, § 78-31) 
Secs. 54-22-54-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Solid waste reduction, recovery and recycling, Wis. Stats. § 287.07 et seq.; municipal solid waste duties and powers, Wis. Stats. §§ 287.09, 287.10. 

Sec. 54-46. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the Solid Waste Management Ordinance of the village and may be referred to as "this article." 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-1; Code 1998, § 78-61) 
Sec. 54-47. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Collector/hauler means the contractor or entity chosen by the village board to handle, transport, and dispose of the solid waste, recyclables and nonrecyclables generated in the village, or a person contracting with waste generators for these services, and who will enforce preparation standards for recyclable materials as well as ensure community compliance with this source separation recycling program. 
    Commercial waste means waste of whatever material generated by any industrial or business establishment where any trade, occupation, industry or commerce is conducted. 
    Corrugated cardboard means heavy duty Kraft paper packaging material with a corrugated medium between two flat paper liners, and does not include paperboard such as for cereal or laundry detergent boxes or holders for six-packs or 12-packs of beverage cans or bottles. 
    Curb means the back edge of curb and gutter along a paved street or where one would be if the street was paved and had a curb and gutter. 
    Deciduous material means yard wastes such as leaves, grass clippings, flowers and other similar vegetation, but the term specifically excludes sod, dirt, twigs, fruit, vegetables and other similar material. Also included are clean woody vegetative material no greater than six inches in diameter and holiday trees; but not included are tree stumps, extensive root systems or shrubs with intact root balls. 
    Demolition wastes means that portion of solid waste from the repair, remodeling, construction or reconstruction of buildings, such as lumber, roofing and sheathing scraps, rubble, broken concrete, asphalt, plaster, conduit, pipe, wire, insulation, and other materials resulting from the demolition of buildings and improvements. 
    Garbage means discarded materials resulting from the handling, processing, storage and consumption of food. 
    Glass means glass bottles, jars and containers and does not include window glass, drinking glasses, Pyrex, lightbulbs or other noncontainer glass. 
    Hazardous waste or hazardous substance means those wastes or substances defined as such in Wis. Stats. § 291.02 pursuant to authority vested in the state department of natural resources to describe and list materials as such and also includes the meaning of the term "hazardous waste" or "hazardous substance" as described in this section. The term "hazardous waste" or "hazardous substance" also means those solid wastes or substances found in household waste. 
    Household sharp medical waste means any type of product capable of puncturing or lacerating the skin that is designed or used to treat, diagnose, or prevent a disease or medical condition, including but not limited to, scalpels and hypodermic needles. 
    Lead-acid batteries means automotive and related batteries that are comprised of lead plates with an acid electrolyte, and does not include nickel-cadmium batteries, dry cell (flashlight) batteries or batteries used in calculators, watches, hearing aids or similar devices. 
    Major appliance means a residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven, refrigerator, stove, water heater or any other item commonly referred to as a "white good." 
    Metal cans means tin coated steel cans, bimetal cans, and aluminum cans used for food and other nonhazardous materials, but excluding aerosol cans and cans that hold paint, paint-related products, pesticides or other toxic or hazardous substances. 
    Newsprint means that portion of newspapers (newspapers and advertising circulars normally accompanying newspapers) or periodicals and advertising circulars printed on newsprint which remain in substantially original condition at the time of disposal, such that the material is suitable for commercial-grade recycling. The term "newsprint" does not include the paper commonly used in the production of magazines, books, and other physical media for written material or paper that is not suitable for recycling purposes or that is in a state which makes separation unreasonable or unduly expensive, or reasons which include but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The paper has been put to another use, such as wrappings, for other wastes, and is thus rendered unfit for commercial recycling. 
(2)  The paper is no longer flat and folded to the approximate dimensions of its original condition. 
(3)  The paper is mixed in with commercial or municipal litter or refuse as a result of the failure of a citizen or business invitee to separate newspapers from other discarded materials outdoors or in publicly accessible areas of buildings. 
(4)  The paper has been damaged or altered by any other means so as to make recycling impossible or unduly difficult. 
    Nonrecyclable material means all items of waste not recyclable, except hazardous waste or hazardous substances. 
    Other paper means all paper, excluding newsprint materials or materials specifically excepted in the definitions of "newsprint" and "corrugated cardboard," but including grades of fiber materials with available markets for recycling. 
    Oversize and bulky waste means large items such as furniture, mattresses, carpeting, construction or demolition materials of substantial dimensions, brush and other large items whose proportions are not easily reduced. 
    Preparation standards means criteria provided establishing acceptable good-faith limits for introduction of materials into the source separation recycling program involving either transport to a material recycling center or temporary storage of such materials. 
    Recyclable material means identified materials meeting preparation standards and including the following: newspapers; corrugated cardboard; unbroken brown, green and clean container glass; aluminum, bimetal and tin-coated steel cans; blow-molded high density polyethylene and polyethylene terephthalate plastic containers; tires, regardless of size; used oil; lead-acid batteries; and large batteries; and large appliances. The term "recyclable material" further means identified materials meeting preparation standards where economical markets or short-term storage are available and includes the following: other paper, polystyrene foam, polyvinyl chloride containers, polypropylene containers, high density polyethylene and polyethylene terephthalate containers other than bottles, types of plastic containers labeled "other," and other materials determined to have economical markets available. 
    Refuse means combustible and noncombustible materials, including but not limited to: paper products, wood, metal, glass, cloth and products thereof in unrecoverable condition; litter and street rubbish, not including yard waste; uncontaminated ashes; and building materials such as wood, concrete, glass, plaster and other intermixed materials produced in construction or demolition of structures. The term "refuse" shall not include oversize or bulky waste. 
    Residential solid waste means all solid waste that normally originates in a residential environment from residential dwelling units. 
    Residential unit means each living unit in the village designed for permanent living quarters, including single-family dwellings and units in duplexes, triplexes, and multifamily units and each unit in a residential condominium project. 
    Scavenging means the uncontrolled and unauthorized removal of materials at any point in solid waste management. 
    Sharps container means a container specifically manufactured for the disposal of sharp medical waste. 
    Solid waste means garbage, refuse and all other discarded or salvageable solid materials, including solid waste materials, resulting from industrial, commercial and agricultural operations, and from community activities, but does not include solids or dissolved material in wastewater effluents or other common water pollutants. 
    Solid waste storage means safe, environmentally sound short-term containment of materials and for recyclables, which shall involve preserving materials in a condition meeting preparation standards. 
    Tires means, for collection purposes, rubber tires from automobiles and light trucks and other tires whose size is less than 1100 by 24.5, which are removed from rims. 
    Used oil means any contaminated petroleum-derived or synthetic oil, including but not limited to, the following: engine and other mechanical lubricants; hydraulic and transmission fluid; metal-working fluid; and insulating fluid or coolant. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-3; Code 1998, § 78-63) 
Sec. 54-48. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Penalties for offenses. Any person who shall violate any section of this article shall be subject to a penalty, which shall be as follows: 
(1)  First offense. Any person found in violation of any section of this article as a first offender shall receive a warning notice requiring compliance and may be subject to having refuse in violation of any section of this article not collected. 
(2)  Second and subsequent offenses. Any person found guilty of violating any section of this article who has previously been notified of being in violation or who has been convicted of violating the same section within one year shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-32. 
(b)  Other remedies. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this article shall preclude the village from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-23; Code 1998, § 78-83) 
Sec. 54-49. - Purpose; findings. 
(a)  The purpose of this article shall be to maintain and protect public health and sanitation by removal of garbage, rubbish, and other waste material generated in the village; to eliminate dispersal of garbage, waste, and other waste material along the streets, roads, and other public and private properties in and near the village; and to provide a comprehensive village recycling program. 
(b)  The village finds participation in a mandatory source separation recycling program appropriate in this jurisdiction to conserve available, local landfill capacity. The village further finds it appropriate to participate in both countywide and statewide recycling programs to conserve energy, recycle valuable resources and to protect public health, welfare and the environment. The village also finds participation in these programs appropriate to achieve consistency with countywide recycling policies to ensure that the waste generated in the village will be able to be delivered to the county-owned landfills and to the county-owned material recycling facilities. 
(c)  The village board further finds and ordains that: 
(1)  Improper disposal of household sharp medical waste, such as hypodermic needles, poses a significant health risk to workers in the waste disposal industry; 
(2)  Safe disposal of household sharp medical waste is possible through inexpensive, easily obtained means, without posing an undue burden on users of household sharp medical waste; and 
(3)  Removal of household sharp medical waste from the village's waste stream is beneficial to residents of the village as well as the village's waste hauler and users of the county landfills. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-2; Code 1998, § 78-62) 
Sec. 54-50. - Federal and state regulations. 
    It is expected that, from time to time, federal and state statutes and regulations will require that items other than the items which have been deemed to be recyclable in this article shall be recycled. In such event, this article shall be deemed to include and shall require such other items to be recyclable under this article. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-30; Code 1998, § 78-90) 
Sec. 54-51. - Effect of state law or county ordinances. 
    This article shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the state statutes or pertinent county ordinances in their interpretation and application. Because this article creates a comprehensive, mandatory source separation recycling program in the community, any terms or requirements or interpretations consistent with state and county law shall control. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-25; Code 1998, § 78-85) 
Sec. 54-52. - Agricultural operations. 
    Nothing in this article is intended to apply to the disposal or the accumulation of agricultural or farm wastes, products or feed accumulated upon property used in the ordinary course of farming. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-29; Code 1998, § 78-89) 
Sec. 54-53. - Mandatory recycling and applicability of article. 
    This article shall apply to all persons, entities and waste generating activities within the limits of the village and includes, but is not limited to, all waste generated by all residential and commercial activities. No person shall mix with nonrecyclables, for collection by the village's authorized collector, any material except recyclable material and only in such manner as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-4; Code 1998, § 78-64) 
Sec. 54-54. - Preparation and designation of recyclable materials. 
    All recyclable materials shall be separated from other nonrecyclable garbage and refuse. Recyclable materials shall be left for collection by the village's authorized collector/hauler by placing all recyclable materials in the special recycling containers specified by the village or the village's authorized collection service. Recyclable materials shall consist of the following and shall be prepared as follows: 
(1)  Glass. Brown glass, green glass and clear glass shall be empty, rinsed, clean, unbroken, and have metal covers and caps removed. 
(2)  Cans. All aluminum, tin, steel, copper and other metal cans shall be empty, rinsed and shall have labels removed with the ends removed and flattened where possible. However, aerosol, paint and oil cans may not be recycled. 
(3)  Plastic containers. Plastic containers shall be rinsed and shall have any metal or plastic rings/caps removed. Plastic containers with handles left for collection by the village's collection service shall not be tied together and should be placed next to the recycling container. 
(4)  Corrugated cardboard. Corrugated cardboard shall be flattened, empty, free of food debris, bundled in eight-inch or ten-inch bundles, and shall be placed beside the recycling container for collection. Waxed cardboard may not be recycled. 
(5)  Newsprint. All newsprint shall be bundled pursuant to section 54-56. 
(6)  Aluminum. All products made of aluminum, including aluminum cans, foil, wrappers, pie pans, containers for dinners or other foods, screen frames, and lawn chairs shall be cleaned and flattened. 
(7)  Tires. Tires, as defined in section 54-47, shall be less than 1100 by 24.5 in size and removed from rims. 
(8)  Additional materials/standards. Additional preparation standards may be provided by notice to generators of waste and collectors/haulers or by amendment to this section when other materials become recyclable dependent, upon available economic markets. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-5; Code 1998, § 78-65) 
Sec. 54-55. - Nonrecyclable materials designated. 
    Nonrecyclable materials include the following: 
(1)  Glass. All Pyrex glass, window glass, lightbulbs, ceramics, mirrors, broken glass and china shall be considered nonrecyclable. 
(2)  Plastics. Rigid cottage cheese containers, plastic wraps, egg cartons, Melamine-type plastics, and all forms of polystyrene foam shall not be placed with recyclable material, but shall be disposed of in the manner prescribed for other nonrecyclable refuse. 
(3)  Gloss paper. All waxed paper, waxed cardboard, envelopes with gum labels, glossy paper, magazines and envelopes with plastic windows shall be considered nonrecyclable paper. 
(4)  Other materials. All other garbage and refuse not qualifying as recyclable materials shall be considered nonrecyclable. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-6; Code 1998, § 78-66) 
Sec. 54-56. - Newsprint recycling. 
(a)  No person shall dispose of newsprint with nonrecyclable refuse, except for such newsprint rendered unfit for recycling. This subsection shall apply to all persons, governmental operations and business, commercial, retail and industrial enterprises, however organized and of whatever type, if such refuse is to be deposited in a county landfill. 
(b)  Newsprint left for collection and recycling shall be bundled with heavy string or cord, securely tied in both directions, and shall be left beside the recycling container. No newsprint bundled for recycling shall weigh in excess of 25 pounds nor shall such bundle exceed the height of ten inches. Newsprint may be recycled in any other lawful manner. Newsprint shall not be placed in containers with other nonrecyclable refuse or garbage. 
(c)  All garbage, refuse and other nonrecyclable materials shall be collected, removed and disposed of pursuant to the village's agreement with the designated collector/hauler or persons' private agreements with collectors/haulers. Newsprint and other recyclables placed for recycling shall become the property of the village or its authorized collector. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-7; Code 1998, § 78-67) 
Sec. 54-57. - Disposal of nonrecyclable materials. 
(a)  Separation required. Nonrecyclable materials shall be separated from recyclable materials and shall be placed for collection by the village's authorized collector. 
(b)  Materials for nonrecyclable materials. All nonrecyclable materials shall be placed in proper containers or plastic garbage bags not exceeding a capacity of 30 to 40 gallons or a net weight of 50 pounds, and shall be equipped with suitable handles in tightfitting covers and shall be watertight. All refuse material not suitable for placement in containers or bags shall be placed in bundles and broken into sizes small enough to be easily handled. All garbage containers shall be kept in a neat, clean and sanitary condition at all times. All garbage containers for residential units shall be of metal, durable plastic, or other suitable, moisture-resistant materials, including heavy duty refuse disposal plastic bags. Metal garbage cans shall be of sufficient thickness to resist denting during normal handling by collection crews. Plastic garbage bags shall be securely closed and shall consist of plastic materials not damaged by freezing and not susceptible to melting. They shall be capable of being handled during hot and cold weather without damage during normal handling by collection crews. Plastic bags shall be of sufficient strength to allow lifting and loading of contents without tearing. 
(c)  Requirements for multifamily dwellings. Owners of multifamily dwellings shall provide adequate containers for handling and collection of recyclable materials enabling tenants to ensure separation of recyclables and ensuring that recyclables meet preparation standards. The following shall be acceptable means of providing containers: 
(1)  Two containers for each dwelling unit with one container being for glass, metal cans and plastic containers, and the other container being for bundles of corrugated cardboard and newspapers with some special provision for lead-acid batteries and tires. 
(2)  A series of containers for the complex of subunits thereof with unique containers for each type of recyclable to be shared in common by occupants of the multifamily dwelling, not including provisions for major appliances or used oil, with sufficient, separate containers to achieve good faith separation of recyclables based upon size of the multifamily dwelling, and the handling, transportation and processing requirements for the collector/hauler. Containers shall be clearly designated and marked as to the recyclables contained therein, and containers shall be maintained in a clean, safe and watertight condition. Owners of multifamily dwellings shall exercise good faith to ensure that residents and occupants comply with recycling requirements of this article. The owner of a multifamily dwelling shall notify every tenant at the time of renting or leasing the dwelling and semiannually thereafter of the recycling programs provided in this subsection. Additionally, owners of the multifamily dwellings shall provide for the collection of recyclable materials separated from solid waste by tenants and delivery of the recyclables to a material recycling facility when volumes are in excess of the village's collection/hauler contract. 
(d)  Duty to provide containers. It shall be the duty of every occupant, tenant, or proprietor of any residential unit to provide and at all times to keep in a suitable place, readily accessible to the refuse collector, garbage containers capable of holding all garbage which would ordinarily accumulate on such premises between the times of successive collections. The owner of any multiple dwellings shall furnish or require the tenants thereof to furnish proper garbage containers. Garbage containers located at multiple dwellings shall be marked so as to indicate the residential unit to which they belong. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-8; Code 1998, § 78-68) 
Sec. 54-58. - Separation of yard waste for composting; standards for compliance with article. 
(a)  No person shall, by curbside collection, dispose of deciduous materials, such as yard waste, grass clippings and leaves, with other refuse that may be lawfully left for collection. Yard waste, such as grass clippings and leaves, may be brought to a composting site designated by the village, if any. 
(b)  The village board shall prepare regulations, standards and schedules as necessary to make effective all sections of this article. Periodically, upon a schedule adopted by the village, the village board may prepare notices and distribute other information to persons generating waste within the village for the purpose of informing the public about the requirements dictated by this article. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-9; Code 1998, § 78-69) 
Sec. 54-59. - Mandatory chipping of brush and wood materials. 
(a)  No person shall dispose of brush, tree branches or other wood materials with refuse that is to be deposited in any landfill owned by the county or the village unless such material has been reduced and processed by chipping. This subsection shall apply to all persons who, directly or through the services of the village or another third party, dispose of solid wastes at any county-owned or village-owned landfill and includes all persons, governmental operations and business, commercial, retail and industrial enterprises however organized and of whatever type. All other persons (nonresidential), subject to this subsection as county-owned or village-owned landfill users, shall facilitate and provide for chipping of brush and wood materials. 
(b)  All chipped material shall be placed for collection on a date and in such manner as established by the village board. 
(c)  All chipped material placed for collection shall become the property of the village or its collection agent. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-10; Code 1998, § 78-70) 
Sec. 54-60. - Nondisposable materials. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place for regular collection any of the following wastes: 
(1)  Hazardous waste. 
(2)  Toxic waste. 
(3)  Chemicals. 
(4)  Explosives or ammunition. 
(5)  Drain or waste oil or flammable liquids. 
(6)  Large quantities of paint. 
(7)  Dead animals. 
(8)  Trees or stumps. 
(9)  Gravel or concrete. 
(10)  Construction debris. 
(11)  Animal or human waste. 
(12)  White goods, unless as a special haul item. 
(13)  Hot ashes; however, ashes that are fully extinguished and dry may be left for collection in noncombustible containers. 
(14)  Tires. 
(15)  Holiday trees. 
(16)  Bedding and furniture. 
(17)  Appliances. 
(b)  The materials mentioned in subsection (a) of this section shall be disposed of in the manner prescribed by federal or state laws or as provided in this article. 
(c)  Materials that the village collector will dispose of for a separate fee may be disposed of by special arrangement between the waste generator and the village collector. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-11; Code 1998, § 78-71) 
Sec. 54-61. - Hospital, medical wastes. 
(a)  Household sharp medical waste shall not be deposited in any place or manner in the village other than as provided in this section. 
(b)  Acceptable means of disposing of household sharp medical waste include the following: 
(1)  Disposal in an approved medical waste box, such as a sharps container; or 
(2)  Disposal in a heavy plastic container, such as a laundry soap bottle, providing that the lid is permanently affixed thereto using tape or another means, and the container is marked "medical waste: do not open." 
(c)  The village's collector shall refuse to pick up any solid waste or recyclables containing household sharp medical waste not separately contained and prepared as provided in this section. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-12; Code 1998, § 78-72) 
Sec. 54-62. - Building waste. 
    All demolition waste resulting from remodeling, construction, or removal of a building, roadway, or sidewalk shall be disposed of by the owner, builder, or contractor. Building materials of any kind will not be disposed of by the village or its collection service. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-13; Code 1998, § 78-73) 
Sec. 54-63. - Alteration of recyclable materials. 
    It shall be unlawful to intentionally alter recyclable materials so as to render them as nonrecyclable material. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-14; Code 1998, § 78-74) 
Sec. 54-64. - Collection of refuse. 
(a)  Placement for collection. Refuse shall be placed for collection as follows: 
(1)  Residential solid waste shall be accessible to collection crews. Residential solid waste in approved containers shall be placed immediately behind the curb of the public street for collection or containers shall be placed immediately adjacent to the alley if premises abut on an alley. Yard bulky wastes from residential units shall likewise be placed in a neat, orderly fashion behind the curb. During winter months, solid waste shall not be placed on top of the snow bank, nor shall it be placed in the roadway. The owner shall either shovel out an area behind the curb in which to place such wastes or such wastes shall be placed in the owner's driveway. Collection crews will not collect residential solid waste unless it is placed at the curb of a public street. Persons in residential units shall bring their solid waste to the terrace adjacent to the street curb for collection. If collection crews are unable to discharge the contents of garbage cans into collection vehicles using normal handling procedures, the cans, including contents, will be left at curbside. The owner shall make provisions to ensure that the solid waste therein can be collected on the next collection day. Collection crews will not empty garbage cans by means other than dumping. 
(2)  No garbage containers or other containers for refuse other than those of the village shall be placed, kept, stored or located within the right-of-way of a street or alley; provided, however, that the village board may authorize the location of such containers within the public right-of-way at specified places and times when such location is necessary for the expeditious collection and disposition of refuse. 
(b)  Restriction on time of placement. Refuse shall be placed for collection and containers shall be removed during the following times: 
(1)  Receptacles and containers for refuse and rubbish shall be placed in collection locations as designated in subsection (a) of this section prior to 7:00 a.m. of the scheduled collection day, but not more than 12 hours prior to such time. 
(2)  All receptacles, bags and containers for refuse and garbage disposal shall be removed from the curbside collection point within 12 hours after the regular collection time. 
(3)  If the scheduled collection day falls on a holiday, collection will be on the following scheduled working day. 
(4)  Special collections will be made only if ordered by the building inspector or health department and will be billed to the owner. 
(c)  Entering buildings for collection. Village employees or employees of licensed collectors will not enter any structure to remove garbage or refuse, except by written agreement with the property owner. 
(d)  Billing for landfill charges. The village levy from the Metropolitan Refuse District will be passed on to the property owners of the village on a monthly basis. Statements not paid within 20 days from the date of issuance shall be subject to a late payment charge of one percent. The late payment charge shall be applied to the total unpaid balance for service, including unpaid late payment charges. This charge is applicable to all customers. If by November 15 of each year an amount is still owed to the village for landfill charges, the outstanding amount shall be placed on the property tax roll of the subject property as a special charge pursuant to law. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-15; Code 1998, § 78-75; Ord. No. 94-13, § 2, 5-2-1994; Ord. No. 01-15, § 4, 11-5-2001) 
Sec. 54-65. - Refuse from outside village. 
    It shall be unlawful to bring refuse from outside the village limits into the village limits for disposal, unless specifically authorized by written agreement with the village. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-16; Code 1998, § 78-76) 
Sec. 54-66. - Title to refuse and recyclable materials. 
(a)  In the absence of an agreement to the contrary, title to the refuse and recyclable material placed for collection and disposal by the village or its agents shall vest in the village as soon as it is placed for collection. It shall be a violation of this article for any person unauthorized by the village to collect or pick up or to cause to be collected or picked up any recyclable materials that are placed for disposal by the village or by any authorized agent. Any such and each such unauthorized collection or scavenging of recyclable materials in violation of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as provided for in this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed to allow for scavenging, removing, transporting, or re-sorting of refuse which has been placed for disposal under this article. Any such scavenging or separation of refuse that has been placed for disposal by the producer of the refuse shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(b)  This article shall not prohibit the actual producers of recyclable materials or the owners of residential units or nonresidential units upon which recyclable materials have been accumulated from personally collecting, conveying, and disposing of recyclable materials, provided such producers or owners do not violate the intent of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-17; Code 1998, § 78-77) 
Sec. 54-67. - Garbage accumulations deemed nuisance. 
    The accumulation or deposit of garbage, trash, or putrescible animal or vegetable matter in or upon any lot or land or any public or private place within the village which causes the air or environment to become noxious or offensive or to be in such a condition as to promote the breeding of flies, mosquitoes, or other insects or to provide a habitat or breeding place for rodents or animals or which otherwise becomes injurious to the public health is prohibited and declared to constitute a nuisance. Refuse areas shall be kept in a nuisance-free and odor-free condition. Refuse shall not be allowed to accumulate. Violation will result in the occupant or owner being notified to clean up such area, with continued violations resulting in the owner being prosecuted under this article and other sections of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-18; Code 1998, § 78-78) 
Sec. 54-68. - Special haul items. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person receiving residential garbage collection with the village to set for regular collection special haul items. Such special haul items may be disposed of by contracting directly with private collectors at the rates in effect at the time. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-20; Code 1998, § 78-80) 
Sec. 54-69. - Interference with authorized collector. 
    No person, other than an authorized collector, shall collect or interfere with any waste after it shall have been put into a garbage receptacle and deposited in the proper place for the collector, nor shall any unauthorized person molest, hinder, delay or in any manner interfere with any authorized garbage collector in the discharge of such garbage collector's duties. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-21; Code 1998, § 78-81) 
Sec. 54-70. - Other prohibited practices in collection and handling of recyclables. 
    No person generating waste within the village shall deposit or cause to be deposited: 
(1)  Recyclable material at any authorized collection point when the site is closed or not operating. 
(2)  Waste material, whether recyclable or not, in or upon any public street, public waters, or public grounds in the village, except at authorized locations within appropriate packaging or placed into appropriate containers during specifically authorized collections if any are provided. 
(3)  Recyclable materials in any container not specifically intended for the collection of that type or group of recyclable material. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-22; Code 1998, § 78-82) 
Sec. 54-71. - Special collections for violations. 
    If any person, including a person receiving collection from a private firm, is found in violation of the collection and storage requirements of this article and fails to comply with a notification or requirements of this article and fails to comply with a notification or citation, the village shall be empowered to order a special collection to remove such violation. The person shall be notified of such special collection and the charges therefor. The special collection shall be made, and if billing plus $50.00 is unpaid, the bill shall be considered a lien on the property and shall be placed on the tax bill. A person shall not use the special collection provision of this article to circumvent requirements for collection by a private firm. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-24; Code 1998, § 78-84) 
Sec. 54-72. - Contracting with collector/hauler. 
(a)  The village may find that the purposes of this article will be better served by limiting collection of waste activities to a minimum, and to that end the village will contract with an independent contractor to provide waste collection services in accordance with this article. If any person needs a service in excess of that provided by such collector/hauler pursuant to the collection contract with the village, such person is free to contract, at such person's cost, for such additional services as may be required or desired. 
(b)  The village shall be authorized to place the pro rata cost of such collector/hauler's fees for such services on the utility bill of customers or tax bill for the real property from which such waste is generated. The amount so placed on the utility bill shall be after provision of services. The amount so placed on the tax bill shall be in advance of such services and when so placed shall have the same force and effect as a utility bill or real estate tax and shall be paid in the same manner as a utility payment or real estate tax. 
(c)  The village and the collector/hauler shall establish pickup times for the collection of collectible wastes. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-26; Code 1998, § 78-86; Ord. No. 99-20, § 1, 9-20-1999) 
Sec. 54-73. - Condominiums and multifamily dwellings. 
(a)  Each condominium association in the village shall be responsible for establishing compliance with this article by the owner of each condominium unit and shall submit its plan for compliance to the village for approval and shall submit for approval of the village any changes in such plan. Such plan may provide for the purposes of this article. Each condominium unit shall be treated the same as a single residential dwelling or the entire condominium shall be treated for such purposes as a multifamily dwelling, as defined in section 54-47. In approving such a plan, the village shall consider which plan under the circumstances would better promote the purpose of this article. 
(b)  Each owner of a multifamily building, with the consent of the village, shall have the option of treating each unit within the building as a single-family residence or shall comply with the requirements of section 54-57(c), except that duplexes shall be treated as two single-family residences. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-27; Code 1998, § 78-87) 
Sec. 54-74. - Commercial buildings. 
    The owner of any commercial, retail, industrial or governmental facility shall provide adequate separate containers for the disposal of recyclable materials and shall regularly notify all users of the premises of such facility, including employees, agents and customers, of county and municipal recycling requirements. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-28; Code 1998, § 78-88) 
Chapter 58 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to grant street privileges, Wis. Stats. § 66.0425; public works generally, Wis. Stats. § 62.15; acquisition of property, Wis. Stats. § 62.22; authority relative to street grades, Wis. Stats. § 62.16. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Removal of rubbish and dirt from sidewalks. 
    No owner or occupant shall allow the sidewalk abutting on such owner's or occupant's premises to be littered with rubbish or dirt. If such owner or occupant shall refuse or fail to remove any such rubbish or dirt when notified to do so by the director of public works, the director of public works may cause the work to be done and shall report the cost thereof to the village administrator who shall place the cost on the tax roll as a special charge against the premises, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627 or such cost may be recovered in an action against the owner or occupant. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-1; Code 1998, § 82-1) 
Sec. 58-2. - Street privilege permit. 
(a)  Required for moving a building, encumbrances. Permits for the use of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public ways or places of the village may be granted to applicants by the village administrator for the purpose of moving any building or structure or of encumbering the street, alley, sidewalk or way with materials necessary in and about the construction or demolition of any building or structure, provided such applicant has complied with the other requirements of this section and has obtained a building permit if required by this Code. The village administrator shall request advisory recommendations from the police chief, director of public works and building inspector prior to issuance of the permit. Village officials may attach conditions to the permit, including proof of liability insurance. No such permit is required as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0425(6)-(8), 
(b)  Bond. No street privilege permit shall be issued until the applicant shall execute and file with the village administrator a bond in an amount determined by the director of public works, not exceeding $10,000.00, conditioned that the applicant will remove such encumbrance upon termination of the operations and will leave the vacated premises in a clean and sanitary condition and will repair any and all damage to the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public property of the village resulting from such building or moving operations. 
(c)  Fee. The fee for a street privilege permit shall be in the sum established by resolution, plus any actual village costs. 
(d)  Conditions of occupancy. The permission to occupy or obstruct the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public ground is intended only for use in connection with the actual erection, alteration, repair, removal or moving of buildings or structures and shall be given upon the following terms and conditions and subject to revocation without notice by the director of public works, police chief or building inspector for violation thereof: 
(1)  Such temporary obstruction shall cover not more than one-third of any street or alley. 
(2)  The obstruction shall be sufficiently lighted at night so as to be in full view of the public from all directions. 
(3)  Sidewalk traffic shall not be interrupted, but temporary sidewalks of not less than four feet in width guarded by a closed fence at least four feet high on both sides may be maintained during the period of occupancy. 
(4)  The process of moving any building or structure shall be as continuous as practicable until completed and, if ordered by the police chief and director of public works, shall continue during all hours of the day and night. 
(5)  No building or structure shall be allowed to remain overnight on any street crossing or intersection or so near thereto as to prevent easy access to any fire hydrant. 
(6)  Buildings shall be moved only in accordance with the route prescribed by the director of public works and police chief. 
(7)  Upon termination of the work necessitating such obstruction, all parts of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds occupied under the permit shall be vacated, cleaned of all rubbish and obstructions and placed in a safe condition for public travel at the expense of the permittee. 
(e)  Termination. All street privilege permits shall automatically terminate at the end of three months from the date of issuance unless an earlier termination date is specified at the discretion of the village administrator. 
(f)  Removal of obstruction by village. In addition to any other penalty imposed, if the owner or occupant of the premises adjoining any lawfully obstructed sidewalk shall fail to remove or neglect to remove such obstruction within 24 hours after such notice from the director of public works, police chief or building inspector to do so, it shall be the duty of the director of public works, police chief or building inspector to remove such obstruction and make return of the costs and expenses thereof to the village administrator who shall enter such cost on the next annual tax roll as a special charge against the property abutting such obstructed sidewalk as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-6; Code 1998, § 82-2) 
State Law reference- Authority to grant street privileges, Wis. Stats. § 66.0425. 
Sec. 58-3. - Terrace areas. 
(a)  Definition. The term "terrace area" is defined in section 78-21(1). 
(b)  Removal of noxious weeds; maintenance. All that part of the terrace area not covered by a sidewalk shall be kept free and clear of all noxious weeds and shall not be paved, surfaced or covered with any material which shall prevent the growth of plants and shall be maintained as a lawn, except in areas specifically approved by the village board or its designee. Basketball backstops, statuary, structures, flagpoles and other objects shall not be placed in the terrace area. 
(c)  Responsibility for maintenance. Every owner of land in the village whose land abuts a terrace area is required to maintain or have maintained by the tenant the terrace directly abutting such land, as provided in this section and elsewhere in this Code. Every owner shall keep mailboxes located on a terrace free and clear of snow. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-8; Code 1998, § 82-3) 
Sec. 58-4. - Vaults. 
    All vaults and cisterns under sidewalks shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-9; Code 1998, § 82-4) 
Sec. 58-5. - Drainage from downspouts and eaves of buildings. 
    No downspout from any building shall terminate on or upon or in such position that the contents of such spout are cast upon or flow back or over any public sidewalk. When the eaves of a building extend over or are so constructed that water may fall therefrom or run back upon any public sidewalk, such eaves shall be so protected by proper spouts or otherwise that no water shall fall or drain therefrom or run back upon or over any public sidewalk. The owner of any building and the officers of any association or corporation owning any building on which any spouts or the eaves thereof shall be maintained contrary to this section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-32. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-10; Code 1998, § 82-5) 
Sec. 58-6. - Sale or display of merchandise; special event vending permit. 
(a)  Permit required for street sales. No person shall display, sell or offer to sell on any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place any goods, wares, foodstuffs or anything of value or service of any kind by putting up a booth or stopping a vehicle or person on foot or in any other manner attempting to publicly sell or offer for sale any such articles, unless such person shall have first applied for and obtained a special event vending permit from the village. Such permit shall enable holders to conduct their business in all enumerated areas subject to the limitations of this section. A special event vending permit shall be obtained where the vending is done by a participant in a special event and where such vending is an integral part of the event. However, where the vending is to occur in connection with a village or area wide promotion of community trade or festival sponsored or coordinated by an organization, the sponsoring organization shall obtain the special event vending permit as agent for its participating members. 
(b)  Procedure. Procedures for obtaining a street sale permit are as follows: 
(1)  Application for a special event vending permit shall be filed with the village administrator and shall contain such information as the village clerk may require. The permit shall be signed by the village administrator and shall be conspicuously displayed at the place where such sales are being made. The permit shall set forth the exact days on which and the exact location where such business shall be carried on and shall be valid only during the dates and at the locations specified. Where a sponsoring organization is the applicant, the applicant shall provide the village administrator with a complete list of sponsors and participants at the time of making application. 
(2)  Upon receipt of an application for a permit, the village clerk shall review the information given on the application for conformity with this section. If all the applicable requirements are clearly and unambiguously met in the village's opinion, the village shall approve the permit or approve it conditionally. If the applicable requirements are not clearly and unambiguously met in the village's opinion, the village clerk shall state the matters in doubt in writing to the applicant within three days of the time of making application. 
(3)  The village board shall review appeals of the denial of the application by the village administrator and may either deny the permit, approve the permit or approve the permit conditionally. Appeals requests shall be filed with the village administrator within seven days of the administrator's decision. 
(c)  Conditions of permit. In addition to any other conditions imposed by the village board, all permittees shall fully comply with the following: 
(1)  Liability insurance. To hold a valid permit, the vendor must have in force adequate liability insurance. Adequate liability insurance is liability insurance holding the village and its employees and agents harmless and indemnifying and defending the village, its employees and agents against all claims, liability, loss, damage or expense incurred by the village with adequate liability policy limits on account of any damage caused by or resulting from the activities for which the permit is granted. As evidence of the applicant's ability to perform this condition of the permit, the applicant shall furnish a certificate of insurance evidencing the existence of comprehensive general liability insurance, including contractual liability insurance with the village being named as an additional insured. Adequate liability limits means minimum limits of $100,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and minimum limits of $50,000.00 per occurrence for property damage. The certificate of insurance shall provide for 30 days' written notice to the village upon cancellation or nonrenewal or material change in the policy. Proof of insurance shall be submitted to the village administrator a minimum of seven days before the start of the event. 
(2)  Cooperation with law enforcement officials. To protect the public health and safety, the permittee shall coordinate with the police chief the location of all events under the permit. Street and sidewalk encroachments, booth locations and special parking provisions shall be submitted to the police chief for the police chief's review and approval a minimum of seven days before the start of the event. 
(3)  Cleanup. The permittee shall be fully responsible for all necessary cleanup associated with the event. 
(4)  Compliance with other regulations. The permittee shall comply with all applicable state and county regulations governing health and sanitation for food handling establishments, if applicable, and any other applicable village regulations, including but not limited to, regulations pertaining to the issuance of special class "B" fermented malt beverage licenses. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-11; Code 1998, § 82-6) 
Sec. 58-7. - Requests for improvements. 
    Requests or petitions by village property owners for new streets, street resurfacing, curb and gutter, storm sewers, utility work and sidewalks shall be presented to the village board on or before September 1 to be considered for installation in the following year. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-12; Code 1998, § 82-7) 
Sec. 58-8. - Raking leaves into streets. 
    In the interests of public safety, health and general welfare, community appearance and efficiency of operation, it shall be unlawful to rake or place fallen tree leaves or grass clippings onto the pavement or into the gutter of any public street. No person shall permit grass clippings from mower swaths to remain upon sidewalks or on abutting property owned or occupied by such person. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-13; Code 1998, § 82-8) 
Sec. 58-9. - Street numbers. 
(a)  Required. Each principal building in the village shall be assigned an official street number. All lots and parts of lots in the village shall be numbered in accordance with a street numbering map on file in the office of the village engineer. Plats shall be numbered to conform as nearly as possible to the general scheme of numbering as outlined on the map. 
(b)  Display. The owner, occupant, or agent in charge of the premises shall cause to be affixed and to be maintained when so affixed to each principal building controlled by such person the official street number assigned to that building as provided in subsection (a) of this section. The physical numbers provided shall be not less than 21/2 inches high on a background of not less than three inches. Each required number shall be affixed on the particular building in such a location that it may be easily and readily seen by a person of ordinary eyesight on the public street or highway upon which the building abuts. For buildings abutting also on a public alley, the street number shall so be affixed in such location that it may be seen in like manner from such alley. 
(c)  Noncompliance. If the owner or occupant of any building neglects for 20 days to duly attach and maintain the proper numbers on the building, the village shall serve such owner or occupant a notice requiring such owner or occupant to properly number the building. If such owner or occupant neglects to do so for ten days after service, such owner or occupant shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in section 1-32. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-15; Code 1998, § 82-9) 
Sec. 58-10. - Obstruction of public ditches. 
    No person shall in any manner obstruct or cause to be obstructed the free passage of water in any public gutter, ditch, culvert, swale or drain, and no person shall place or cause to be placed any rubbish, dirt, sand, gravel or any other matter or thing so that such is likely to be carried by the elements into any public gutter, ditch, culvert, swale or drain. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-16; Code 1998, § 82-10) 
Sec. 58-11. - Curb and gutter. 
(a)  Special assessments and charges. The village may, at any time, construct or have constructed curb and gutter in the village. As a complete alternative to any other methods provided by law, the village may collect for the curb and gutter in the manner and by the procedure provided by Wis. Stats. § 66.0703 or 66.0701. 
(b)  Alternative methods. Alternative methods for construction of curb and gutter are as follows: 
(1)  Petition. Any taxpayer and property owner in the village may petition the village for the installation of curb and gutter abutting property owned by the petitioner in the village as follows: 
a.  Requirements of petition. The petition for the installation of curb and gutter shall state that the petitioner requests curb and gutter abutting property owned by the petitioner, describing the property, stating what type is requested, and, further, the petition shall state that each petitioner individually shall be responsible and liable for and thereby obligates the petitioner to pay the total costs of installation of the curb and gutter, to include surveying and other contingent expenses. 
b.  Effect of petition. If a petition for the installation of curb and gutter is presented to the village board, the board shall have the exclusive discretion to accept or reject the petition. The board may refer the petition, may table it, but in any event they shall act upon the petition in some manner within six months of receipt of the petition. 
(2)  Resolution of intent. If the village desires to construct a curb and gutter in any area of the village, the village board may adopt a resolution of intent to install the curb and gutter and assess the costs thereof to the abutting property owners as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0703. 
(c)  Construction standards. All curbs and gutters shall conform to the construction standards adopted by the village board, on file with the director of public works. 
(d)  Liability for repair. Whenever a curb and gutter is installed, all property owners receiving the benefits thereof shall be responsible and liable for all replacements, repairs, damage and maintenance and during any period of construction on the property against which it abuts. Any expense for an additional width of road made necessary by blacktop curb and gutter shall be the responsibility of and shall be paid for by the abutting property owner. 
(e)  Costs. Any and all costs of replacement, repair and maintenance of curb and gutter incurred within two years after installation thereof or damage thereto during construction as provided in subsection (d) of this section shall be charged to the lot or parcel of land affected thereby pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0703. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-17; Code 1998, § 82-11) 
State Law reference- Special assessments and charges, Wis. Stats. § 66.0701 et seq. 
Sec. 58-12. - Obstructing streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Block means to interfere with unobstructed travel by any means, including but not limited to, standing on the part of the walk that is fit for travel, or placing any object or vehicle whatsoever on such walk. 
    Sidewalk means any sidewalk owned or maintained by the village. The term "sidewalk" shall not include sidewalks or walkways on private property in shopping centers, apartment complexes, office building sites or any other private property. 
(b)  Obstructing streets. No person shall stand, sit, loaf, loiter or engage in any sport or exercise on any public street, bridge or public ground within the village in such manner as to prevent or obstruct the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon or to prevent or hinder free ingress or egress to or from any place of business or amusement, church, public hall or meeting place. 
(c)  Blocking sidewalk. No person shall block any sidewalk by obstructing the sidewalk so that it is impossible for a pedestrian to travel along the sidewalk without leaving the sidewalk and walking on adjacent property or on the street. 
(d)  Free speech. This section shall not be interpreted as prohibiting any person from stopping on any sidewalk to talk or to make a speech, provided that such person shall not stand in such a location that it is impossible for any pedestrian to travel along the sidewalk without leaving the sidewalk and walking on adjacent property or on the street. If two or more persons are engaged in talking while stopped on a sidewalk, they shall not stand in such locations as to completely prevent any pedestrian from passing them on the sidewalk. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-7; Code 1998, § 82-12) 
Sec. 58-13. - Occupancy of right-of-way and village-owned property. 
(a)  Permit required. 
(1)  Before any person, corporation, utility, association or public body erects, constructs, installs, extends, modifies or maintains telephone or electric poles, utility facilities or appurtenances, or pipes, conduits, sewers or drains upon, along, or within any street, alley or other village-owned property, they shall obtain a permit from the village. In the permit application, the applicant shall: 
a.  Identify the proposed location of the telephone or electric poles, utility facilities or appurtenances, or pipes, conduits, sewers or drains. 
b.  Identify the route of any proposed lines, including stating the name of the street or alley to be occupied. Whenever possible, the applicant shall use an alley instead of a street, and any aboveground facilities shall be located as close to the side of the alley as possible so as to not unreasonably inconvenience the public and/or adjoining property owners. 
c.  Identify whether the telephone or electric poles, utility facilities or appurtenances, or pipes, conduits, sewers or drains will be aboveground or below ground. To the extent feasible, all facilities shall be placed underground and facilities are subject to section 58-74. 
(2)  Each application shall be accompanied by a fee as established in the schedule of village fees. Once the application is deemed complete by the director of public works, the permit application shall be reviewed and approved, approved with conditions, or denied by the director of public works. In his sole discretion, the director of public works may seek review and action by the public works committee on the permit application. 
(b)  Location of poles, facilities, or appurtenances. When telephone or electric poles or other utility facilities or appurtenances are erected, constructed, installed, extended, modified or maintained aboveground in a street, alley or other village-owned property, the location of the poles, facilities, or appurtenances shall be as determined by the director of public works. Generally, the location of the poles, facilities, or appurtenances shall be on the outer edge of the sidewalk, just inside the curb stone, and on the line dividing lots, unless directed otherwise by the director of public works. Other factors to be considered by the director of public works when determining the appropriate location of aboveground facilities include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Proper drainage on the street and alley and adjacent property. 
(2)  Vehicular traffic safety, including sight line obstructions, and pedestrian safety. 
(3)  Impact on snow and ice removal from the street and sidewalk access. 
(4)  Impact on adjacent trees or shrubbery, including possible damage thereto. 
(5)  Screening of the poles, facilities, or appurtenances, where appropriate. 
(6)  Noise or other factors that may adversely affect the public. 
(c)  Repair and maintenance. Whenever any street, alley or other village-owned property is repaired or improved, the person, corporation, utility, association or public body that owns, operates or maintains telephone or electric poles, utility facilities or appurtenances, or pipes, conduits, sewers or drains upon, along, or within the street, alley or other village-owned property shall make, at their own expense, such changes or alterations in the location, construction, grade, or elevation of their facilities, or such other changes as deemed necessary by the village, to conform to the new construction or improvement. 
(d)  Village rights. The village shall have the right to use, without charge, any pole, utility facility or appurtenance, or conduit erected, constructed, installed, extended, modified or maintained upon, along, or within any street, alley or other village-owned property for the purpose of stringing thereon, or for laying therein, a wire or wires for the exclusive use of the village departments; and no such pole, utility facility or appurtenance, or conduit so used shall be removed until the police chief and fire chief shall have been reasonably notified of such contemplated removal. 
(e)  Indemnification. Every person, corporation, utility, association or public body that erects, constructs, installs, extends, modifies or maintains telephone or electric poles, utility facilities or appurtenances, or pipes, conduits, sewers or drains upon, along, or within any street, alley or other village-owned property shall, before commencing any work, file an agreement with the village clerk in which it expressly agrees to indemnify, defend and hold the village and its officers, employees, and agents harmless from and against all claims, costs and liability of every kind and nature (including reasonable fees for attorneys, consultants, and experts), for injury or damage received or sustained by any person or entity in connection with, or on account of, the work performed by the person, corporation, utility, association or public body, except to the extent caused by a willful act or omission of the village or its officers, employees, agents or contractors. Further, the agreement shall allow the village to use, without charge, any pole, utility facility or appurtenance, or conduit erected, constructed, installed, extended, modified or maintained upon, along, or within any street or alley or other public places of the village for the purpose of stringing thereon, or for laying therein, a wire or wires for the exclusive use of the village departments. 
(f)  Emergency repairs, restoration or replacement. Where an emergency arises in the operation of any telephone or electric poles, utility facilities or appurtenances, or pipes, conduits, sewers or drains upon, along or within any street, alley or other village-owned property, the person, firm, corporation, utility or public body owning, operating or maintaining such facilities may, without first securing permission from the director of public works, and at its own expense, repair, restore or replace such portion or portions of the facilities that have been damaged and created the emergency; provided, however, such person, firm, corporation, utility or public body shall make a full and complete report to the director of public works within five days of completion of the work identifying any damages arising out of the emergency and the repairs, restoration or replacement made to the physical facilities. If the repairs, restoration or replacement do not meet with the village's approval, the work performed by the person, firm, corporation, utility or public body owning, operating or maintaining such facilities shall be corrected to comply with village regulations and requirements, and the person, firm, corporation, utility or public body shall be responsible for all costs associated with the correction. 
(g)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide the village a legal framework within which to regulate and manage the public right-of-way and other village-owned property and to provide for recovery of the costs incurred in doing so. This section provides for the health, safety and general welfare of residents of the village as they use the public right-of-way and other village-owned property and seeks to ensure the structural integrity of the right-of-way. 
(h)  Compliance with other regulations. Obtaining a permit under this section does not relieve the applicant of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits or approvals from the village or other parties, if applicable, including, but not limited to, sections 58-2 and 58-74. 
(i)  Restoration. For all work performed by a person, corporation, utility, association or public body under this section, the person, corporation, utility, association or public body shall restore the surface of any street, alley or other village-owned property to the same condition it was in before the work commenced. If it fails to do so, the village may proceed to restore the surface to such condition at the expense of the person, corporation, utility, association or public body. 
(j)  Abandoned facilities. If a person, corporation, utility, association or public body that owns, operates or maintains telephone or electric poles, utility facilities or appurtenances, or pipes, conduits, sewers or drains upon, along, or within any street, alley or other village-owned property decides to discontinue its operations in the village, it must either: 
(1)  Provide information satisfactory to the village that the party's obligations for its facilities under this Code have been lawfully assumed by another party; or 
(2)  Submit to the village a proposal and instruments for dedication of its facilities to the village. If a party proceeds under this subsection, the village may, at its option: 
a.  Accept the dedication for all or a portion of the facilities; or 
b.  Require the party, at its own expense, to remove the facilities in the right-of-way at ground or above ground level; or 
c.  Require the party to post a bond or provide payment sufficient to reimburse the village for reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the facilities. Facilities of a party that fails to comply with this subsection shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. In addition, to any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, the village, at its option: 
1.  Abate the nuisance; 
2.  Take possession of the facilities; or 
3.  Require removal of the facilities by the party, or the party's successor in interest. 
This subsection shall not apply to a public utility, as defined by Wis. Stats. § 196.01(5), that is required to follow the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 196.81. 
(Ord. No. 14-06, 4-21-2014) 
Secs. 58-14-58-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR 

Sec. 58-45. - Determination of need by board. 
    The village board shall determine that sidewalks, curb ramps, curb and gutter and suitable street surface material shall be constructed, laid, rebuilt or repaired along or upon any public street, right-of-way or highway within the village. The village board may determine or change the grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-2(a); Code 1998, § 82-41) 
Sec. 58-46. - Apportionment of costs. 
(a)  Property owner costs. Costs for construction and repair shall be paid by the property owner as follows: 
(1)  The property owner shall pay the entire cost of the construction of a new sidewalk, curb ramp, curb and gutter along lot frontages and side yards, except as provided in this section. 
(2)  The property owner shall pay the entire cost of any other sidewalk, driveway or other construction which is in addition to the main sidewalk. 
(3)  The property owner shall pay one-half the costs of repairs to sidewalks, curb ramps and gutters and the village shall pay the balance of such repairs. However, where such repairs are caused by the property owner's negligence, the entire cost shall be paid by the property owner. 
(b)  Village costs for new construction and repairs. The village shall pay costs for new construction and repairs as follows: 
(1)  The village shall pay the entire costs of constructing a main sidewalk, whether front or side yard, where the construction of curb and gutter has changed the grade. 
(2)  Where the village's liability pursuant to subsection (a)(3) of this section is applicable, such responsibility shall apply only to sidewalks not exceeding five feet in width. 
(3)  The village will assume no responsibility for damage to private property due to change in grade in making street or sidewalk improvement. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-2(b); Code 1998, § 82-42) 
Sec. 58-47. - Sidewalk specifications. 
(a)  Generally. All public sidewalks in the village shall conform to those specifications set forth in the publication Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, as published by the state department of transportation, as from time to time revised. All sidewalks shall be of grade AA air-entrained concrete. 
(b)  Width and thickness. Residential walks shall be four feet in width and not less than five inches thick except within driveway approaches where the minimum thickness shall be seven inches. However, walks in residential areas may be repaired or replaced to a width not less than the existing width of the sidewalk. Sidewalks in front of commercial or industrial establishments shall be not less than five feet in width and five inches in thickness, except within driveway approaches where the minimum thickness shall be seven inches. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-2(c); Code 1998, § 82-43) 
Sec. 58-48. - Repair or replacement of defective sidewalks. 
    The repair or replacement of defective sidewalks shall be in accordance with Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0907 and 66.0909. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-2(d); Code 1998, § 82-44) 
Sec. 58-49. - Illegal sidewalks. 
    No sidewalk which shall be constructed contrary to this article shall be considered a legal sidewalk. The illegal sidewalk may be ordered to be replaced with a legal sidewalk and with one that is in conformity with this article, the same as if no sidewalk whatever had been built or constructed in the place where any such sidewalk is located. Such replacement shall be accomplished at the adjacent property owner's cost. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-2(e); Code 1998, § 82-45) 
Secs. 58-50-58-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET AND SIDEWALK GRADES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority relative to street grades, Wis. Stats. § 62.16. 

Sec. 58-72. - Establishment of grades. 
(a)  Procedures. The grade of all streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be established by vote by the village board, and the grade shall be recorded by the village administrator in the administrator's office. No street, alley or sidewalk shall be worked until the grade thereof is established. When the grade of sidewalks shall not have been specifically set by ordinance, the sidewalk shall be laid to the established grade of the street. All grades established prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives are confirmed. 
(b)  New sidewalk grade. Whenever a street shall be improved for the first time or the grade thereof changed and the street improved so as to conform to the new grade, the grading of the sidewalk shall be considered a part of the improvement, shall be let by contract with the other work of improving such street, and the expense thereof shall be provided for and borne in all respects like that of improving the street, but the construction shall be done by the owners of the abutting lots or parcels of land or at their expense as provided in this subsection. Before such construction is commenced by the owners of the abutting lots or parcels of land, the village engineer or director of public works shall, upon application by the respective owners for a sidewalk grade, cause such sidewalk grade to be established. If a village project changes the grade, the village shall be responsible for the cost of establishing the new grade. If a property owner's project changes the grade, the property owner shall be responsible for the cost of establishing the new grade. 
(Code 1988, § 6-1-1; Code 1998, § 82-76) 
Sec. 58-73. - Alteration of grade prohibited. 
    No person shall alter the grade of any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground or any part thereof in the village by any means whatsoever unless authorized or instructed to do so by the director of public works. All such alterations of grade shall be recorded in the office of the village engineer. 
(Code 1988, § 6-1-2; Code 1998, § 82-77) 
Sec. 58-74. - Underground utilities. 
(a)  Elevation. The grade or elevation of all underground construction of utilities shall be a minimum of three feet below the established grade of the street, alley, park, public property or easement. The three feet shall be measured between the top of the established grade and the top of the underground construction. 
(b)  Approval of location. The location of any and all such underground construction must have the approval of the director of public works. 
(c)  Filing of plans. Complete plans for any such construction must be filed with and be approved by the director of public works before construction can begin. 
(d)  Inspection. On request of the director of public works, the utility company must provide opportunity for the director of public works to check any construction before it may be covered. 
(e)  Conflict with other utilities. If the grade or elevation set in this section for the underground construction of utilities shall, in any instance, conflict with other existing utilities, the utility shall be required to lower the elevation of its underground construction or of the storm sewer, at the election of the director of public works and in accordance with the director of public works directions and specifications. 
(f)  Establishment of grade. At the request of the utility company, the director of public works shall, at the expense of the requestor, give the utility company an established grade on any streets, alleys, public parks or easements where it proposes to install underground utilities. 
(g)  Emergency work. In an emergency, when immediate action is necessary in order to protect life or property, the utility company may proceed with underground construction subject to obtaining the approval of such work by the director of public works as soon thereafter as is reasonably possible. 
(h)  Restoration of surface. For any such underground construction, the utility company shall leave the surface of the ground or road in the same condition as before the work was commenced. If it fails to do so, the village may proceed to place the surface of the ground or street in such condition at the utility company's expense. Such work shall comply with article VI of this chapter. 
(i)  Relief from obligations. Compliance with this section does not relieve the utility company from any responsibility of any kind whatsoever because of the widening of the travelway or any other improvements which may become necessary, nor does it relieve it from any liability of any kind or nature whatsoever. Compliance with this section shall not relieve the utility company from the responsibility or obligation of removing, relocating or moving any of its mains, pipes or property due to the opening, widening or improving of streets or due to any other changes which may occur because of which such moving, relocation or removing may be necessary. 
(Code 1988, § 6-1-3; Code 1998, § 82-78) 
Secs. 58-75-58-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS 

Sec. 58-92. - Prohibited upon public grounds or public ways. 
    No person shall encroach upon or in any way obstruct or encumber any street, alley, sidewalk, public grounds or land dedicated to public use or any part thereof or permit such encroachment or encumbrance to be placed or remain on any public way adjoining the premises of which such person is the owner or occupant, except as provided in sections 58-93 and 58-94. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-5(a); Code 1998, § 82-92) 
Sec. 58-93. - Exceptions. 
    The prohibition of section 58-92 shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Temporary encroachments or obstructions authorized by permit under section 58-2 pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0425. 
(2)  Building materials for the period authorized by the building inspector, which shall not obstruct more than one-half of the sidewalk or more than one-third of the traveled portion of the street and which do not interfere with the flow in the gutters. 
(3)  Excavations and openings permitted under article VI of this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-5(b); Code 1998, § 82-93) 
Sec. 58-94. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  The village engineer is authorized to issue a permit which allows a property owner to place certain fixtures, such as for the sale of merchandise, on a sidewalk which immediately adjoins the property owner's property. In determining if a permit shall be authorized, all of the following requirements must be met: 
(1)  The property must be located in an area zoned for commercial uses. 
(2)  The fixture shall not be physically attached to the sidewalk, any street fixture or any adjacent building and shall be of a temporary design. 
(3)  The placement of the fixture shall not impede the flow of pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk. In no event shall the fixture reduce the unobstructed sidewalk width to less than five feet at any point. 
(4)  The property owner shall provide the village with proof of liability insurance coverage. The insurance coverage shall be an amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, and the policy shall specifically state that it includes coverage for the fixtures located on the village sidewalks. In addition, the village shall be identified as a third-party insured. 
(5)  The fixtures shall not be for sale nor shall the fixtures be used for the sale of merchandise. Specifically excluded are all forms of vending machines, vendors carts or tables, etc. 
(6)  The property owner whose property adjoins the village sidewalk shall file the permit application or authorize the occupant of the property to file the permit application. 
(7)  The property owner or the occupant of the property shall display the approved permit in the window of the building so that it can be seen from the sidewalk. 
(b)  Upon reviewing the permit application, if it is determined by the village administrator that all of the requirements in subsection (a) of this section have been met, the village administrator shall issue the permit. The permit may be revoked by the village president, the director of public works, the village administrator, the building inspector or any village law enforcement officer (referred to in this article as "village enforcement officials") at any time when one or more of the requirements of subsection (a) of this section are not complied with or if the village enforcement officials determine that the placement of the fixture endangers the safety of the pedestrians who utilize the sidewalks. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-5(c); Code 1998, § 82-94) 
Sec. 58-95. - Notice to remove. 
(a)  In addition to any other penalty imposed, if any village enforcement official determines that a sidewalk is unlawfully obstructed in violation of this article, the village enforcement official shall issue a written notice to the owner or occupant of the premises which adjoins the obstructed sidewalk directing that the obstruction be removed within 24 hours. 
(b)  In addition to any other penalty imposed, if any village enforcement official determines that a village street, alley, public grounds or land dedicated for public use is obstructed or encumbered, the enforcement official shall issue a written notice to the property owner of the premises which adjoin the obstructed public area directing that the obstruction be removed within 24 hours. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-5(d), (e); Code 1998, § 82-95) 
Sec. 58-96. - Failure to remove; removal by village. 
(a)  If the owner or occupant fails to remove the obstruction within the time period established in section 58-95, any village enforcement official shall cause the removal of the obstruction, keeping an account of the expense of the abatement, and such expenses shall be charged to and paid by such property owner. Notice of the bill for abatement of the obstruction shall be mailed to the owner of the premises and shall be payable within ten calendar days from receipt thereof. Within 60 days after such costs and expenses are incurred and remain unpaid, the village administrator shall enter those charges onto the tax roll as a special tax as provided by the state statutes. 
(b)  The failure of the village administrator to record such claim or to mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to place the village expense on the tax rolls for unpaid bills for abating the obstruction, as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-5(f); Code 1998, § 82-96) 
Secs. 58-97-58-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARADES, PROCESSIONS, RACES AND SIMILAR EVENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-121. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Highways and streets have the meaning set forth in Wis. Stats. § 340.01, and also include areas owned by the village which are used primarily for pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(b)  The terms "processions, parades, runs, walks, marathons, bicycle races," etc. have their usual and customary usage. 
(Code 1988, § 10-6-1(b); Code 1998, § 82-110) 
Sec. 58-122. - Purpose. 
    The village recognizes that village streets and highways are primarily for the use of vehicular travel. It further recognizes a need to use these public streets and highways for processions, parades, runs, walks, bicycle races, marathons, etc., which do not substantially interfere with the public's right to travel on such streets and highways. This article is intended to regulate and control nonvehicular use of the streets and highways and to protect the general welfare and safety of the persons using the streets and highways within the village. The authority to regulate is contained in Wis. Stats. § 349.185 and related sections. 
(Code 1988, § 10-6-1(a); Code 1998, § 82-109) 
Secs. 58-123-58-142. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 58-143. - Required. 
    No person shall form, direct, lead or participate in any organized procession, parade, run, walk, marathon, bicycle race, etc., on any street or highway under the jurisdiction of the village, unless a permit has been obtained in advance as provided in this division. 
(Code 1988, § 10-6-2(a); Code 1998, § 82-115) 
Sec. 58-144. - Exemptions. 
    Under this division, a permit is not required for assembling or movement of a funeral procession or military convoy. Any parade, etc., sponsored by any agency of the federal or state government, acting in its governmental capacity within the scope of its authority, shall be required to obtain a permit; however, it shall be exempt from the parade permit fee and insurance requirements contained in this division. 
(Code 1988, § 10-6-2(b); Code 1998, § 82-116) 
Sec. 58-145. - Time limits for making application. 
    A written application for a permit for any function described in this article on the streets and highways under the jurisdiction of the village shall be made by one of the organizers or officers to the village administrator on a form provided by the village clerk no less than 15 days prior to the usage. 
(Code 1988, § 10-6-2(c); Code 1998, § 82-117) 
Sec. 58-146. - Information required in application. 
    The application for the permit required by this division shall set forth the following information regarding the proposed usage: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  If the usage is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be responsible for conducting the usage. 
(4)  The date when the usage is to be conducted and its duration. 
(5)  The assembly area, the starting point, the route to be traveled and the termination point. 
(6)  The number and size of participants or units comprising the usage. 
(7)  If the usage is to be conducted by or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the village clerk a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the usage authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on such person's behalf. 
(8)  Any additional information the village clerk finds reasonably necessary for a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(Code 1988, § 10-6-2(d); Code 1998, § 82-118) 
Sec. 58-147. - Recommendations. 
    The village clerk shall submit a copy of the application for the permit required by this division to the police chief and director of public works for recommendations. 
(Code 1988, § 10-6-2(e); Code 1998, § 82-119) 
Sec. 58-148. - Basis for discretionary denial. 
    The application for the permit required under this division may be denied if: 
(1)  It is for a usage that is to be held on a workday during hours when and at places where, in addition to the proposed usage, the flow of vehicular traffic is usually delayed by its own volume. 
(2)  It is for a usage that is to commence between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
(3)  Sufficient usage marshals are not provided as to reasonably ensure the orderly conduct of the usage. 
(4)  The proposed route for conducting usage involves a street or highway under construction or detour route. 
(Code 1988, § 10-6-2(f); Code 1998, § 82-120) 
Sec. 58-149. - Mandatory denial. 
    The application for the permit required under this division shall be denied if: 
(1)  It is made less than 15 days in advance of the time the usage is scheduled to commence; 
(2)  It is for a usage that is primarily for private or commercial economic gain; 
(3)  It is for a usage that would involve violation of federal, state or local laws relating to use of highways or of other applicable regulations of the village; 
(4)  The granting of the permit would conflict with another permit already granted or for which application is already pending; 
(5)  The application does not contain the information required by section 58-146; 
(6)  More than one assembly area or more than one dispersal area is proposed; or 
(7)  The applicant fails to receive the permit under Wis. Stats. § 84.07(4). 
(Code 1988, § 10-6-2(g); Code 1998, § 82-121) 
Sec. 58-150. - Conditions for issuance. 
    Under this division, the village clerk shall issue a permit to the applicant, subject to the requirements of this article, unless the village clerk concludes that: 
(1)  The policing of the usage will require so large a number of persons and vehicles, including ambulances, as to prevent adequate service of the needs of the rest of the village; 
(2)  The usage will so substantially hinder the movement of police and fire and other emergency vehicles as to create a substantial risk to persons and property; 
(3)  The conduct of the usage will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; or 
(4)  The usage is so poorly organized that participants are likely to engage in aggressive or destructive activity. 
(Code 1988, § 10-6-2(h); Code 1998, § 82-122) 
Sec. 58-151. - Actions for grant or denial. 
(a)  Time limitations. The village clerk shall act as promptly as the village clerk reasonably can on every application for a permit required under this division after consulting with other government agencies directly affected and after consulting with the applicant, if necessary. Every application filed 45 days or more in advance shall be granted or denied not less than 30 days before the date of the usage stated in the application. Action on any application filed less than 45 days in advance shall be taken within 15 days after the application is filed, but not later than 48 hours in advance of the time applied for. The village clerk shall immediately, by the most reasonable means of communication, notify the applicant of such action and, if the application is denied, shall give the reasons for denial of the permit. 
(b)  Modifications. In lieu of denying a permit, the village clerk may authorize the changing of assembly areas or dispersal areas or the conducting of the usage at a date or time or over a route different than as applied for in the permit. The applicant or permittee may accept such modification by immediately notifying the village clerk in writing of such acceptance. 
(Code 1988, § 10-6-2(i); Code 1998, § 82-123) 
Sec. 58-152. - Fee. 
    There shall be paid, at the time of filing the application for a usage permit required in this division, a fee established by resolution. 
(Code 1988, § 10-6-2(j); Code 1998, § 82-124) 
Sec. 58-153. - Charge for increased costs. 
    Under this division, when the village determines that the cost of municipal services incident to the staging of the usage will be increased because of the usage, the village administrator may require the permittee to make an additional payment into the general fund of the village in an amount equal to the increased costs. 
(Code 1988, § 10-6-2(k); Code 1998, § 82-125) 
Sec. 58-154. - Emergency revocation; indemnification. 
    The village may revoke a permit already issued pursuant to this division if the official deems that such action is justified by an actual or potential emergency due to weather, fire, riot, other catastrophe or likelihood of a breach of the peace or by a major change in the conditions forming the basis of the standards of issuance. In lieu of revoking a permit, any official named in this section may require the permittee to file evidence of good and sufficient sureties, insurance in force or other evidence of adequate financial responsibility running to the village and such third parties as may be injured or damaged, in an amount depending upon the likelihood of injury or damage as a direct and proximate result of the holding of the usage sufficient to indemnify the village and such third parties as may be injured or damaged thereby, caused by the permittee, the permittee's agents or participants. 
(Code 1988, § 10-6-2(l); Code 1998, § 82-126) 
Sec. 58-155. - Contents. 
    Each usage permit issued pursuant to this division shall state such information as the village shall find necessary for the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 10-6-2(m); Code 1998, § 82-127) 
Sec. 58-156. - Distribution of copies. 
    Immediately upon the issuance of a usage permit pursuant to this division, the village administrator shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  Each public transportation utility whose regular service will be affected by the usage. 
(2)  The police chief. 
(Code 1988, § 10-6-2(n); Code 1998, § 82-128) 
Sec. 58-157. - Compliance required; prohibited conduct. 
(a)  Permittee. A person issued a permit under this division shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws, ordinances and other regulations of the state and the village. 
(b)  Participants. No person who leads or participates in any usage shall disobey or encourage others to disobey this article after a law enforcement officer has directly and presently informed such person of any of the provisions of this article or of the terms of the applicable usage permit. 
(c)  Throwing objects. No candy, gum, balloons or other objects shall be thrown or disbursed from parade floats or vehicles. 
(d)  Alcohol beverages. Any person participating in such event shall not possess or consume any alcohol beverage. 
(Code 1988, § 10-6-2(o); Code 1998, § 82-129) 
Sec. 58-158. - Insurance required. 
    Prior to issuance by the village administrator of the permit required under this division, each permittee shall furnish evidence of a liability insurance policy in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00. The policy shall be in force and effect at the time such usage is to take place. The evidence of insurance shall include a certificate of insurance naming the village as an additional insured in connection with the usage. 
(Code 1988, § 10-6-2(p); Code 1998, § 82-130) 
Secs. 58-159-58-184. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EXCAVATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-185. - Standards. 
    All street work shall be performed in accordance with the standard specifications for street openings found in this article. Any damaged curb and gutter, sidewalk or grass-covered area shall be restored to the condition prior to damage. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-3(f)(1); Code 1998, § 82-146) 
Sec. 58-186. - Dates of performing work. 
    No opening in the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public ways shall be permitted between November 15 and April 1, except where it is determined by the director of public works to be an emergency excavation. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-4(a); Code 1998, § 82-150) 
Sec. 58-187. - Protection of public. 
(a)  Every opening and excavation shall be enclosed with sufficient barriers, signing, and such other traffic control devices as may be required by the director of public works, and in accordance with section VI of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Sufficient warning lights shall be kept on from sunrise to sunset. "No open flame" warning devices shall be used. Except by special permission from the director of public works, no trench shall be excavated more than 250 feet in advance of pipe or conduit laying or left unfilled more than 500 feet from where pipe or conduit has been laid. 
(b)  All necessary precautions shall be taken to guard the public effectively from accidents or damage to persons or property through the period of the work. Each person making such opening shall be held liable for all damages, including costs incurred by the village in defending an action brought against it for damages, as well as cost of any appeal, that may result from the neglect by such person or such person's employees of any necessary precaution against injury or damage to persons, vehicles or property of any kind. 
(c)  Unless otherwise approved, a minimum of one lane of traffic in each direction shall be provided. Every effort shall be made on the part of the permittee to provide reasonable access to all properties adjacent to the permittee's project. If traffic is limited to less than one lane in each direction, a flagman or temporary traffic control signal shall be provided to safely cycle traffic in each direction past the work area. 
(d)  The permittee shall perform the work in such a manner so as not to disrupt the flow of traffic in the area or endanger the safety of workers or passersby. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to prevent traffic backup during construction operations. The permittee shall notify the police department 24 hours prior to commencement of excavation of the location and extent of the excavation, unless the excavation is an emergency excavation as identified in section 58-193. 
(e)  When the operations will result in the loss of any utility service to private properties, the private properties shall be notified in writing or by personal contact at least 12 hours prior to the loss of service, unless the operations are part of an emergency excavation as defined in section 58-193. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-4(b); Code 1998, § 82-151) 
Sec. 58-188. - Pavement removal. 
(a)  Under this article, removal of existing pavement shall be to neat, straight lines. The permittee shall make a final saw cut in the existing pavement after backfilling. Excavations shall be kept to the minimum possible and acceptable for the convenience and safe performance of the work and in accordance with all applicable codes and regulations. 
(b)  If the pavement is damaged during excavation beyond the original saw cut lines, it shall be saw cut again along neat, straight lines. The finished saw cut shall leave a regular rectangular section or pavement replacement. If the street opening occurs near an adjacent patch or close to an existing patch or if it requires more than one opening within a short distance, the permittee shall identify and locate the existing patches or additional openings on the permit application form. The director of public works shall, on the basis of an on-site inspection, approximate the boundaries of the pavement replacement area. 
(c)  Pavement replacement areas with the long dimension in the direction of travel shall have the long dimension parallel with the curbline or the direction of travel. Pavement replacement areas in concrete pavements shall be parallel with or at right angles to the direction of travel. 
(d)  The director of public works may order the permittee to remove and replace up to one full lane width of pavement along the patched or excavated area. Special care shall be taken with concrete pavement to produce a vertical face on the existing concrete at the point of the saw cut to ensure a full depth of concrete at the joint. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-4(c); Code 1998, § 82-152) 
Sec. 58-189. - Excavated material. 
(a)  All excavated material shall be piled in a manner such that pedestrian and motor traffic is not unnecessarily disrupted. Gutters shall be kept clear or other satisfactory provisions shall be made for street drainage, and natural watercourses shall not be obstructed. 
(b)  Excavated material to be used for backfilling of the trench must be so handled and placed as to be of as little inconvenience as practical to public travel and adjoining tenants. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-4(d); Code 1998, § 82-153) 
Sec. 58-190. - Backfilling. 
(a)  All backfill material for an excavation shall be free from cinders; ashes; refuse; vegetable or organic matter; boulders, rocks or stones greater than eight inches in their greatest dimension; frozen lumps; or other material which, in the opinion of the director of public works, is unsuitable. 
(b)  In refilling the excavation, if there is not sufficient material excavated suitable for refilling, the deficiency shall be made up with material, approved prior to use by the director of public works, hauled in. 
(c)  Wherever an excavation crosses an existing utility, pipe or other structure, backfill shall be carefully compacted in stages from the bottom of the excavation. Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water service, telephone service, natural gas service or other service shall not be interrupted by the permittee. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to have the various utilities locate and mark their facilities prior to excavation. 
(d)  Mechanical compaction shall be used on all materials used for trench backfill. Each layer (12-inch maximum) shall be uniformly compacted to a dry density of at least 95 percent of the maximum dry density as determined by the modified proctor test (ASTM-1557). Compaction or consolidation by flooding shall not be permitted. 
(e)  All excavations shall be subject to testing by the village. Backfilled material not achieving the compaction requirements of subsection (d) of this section shall be removed and recompacted by the permittee. The cost of any retesting shall be paid by the permittee. 
(f)  When the sides of the trench will not stand perpendicular, sheathing and braces shall be used to prevent caving. No timber, bracing, lagging, sheathing or other lumber shall be left in any trench. At no time shall any street pavements be permitted to overhang the excavation. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-4(e); Code 1998, § 82-154) 
Sec. 58-191. - Notice of commencement of work. 
    Under this article, it shall be the duty of the permittee to notify the director of public works and all public and private individuals, firms and corporations affected by the work to be done at least one business day before such work is to commence. The director of public works shall also be notified at least four hours prior to backfilling or restoring the surface. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-4(f); Code 1998, § 82-155) 
Sec. 58-192. - Pavement replacement. 
(a)  Under this article, backfill material shall be left below the original surface to allow for four inches of three-inch crushed stone and four inches of three-quarter-inch crushed stone, plus the thickness of the required pavement structure. If paving will not occur as part of the initial street restoration operation, the balance of the opening to the original surface elevation shall be backfilled with compacted three-quarter-inch crushed stone. 
(b)  Bituminous pavement shall be placed the full depth of the existing pavement or 21/2 inches, whichever is greater. Bituminous pavement shall be placed in a maximum of a 11/2-inch base layer and a one-inch top layer, with each layer compacted to maximum density, and shall consist of state department of transportation gradation no. 1 for the binder course and state department of transportation no. 3 for the surface course. The finished surface shall be smooth and free of surface irregularities and shall match the existing pavement and any castings or street appurtenances. Allowable deviations shall be no more than one-quarter inch as measured with a ten-foot straight edge. 
(c)  Concrete pavement shall be placed to the full depth of the existing pavement or seven inches, whichever is greater. Concrete used shall not contain calcium chloride. The surface shall be given a light broom finish. The edges shall be tooled to prevent spalling at the saw cut edge. The surface shall be evenly and completely sealed with a white pigmented curing compound. The surface shall be protected from traffic for a minimum of three days. Tie bars shall be installed as directed by the director of public works. 
(d)  In emergency excavations during winter months when it is not possible to replace the removed pavement with a like material, the excavation shall be temporarily resurfaced with a minimum of three inches of cold mix bituminous material. This temporary wearing surface shall be compacted and rolled smooth. These temporary wearing surfaces shall be removed and replaced with material as specified in this section by not later than the following June 1, except as provided in this section. Permanent pavements shall be replaced within 60 days of the date of the permit. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-4(g); Code 1998, § 82-156) 
Sec. 58-193. - Emergency excavations. 
    In an emergency, any person owning or controlling any sewer, gas main, water main, conduit or other utility in or under any public street, alley, easement, way or ground and any person's agents and employees may take immediate proper emergency measures to remedy dangerous conditions or the protection of property, life, health or safety without obtaining an excavation permit, provided that such person shall apply for an excavation permit not later than next business day and shall notify the police department immediately. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-4(h); Code 1998, § 82-157) 
Sec. 58-194. - Excavations limited in permanently improved or repaved streets. 
    Whenever the village board determines to provide for the permanent improvement or repaving of any street, such determination shall be made not less than 30 days before the work of improvement or repaving shall begin. Immediately after such determination by the village board, the director of public works shall notify in writing each person, utility or other agency owning or controlling any sewer, water main, conduit or other utility in or under such street or any real property abutting the street that all such excavation work in such street must be completed within 30 days. After such permanent improvement or repaving, no permit shall be issued to open or excavate the street for a period of five years after the date of improvement or repaving unless, in the opinion of the director of public works, conditions exist which make it absolutely essential that the permit be issued. Every effort shall be made to place gas, electric, telephone and television cable lines in street terraces. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-4(i); Code 1998, § 82-158) 
Secs. 58-195-58-211. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 58-212. - Required. 
    No person or the agents, employees or contractors of such person shall make or cause to be made any opening or excavation in any public street, public alley, public way, public ground, public sidewalk or village-owned easement within the village without a permit from the director of public works. This section shall not apply to village excavation work done under the direction of the director of public works. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-3(a), (c); Code 1998, §§ 82-141, 82-143) 
Sec. 58-213. - Application. 
    The application for a permit shall be in writing and signed by the applicant or the applicant's agent. The applicant shall submit to the director of public works, at the time the application for the permit is made, sufficient information relating to the work to be done, including the general location and nature of the work and the method the applicant proposes to use in doing the work. The director of public works shall determine if sufficient information is submitted. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-3(b); Code 1998, § 82-142) 
Sec. 58-214. - Validity. 
    A permit issued under this article shall be valid for a period of 30 days from the date of approval, except as provided under section 58-192 for pavement replacement. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-3(d); Code 1998, § 82-144) 
Sec. 58-215. - Renewal. 
    If operations have begun under an approved permit issued pursuant to this article and the operations will continue beyond the 30-day validation period, the permittee shall apply for a 30-day permit renewal by written request to the director of public works and payment of a renewal permit fee in the amount established by resolution. Permit renewals shall be issued at the discretion of the director of public works. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-3(e); Code 1998, § 82-145) 
Sec. 58-216. - Permit fee. 
    The fee for a street opening permit shall be as established by resolution plus actual village expenses. Permit fees shall be paid to the village who shall issue a receipt therefor. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-3(f)(2); Code 1998, § 82-147) 
Sec. 58-217. - Insurance required. 
    A permit required under this article shall be issued only upon condition that the applicant submit to the village satisfactory written evidence that the applicant has in force and will maintain during the time the permit is in effect public liability insurance of not less than $1,000,000.00 per one person, $1,000,000.00 for one accident and property damage coverage of not less than $1,000,000.00. The policy shall name the village as the third-party insured. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-3(g); Code 1998, § 82-148) 
Sec. 58-218. - Statement of guarantee; bond; defective work. 
(a)  Before a permit for excavating or opening any street or public way may be issued, the applicant must sign a statement that the applicant will: 
(1)  Indemnify and hold harmless the village and its officers from all liability for accidents and damage caused by any of the work covered by the applicant's permit; 
(2)  Fill up and place in good and safe condition all excavations and openings made in the street; 
(3)  Replace and restore the pavement over any opening the applicant may make as near as can be to the state and condition in which the applicant found it, and shall keep and maintain the pavement in such condition, normal wear and tear excepted, to the satisfaction of the director of public works for a period of one year; 
(4)  Pay all forfeitures imposed upon the applicant for any violation of any rule, regulation or ordinance governing street openings or drain-laying adopted by the village board; and 
(5)  Repair any damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the excavation in accordance with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the village. 
Such statement shall also guarantee that, if the village shall elect to make the street repair, the person opening the street will pay all costs of making such repair and of maintaining the street for one year. 
(b)  Faulty work or materials shall be immediately replaced by the permittee upon notice by the village. Failure to correct deficiencies shall result in a one-year revocation of the right to obtain a street opening permit. The village shall repair the deficiencies and bill the permittee for all labor, materials and equipment used plus 20 percent for administration. 
(c)  The person who does such restoration shall be responsible therefor for one year from the date of the completion of the work and shall file a written guarantee or surety bond to that effect with the village in an amount determined by the director of public works. 
(d)  Whenever the director of public works shall find that any such work has become defective within one year of the date of completion, the director of public works shall give written notice thereof to the contractor or to the contractor's surety stating the defect, the work to be done, the cost thereof and the period of time deemed by the director of public works to be reasonably necessary to complete the work. After receipt of such notice, the contractor or the surety must, within the time specified, repair the defect or indemnify the village for the cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice. 
(e)  An annual bond may be given under this section covering all excavation work done by the principal for one year beginning January 1, which shall be conditioned as specified in this section and in the amount determined by the village board as necessary to adequately protect the public and the village. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-3(h); Code 1998, § 82-149) 
Secs. 58-219-58-244. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DRIVEWAYS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 58-245-58-266. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 58-267. - Purpose and intent. 
    For the safety of the general public, the village shall determine the location, size, construction and number of access points to public roadways within the village limits. It is the village's intent to provide safe access to properties abutting public roadways suitable for the property to be developed to its highest and best use, provided that access is not deficient or dangerous to the general public. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-1(a); Code 1998, § 82-216) 
Sec. 58-268. - Required to construct, reconstruct, alter or enlarge. 
    No person shall construct, reconstruct, alter or enlarge any private driveway within the limits of the dedicated portion of any public street under the control and jurisdiction of the village without first obtaining a sidewalk permit as provided by this division. A sidewalk permit is not required when a new sidewalk is to be constructed in conjunction with the construction of a new driveway; the sidewalk is included in the driveway permit/building permit process in such cases. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-1(b); Code 1998, § 82-217) 
Sec. 58-269. - Application form; fee; issuance criteria. 
    Application for a permit required under this division shall be made to the building inspector on a form provided by the village and shall be accompanied by a drawing accurately depicting the portion of the proposed private driveway to be constructed, reconstructed, altered or enlarged lying within the dedicated portion of the public street; the dimensions thereof; and a statement of the materials proposed to be used. The applicant shall pay a fee in the amount established by resolution. If the proposed private driveway is a part of construction for a building or other structure for which a building permit has been applied for, no additional fee is required. Upon receipt of the application and the fee if required, the building inspector, upon the recommendation of the director of public works, shall approve such application if the proposed driveway complies with the terms and conditions of this article and any other applicable section of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-1(c); Code 1998, § 82-218) 
Sec. 58-270. - Application contents. 
    All driveway permit applications shall contain the applicant's statement that: 
(1)  The applicant represents all parties in interest and that such proposed driveway is for the bona fide purpose of securing access to the applicant's property and not for the purpose of parking or servicing vehicles, advertising, storage or merchandising of goods within the dedicated portion of the village street, or for any other purpose. 
(2)  The village, notwithstanding the construction of such driveway, reserves the right to make any changes, additions, repairs or relocations within the dedicated portion of the village street at any time, including relocation, reconstruction, widening and maintaining the street without compensating the owner of such private driveway for the damage or destruction of such private roadway. 
(3)  The permittee, the permittee's successors or assigns agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the village, its officials, officers, agents or employees against any claim or any cause of action for personal injury or property damage sustained because of the exercise of such permit. 
(4)  The village does not assume any responsibility for the removal or clearance of snow, ice or sleet or the opening of any windrows of such material upon such portion of such driveway within the dedicated portion of the village street. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-1(d); Code 1998, § 82-219) 
Secs. 58-271-58-288. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LOCATION, DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 58-289. - General requirements. 
    The location, design and construction of driveways shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  General design. Private driveways shall be of such width and so located that all of such driveways and their appurtenances are within the limits of the frontage abutting the street of the property served. Driveways shall not provide direct ingress or egress to or from any street intersection area and shall not encroach upon or occupy areas of the street right-of-way required for effective traffic control or for street signs or signals. A driveway shall be so located and constructed that vehicles approaching or using it shall have adequate sight distance along the street. 
(2)  Number. The number of driveways to serve an individual property fronting on a street shall be one, except where deemed necessary and feasible by the director of public works for reasonable and adequate service to the property, considering the safety, convenience and utility of the street. 
(3)  Island area. The island area in the street right-of-way between successive driveways or adjoining a driveway and between the highway shoulder and right-of-way shall constitute a restricted area and may be filled in and graded only as provided in subsection (7) of this section. 
(4)  Drainage. The surface of the driveway connecting with rural-type street cross sections shall slope downward and away from the highway shoulder a sufficient distance to preclude ordinary surface water drainage flowing onto the street roadbed. 
(5)  Culverts. Driveways shall not obstruct or impair drainage in street ditches or roadside areas. Driveway culverts, where required, shall be adequate for surface water drainage along the street and shall not be less than the equivalent of a 12-inch diameter pipe. The distance between culverts under successive driveways shall not be less than ten feet except as such restricted area is permitted to be filled pursuant to subsection (7) of this section. 
(6)  Reconstruction of sidewalks and curb and gutter. When the construction of a driveway requires the removal of a curb or gutter, the new connections shall be of equivalent acceptable material, and curb returns shall be provided or restored in a neat, workmanlike manner. The driveway surface shall be connected with the highway pavement and the sidewalk, if any, in a neat, workmanlike manner. The driveway construction shall include the replacement of such sidewalk areas that are inadequate or that are or may be damaged by means of vehicle travel across the sidewalk. 
(7)  Restricted areas. The restricted area between successive driveways may be filled in and graded only upon compliance with the following: 
a.  The filling or draining shall be to grades approved by the director of public works and, except where highway drainage is by means of curb and gutter, water drainage of the area shall be directed away from the street roadbed in a suitable manner. 
b.  Culvert extensions under the restricted area shall be of the same size and of equivalent acceptable material as the culvert under the driveway. Intermediate manholes adequate for cleanout purposes may be required where the total culvert length is excessive. 
c.  Where no street side ditch separates the restricted area from the street roadbed, permanent provision may be required to separate the area from the street roadbed to prevent its use for driveway or parking purposes by construction of a border, curb, rail or posts as may be required by the director of public works. 
(8)  Relocation of utilities. Any costs of relocating utilities shall be the responsibility of the property owner, with approval of the board of appeals necessary before any utility may be relocated and the driveway installed. 
(9)  Construction across sidewalks. All driveway entrances and approaches which are constructed across sidewalks shall be of concrete constructed in accordance with the requirements for sidewalk construction in article III of this chapter, insofar as such requirements are applicable, including thickness requirements. 
(10)  Variances. Any of the requirements of this section may be varied by the board of appeals when the peculiar nature of the property or the design of the street may make the rigid adherence to the requirements impossible or impractical. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-2(a); Code 1998, § 82-246) 
Sec. 58-290. - Special requirements for commercial and industrial driveways. 
    The following are applicable to driveways serving commercial or industrial establishments: 
(1)  Width of drive. No part of a private driveway located within the dedicated area of a public street shall, except as provided in this section, have a width greater than 30 feet measured at right angles to the centerline of the driveway, except as increased by permissible radii. When the nature of the commercial or industrial activity or the physical characteristics of the land would require a driveway of greater width than specified in this subsection, the plan commission in its discretion may permit a driveway of additional width. 
(2)  Angular placement of driveway. The angle between the centerline of the driveway and the curbline shall not be less than 45 degrees. 
(3)  Terrace areas. Where the public sidewalk is adjacent to the curb, a terrace of a minimum length of six feet measured along the curbline shall be placed between each entrance to a village street. The curb shall be left intact for the length of this terrace. Where the public sidewalk is remote from the curb, an island of a minimum length of ten feet measured along the right-of-way line shall be maintained along each entrance to the village street. All flares shall be tangent to the curbline. A curb length of not less than three feet shall be left undisturbed adjacent to each property line to serve as an island area if an adjoining property owner applies for a driveway permit to serve the property owner's property. The director of public works may grant exceptions to the requirements in this subsection where deemed necessary and feasible for reasonable and adequate service to the property, considering the safety, convenience and utility of the street. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-2(b); Code 1998, § 82-247; Ord. No. 01-9, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 58-291. - Special requirements for residential driveways. 
    The following are applicable to driveways serving residential property: 
(1)  Width of driveways. Openings for vehicular ingress and egress shall be at least ten feet wide at the property line for residential properties, but shall not exceed three feet wider than the garage door opening or 24 feet, whichever is greater, at the property line, with a maximum additional six feet at the curb opening. 
(2)  Angular placement. The centerline of the drive may be parallel to the line of the lot where access is required or at right angles to the curbline. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-2(c); Code 1998, § 82-248) 
Sec. 58-292. - Appeal from permit refusal. 
    Any person feeling aggrieved by the refusal of the building inspector to issue a permit for a private driveway may appeal such refusal to the board of appeals within 20 days after such refusal to issue the permit is made. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-2(d); Code 1998, § 82-249) 
Sec. 58-293. - Prohibited driveways. 
(a)  No person shall place, construct, locate, or cause to be placed, constructed or located any obstruction or structure within the limits of any public road, highway or street in the village except as permitted by this division. As used in this subsection, the term "structure" includes private driveways, a portion of which extends into any public road, highway or street, and which is in nonconformance with this article. 
(b)  No driveway shall be closer than ten feet to the extended street line at an intersection. At street intersections, a driveway shall not provide direct ingress or egress to or from the street intersection area and shall not occupy areas of the roadway deemed necessary by the village for effective traffic control or for highway signs or signals. 
(c)  The grade of that portion of any private driveway or pedestrian path located within the limits of any public road, highway or street shall be such as shall meet the grade of the existing public roadway at its edge and shall not cause an obstruction to the maintenance or clearing of such public roadway. 
(d)  No driveway apron shall extend out into the street further than the facing of the curb, and under no circumstances shall such driveway apron extend into any gutter area. All driveway entrances and approaches shall be constructed as not to interfere with the drainage of streets, side ditches or roadside areas, or with any existing structure on the right-of-way. 
(e)  No portion of any curb, parapet or retaining wall, rising above the grade of the driveway, erected by the owner of the premises involved, shall extend beyond the culvert spanning the watercourse located in such public way. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-2(e); Code 1998, § 82-250) 
Secs. 58-294-58-319. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Assessments for snow and ice removal, Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0627, 66.0907. 

Sec. 58-320. - Duty to remove from sidewalks; encroachment. 
(a)  Removal of snow and ice. The owner, occupant or person in charge of any parcel or lot which fronts upon or abuts any sidewalk shall keep such sidewalk clear of all snow and ice. If snow accumulates on the sidewalk due to natural means or by any other means, the sidewalk shall be cleared of all accumulated snow and ice within 24 hours from the time the snow ceases to accumulate on the sidewalk. Sidewalks are to be kept clear of snow and ice to a minimum of four feet in width. If ice has formed on any sidewalk in such a manner that it cannot be removed, the owner, occupant or person in charge of the parcel or lot which fronts upon or adjoins the sidewalk shall keep the sidewalk sprinkled with sand or salt to permit safe travel by pedestrians. 
(b)  Encroachment into street or onto sidewalks. No person shall push, shove or in any way deposit any snow or ice onto any public streets or alley, public or private sidewalk or public lands dedicated to public use except for parcels or lots located where existing buildings are constructed within five feet of the street right-of-way and the sidewalks exist from the village right-of-way to the curbline. In such instances, the owner, occupant or employee of the owner or occupant of the parcel or lot shall be permitted to deposit snow and ice from the sidewalk onto the public street. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-7(a); Code 1998, § 82-281; Ord. No. 00-14, § 1, 12-18-2000) 
Sec. 58-321. - Notice to remove; removal by village. 
    If, during any September 1 through April 30 period, the owner, occupant or person in charge of any parcel or lot that fronts upon or adjoins any sidewalk fails to keep the sidewalk clear of snow and ice as set forth in section 58-320, the director of public works may provide written notice to the owner directing that the snow and ice be removed no later than 12:00 noon of the day following the issuance of the notice, and further directing that all future accumulations of snow and ice be removed as required by section 58-320. Notice may be hand-delivered or mailed to the last-known address of the owner of the property. The notice shall state that the village may, during the remainder of the September 1 through April 30 period, and without further notice, remove any snow and ice accumulations that are not removed within the time required by section 58-320, that the cost of the snow and ice removal shall be charged to the parcel or lot owner, and that the cost of the snow and ice removal may become a charge against the parcel or lot. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-7(b); Code 1998, § 82-282; Ord. No. 00-14, § 2, 12-18-2000) 
Sec. 58-322. - Enforcement. 
    The director of public works is authorized and directed to enforce this article. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-7(c); Code 1998, § 82-283) 
Sec. 58-323. - Continued violations. 
    Each 24-hour period where a violation of this article occurs shall constitute a separate offense under this article for enforcement purposes. Repeated violations or subsequent additional accumulations of snow and ice shall not nullify any pending notice issued under this article. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-7(d); Code 1998, § 82-284) 
Sec. 58-324. - Abatement after notice. 
    During each September 1 through April 30 period, if a property owner has received at least one written notice pursuant to section 58-321, and has failed to remove snow and ice within the time required by the notice, or within the time required by section 58-320 if the snow or ice has accumulated after the owner has received one written notice, then the director of public works may cause the snow and ice to be removed without further notice. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-7(e); Code 1998, § 82-285; Ord. No. 00-14, § 3, 12-18-2000) 
Sec. 58-325. - Expense for abatement. 
    An account of the expenses incurred by the village to abate the snow or ice hazard pursuant to this article shall be kept, and such expenses shall be charged to and paid by the parcel or lot owner. Notice of the bill for the removal of snow or ice shall be mailed to the last-known address of the owner of the parcel or lot and shall be payable within ten calendar days from the receipt thereof. Within 60 days after such costs and expenses are incurred and remain unpaid, the village treasurer shall enter those charges onto the tax roll as a special tax as provided by Wis. Stats. § 66.0907. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-7(f); Code 1998, § 82-286) 
Sec. 58-326. - Penalty. 
    In addition to the procedures set forth in this article, any person who violates this article shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-32. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-7(g); Code 1998, § 82-287) 
Secs. 58-327-58-355. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - STREET USE PERMIT 

Sec. 58-356. - Purpose. 
    The streets in possession of the village are primarily for the use of the public in the ordinary way. However, under proper circumstances, the village may grant a permit for street use, subject to reasonable municipal regulation and control. Therefore, this article is enacted to regulate and control the use of streets pursuant to a street use permit to the end that the health, safety and general welfare of the public and the good order of the village can be protected and maintained. 
(Code 1988, § 7-8-1(a); Code 1998, § 82-316) 
Sec. 58-357. - Application. 
    A written application for a street use permit by a person or group desiring the permit shall be made on a form provided by the village administrator and shall be filed with the village clerk. The application shall set forth the following information regarding the proposed street use: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  If the proposed street use is to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorizing responsible heads of such organization. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be responsible for conducting the proposed use of the street. 
(4)  The date and duration of time for which the requested use of the street is proposed to occur. 
(5)  An accurate description of that portion of the street proposed to be used. 
(6)  The approximate number of persons for whom use of the proposed street area is requested. 
(7)  The proposed use, described in detail, for which the street use permit is requested. 
(Code 1988, § 7-8-1(b); Code 1998, § 82-317) 
Sec. 58-358. - Review by police chief and director of public works. 
    Before an application for a street use permit is considered by the village board, the application shall be reviewed by the director of public works and police chief for their recommendation as to the effect that the temporary closing of the street will have on the public safety and traffic movement in the area during the time the street may be closed. 
(Code 1988, § 7-8-1(d); Code 1998, § 82-319) 
Sec. 58-359. - Mandatory denial. 
(a)  An application for a street use permit shall be denied if: 
(1)  The proposed street use is primarily for private or commercial gain. 
(2)  The proposed street use would violate any federal or state law or any village ordinance. 
(3)  The proposed street use will substantially hinder the movement of police, fire or emergency vehicles, constituting a risk to persons or property. 
(4)  The application for a street use permit does not contain the information required in section 58-357. 
(5)  The application requests a period for the use of the street in excess of six hours. 
(6)  The use could equally be held in a public park or other location. 
(b)  In addition to the requirement that the application for a street use permit shall be denied, as set forth in this section, the village board may deny a permit for any other reason if it concedes that the health, safety and general welfare of the public cannot adequately be protected and maintained if the permit is granted. 
(Code 1988, § 7-8-1(e); Code 1998, § 82-320) 
Sec. 58-360. - Fee. 
    Each application for a street use permit shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution. 
(Code 1988, § 7-8-1(f); Code 1998, § 82-321) 
Sec. 58-361. - Consent to issuance. 
    In addition to the fee required by section 58-360, each application for a street use permit, except for parades or races sponsored by civic, youth or scout organizations which have been in existence for at least six months, shall be accompanied by a petition designating the proposed area of the street to be used and the time for the proposed use. The petition shall be signed by not less than 75 percent of the residents over 18 years of age residing along that portion of the street designated for the proposed use. The petition shall be verified and shall be submitted in substantially the following form: 
PETITION FOR STREET USE PERMIT 
    We, the undersigned residents of the _____ hundred block of ___________ Street in the Village, hereby consent to the _____ recreational or business use of this street between the hours of _____ and _____ on ___________, the ___ day of ___________, 20___ for the purpose of ___________ and do hereby consent to the Village of Waunakee to grant a Street Use Permit for use of the said portion of said street for said purpose and do hereby agree to abide by such conditions of such use as the Village of Waunakee shall attach to the granting of the requested Street Use Permit. We further understand that the permit will not be granted for longer than six hours on the date hereinabove specified, and agree to remove from the street prior to the end of said period all equipment, vehicles and other personal property placed or driven thereon during the event for which a permit is granted. 
    We designate ___________ as the responsible person or persons who shall apply for an application for a Street Use Permit. 
(Code 1988, § 7-8-1(g); Code 1998, § 82-322) 
Sec. 58-362. - Indemnification; insurance; bond. 
    The applicant for a street use permit may be required to indemnify, defend and hold the village and its employees and agents harmless against all claims, liability, loss, damage or expense incurred by the village on account of any injury to or death of any person or any damage to property caused by or resulting from the activities for which the permit is granted. As evidence of the applicant's ability to perform the conditions of the permit, the applicant may be required to furnish a certificate of comprehensive general liability insurance with the village. The applicant may be required to furnish a performance bond prior to being granted the permit. 
(Code 1988, § 7-8-1(h); Code 1998, § 82-323) 
Sec. 58-363. - Termination. 
    A street use permit for an event in process may be terminated by the police department if the health, safety and welfare of the public appears to be endangered by activities generated as a result of the event or if the event is in violation of any of the conditions of the permit or village ordinances. The police chief has the authority to revoke a permit or terminate an event in progress if the event organizers fail to comply with any of the regulations in the street use policy or conditions stated in the permit. 
(Code 1988, § 7-8-1(i); Code 1998, § 82-324) 
Chapter 62 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Delinquent personal property taxes. 
    A penalty of 0.5 percent per month or fraction of a month beginning from the preceding January 1 shall be paid on any overdue or delinquent personal property taxes. 
(Code 1988, § 3-1-14(a); Code 1998, § 2-460) 
Sec. 62-2. - Distribution of payments for state property tax credits. 
    The Village of Waunakee is eligible for direct distribution of state property tax credits and notifies the State Departments of Administration and Revenue that the village approves the direct distribution of property tax credits to the Village of Waunakee until or unless this section is repealed, or the property tax credits to be distributed no longer exceed $3,000,000 annually. 
(Ord. No. 18-4, § 1, 2-19-2018) 
Secs. 62-3-62-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF REVIEW[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Boards of review, proceedings, Wis. Stats. §§ 70.46, 70.47. 

Sec. 62-21. - Composition. 
    The board of review shall consist of the village clerk and six citizens. The village president shall make the appointments, subject to confirmation of the village board, at the organizational meeting. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-1(a); Code 1998, § 90-26; Ord. No. 96-10, § 1, 10-21-1996; Ord. No. 97-5, § 4, 5-5-1997; Ord. No. 99-19, § 1, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 62-22. - Duties. 
    The duties and functions of the board of review shall be as prescribed in Wis. Stats. §§ 70.46 and 70.47. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-1(b)(1); Code 1998, § 90-27) 
Sec. 62-23. - Officers. 
    The members of the board of review shall elect a chairperson for each annual session thereof, which election shall be held at the first annual meeting of the board. The board of review shall appoint the secretary for such board, who shall keep an accurate record of all of its proceedings and give the necessary notices. 
(Code 1998, § 90-30; Ord. No. 96-10, § 2(2-4-1(d)), 10-21-1996) 
Secs. 62-24-62-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL/MOTEL ROOM TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Hotel occupancy tax, Wis. Stats. § 66.0515. 

Sec. 62-50. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bed and breakfast establishment means any place of temporary lodging that provides four or fewer rooms for rent, which is open for rental more than ten nights in a 12 month period, is the owner's personal residence and is occupied by the owner at the time of rental, and in which the only meal served is breakfast. 
    Gross receipts has the meaning as defined in Wis. Stats. § 77.51(4)(a), insofar as applicable. 
    Hotel or motel means a building or group of buildings in which the public may obtain accommodations for a consideration, including, without limitation, such establishments as inns, motels, tourist homes, tourist houses or courts, bed and breakfast establishments, lodging houses, rooming houses, summer camps, apartment hotels, resort lodges and cabins, and any other building or group of buildings in which accommodations are available to the public, except accommodations rented for a continuous period of more than one month and accommodations furnished by any hospital, sanitarium or nursing home, or by corporations or associations organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, or educational purposes provided that no part of the net earnings of such corporations and associations inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
    Transient means any person residing for a continuous period of less than one month in a hotel, motel, or other furnished accommodation available to the public. 
    Tourism commission means an entity created by one municipality to coordinate tourism promotion and tourism development for the zone. 
(Code 1998, § 90-46; Ord. No. 02-03, § 1, 5-20-2002; Ord. No. 16-9, § 1(90-46), 10-17-2016) 
Sec. 62-51. - Imposition of room tax. 
(a)  Tax exemptions. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0615, a tax is imposed on the privilege and service of furnishing, at retail, rooms or lodging to transients by hotel keepers, motel operators and other persons furnishing accommodations that are available to the public, irrespective of whether membership is required for the use of the accommodations. Such tax shall be at the rate of five percent of the gross receipts from such retail furnishing of rooms or lodgings. Such tax shall not be subject to the selective sales tax imposed by Wis. Stats. § 77.52(2)(a)l. 
(1)  Sales exemptions. The following room sales are exempt from this tax: 
a.  Sales to the federal government; 
b.  Sales to persons listed under Wis. Stats. § 77.54(9a). 
(2)  Exemption conditions. The following conditions must occur for a sales to be exempt from the room tax: 
a.  The lodging establishment must issue the billing or invoice for the lodging in the name of the exempt entity; and 
b.  The lodging establishment must receive from the exempt entity: 
1.  In the case of federal and state or local governmental units, a purchase order or similar written document (such as a letter of authorization); or 
2.  In the case of nonprofit religious, charitable, scientific, or educational organization, the organization's certificate of exempt status number. 
The exemption still applies if the employee pays with his own funds, as long as the above conditions are met. 
(b)  Permit required. Every person furnishing rooms or lodging under subsection (a) of this section shall obtain a permit for such place of business from the village treasurer. Every application for a permit shall be made upon a form prescribed by the village treasurer. The application shall be signed by the owner if a sole proprietor and, if not a sole proprietor, by the person authorized to act on behalf of the business. 
(c)  Issuance of permit. After compliance with subsection (b) of this section, the village treasurer shall grant and issue to each applicant a separate permit for each place of business within the village. Such permit is not assignable and is valid only for the person in whose name it is issued and for the transaction of business at the place designated therein. It shall at all times be available for inspection at the place for which issued. 
(d)  Revocation or suspension of permit. Whenever any person fails to comply with this article, the village clerk may, upon ten days' notification and after affording such person the opportunity to show cause why his permit should not be revoked, revoke or suspend the permit. The village clerk shall give to such person written notice of the revocation or suspension of any permits. The village clerk shall not issue a new permit after the revocation of a permit unless he is satisfied that the former holder of the permit will comply with the provisions of this article. A fee in the amount established by resolution shall be imposed for the renewal or issuance of a permit which has been previously revoked or suspended. 
(Code 1998, § 90-47; Ord. No. 02-03, § 1, 5-20-2002; Ord. No. 16-9, § 2(90-47), 10-17-2016) 
Sec. 62-52. - Collection of tax. 
    The room tax imposed by section 62-51 for the months of October, November, and December 2002, and each calendar quarter thereafter is due and payable and must be received in the office of the village treasurer at the village hall on or before the last business day of the month next succeeding the calendar quarter for which it is imposed. 
(1)  Quarterly room tax returns. A return shall be filed with the treasurer on or before the same date on which such tax is due and payable. Such return shall be on a form provided by the village and shall show the gross receipts of the preceding calendar quarter from such retail furnishing of rooms or lodging, illustrating and indicating thereon any exemption from an imposed room tax, billed to the state and/or its departments or agencies, the amount of taxes imposed for such period, and such other information as the treasurer deems necessary, provided it is directly related to the tax. 
(2)  Annual room tax return. Every person required to file such quarterly returns shall also file an annual calendar year return on a form provided by the village which shall be due and filed as part of the quarterly return for the fourth quarter of each calendar year. The annual return shall summarize the quarterly returns, reconcile and adjust for errors in the quarterly returns, and shall contain certain such additional information as the treasurer requires, provided it is directly related to the tax. All annual returns shall be signed by the persons required to file a return, or his duly authorized agent. The treasurer may, for good cause, extend the time for filing any return, but in no event longer than one month from the filing date. 
(Code 1998, § 90-48; Ord. No. 02-03, § 1, 5-20-2002) 
Sec. 62-53. - Liability for unpaid tax. 
    The room tax imposed hereunder shall be a continuing liability upon the business entity or person upon whom it is imposed until paid in full. Business successors shall be liable for any preceding calendar quarter for which a return has not been filed and payment not received. 
(Code 1998, § 90-49; Ord. No. 02-03, § 1, 5-20-2002) 
Sec. 62-54. - Interest on unpaid taxes. 
    All unpaid taxes under this article shall bear interest at the rate of eighteen percent per annum from the due date of the return until the first day of the month following the month in which the tax was paid. 
(Code 1998, § 90-50; Ord. No. 02-03, § 1, 5-20-2002) 
Sec. 62-55. - Delinquent tax returns. 
    Tax returns required hereunder and not timely filed shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to a late filing fee as established by resolution. 
(Code 1998, § 90-51; Ord. No. 02-03, § 1, 5-20-2002) 
Sec. 62-56. - Administration of tax collection. 
(a)  The village treasurer shall be responsible for the administration and collection of the room tax. The treasurer may, by field audit, determine the tax required to be paid to the village or the refund due to any person under this article. The determination shall be made upon the basis of the facts contained in the return being audited and upon any other information available to the treasurer. The treasurer is authorized to examine and inspect the books, records memoranda and property of any person which are directly related to the tax or which have a direct bearing upon the gross receipts upon which the tax due, including state sales tax records, is determined in order to verify the tax liability of that person or of another person. Nothing herein shall prevent the treasurer from making a determination of tax at any time. 
(b)  Commencing the effective date of this section, the net room tax collections shall be collected from approved hotels or motels within the village and shall be allocated as follows: 
(1)  The tourism commission shall receive 70 percent of the collected tax receipts, which are to be expended for tourism promotion and tourism development. The tourism commission shall advise and inform the village board of which items it intends to support or implement prior thereto. 
If the village board objects to such expenditure, it shall inform the tourism commission of its objection and no room tax money shall be spent on that particular item. 
(2)  The village may retain 30 percent of the tax receipts to be used for tourism promotion, tourism development, or seasonal, permanent, or long-lived improvements that benefit the village. 
(3)  The tourism commission shall submit an annual report to the village on or before April of each year with respect to the previous year's tourism promotion and tourism development activities in which it engaged. 
(4)  The treasurer shall submit an annual report to the state department of revenue in accordance with Wis. Stat. § 66.0615(4). 
(Code 1998, § 90-52; Ord. No. 02-03, § 1, 5-20-2002; Ord. No. 16-9, § 3(90-52), 10-17-2016) 
Sec. 62-57. - Penalty assessment. 
    If any person fails to timely file a return, as required by this article, the treasurer shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts upon which the tax is determined. Such estimate shall be made for the period for which such person failed to make a return and shall be based upon any information which is in the treasurer's possession or may come into his possession or such other information as may have a bearing upon the determination of gross receipts. On the basis of this estimate, the treasurer shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the village, adding to the sum thus arrived at a penalty equal to ten percent thereof. Such determination may be made for each quarterly period for which no return is filed. Such penalty shall be due upon written notice to the business entity or person owing the tax and shall not be in lieu of the tax due hereunder. 
(Code 1998, § 90-53; Ord. No. 02-03, § 1, 5-20-2002) 
Sec. 62-58. - Records to be maintained. 
    Every person liable for the tax imposed by this article shall keep or cause to be kept such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers for seven years in such form so as to enable the treasurer to determine the tax due hereunder. 
(Code 1998, § 90-54; Ord. No. 02-03, § 1, 5-20-2002) 
Sec. 62-59. - Confidentiality. 
(a)  All tax returns, schedules, exhibits, writings or audit reports relating to such returns on file with the village treasurer are deemed to be confidential, except the village treasurer may divulge their contents to the following and no others: 
(1)  The person who filed the return. 
(2)  Such other public officials when deemed necessary and after notification of the licensee. 
(b)  No person having an administrative duty under this article shall make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of records of any person on whom a tax is imposed by this article, the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof set forth or disclosed in any return, or permit, any return or copy thereof to be seen or examined by any person, except as provided herein. 
(Code 1998, § 90-55; Ord. No. 02-03, § 1, 5-20-2002) 
Sec. 62-60. - Penalty. 
    Any violation of, or noncompliance with, any of the provisions of this article for which a penalty has not been prescribed herein shall subject the violator to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment thereof to imprisonment in the county jail until such forfeiture has been paid but not to exceed 15 days. Each day of violation or noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1998, § 90-56; Ord. No. 02-03, § 1, 5-20-2002) 
Chapter 66 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1-66-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Video service, Wis. Stats. § 66.0420 et seq. 

Sec. 66-19. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to authorize the village to grant a nonexclusive franchise to one or more grantees to construct, install, maintain, operate and reconstruct within the village a cable television system for the distribution of television signals, frequency-modulated radio signals and any other electronic signals capable of being transmitted on a coaxial or fiber optic network including data transmission and closed circuit television programs, provided that the grantee conforms to the conditions, limitations, and requirements of this article. 
(Code 1998, § 26-75; Ord. No. 98-3, § 1, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-20. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "cable television franchise ordinance." 
(Code 1998, § 26-76; Ord. No. 98-3, § 2, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
    Basic service means any service tier which includes, at a minimum, all signals of domestic television broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station), any public, educational, and governmental programming required by the franchise, and any additional video programming signals or service added to the tier by the grantee. 
    Cable Act means title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 USC 151 et seq., and all other provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-549, and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-104. 
    Cable operator means any person or group of persons who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such a cable system or who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
    Cable service means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service; and, subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
    Cable television system, cable TV system or cable system means any facility owned by a cable operator consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but the term "cable television system, cable TV system, or cable system" does not include: 
(1)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
(2)  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; 
(3)  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; 
(4)  An open video system that complies with section 653 of the Cable Act, including any amendments thereto; or 
(5)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems. 
    Channel means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel (as "television channel" is defined in the Federal Communications Commission regulations). 
    Control means the power or authority to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of the grantee. 
    Dwelling unit means a building or that part of a building used as a home or residence. 
    Extended basic service means any video programming provided over a cable system, regardless of service tier, including installation or rental of equipment used for the receipt of such video programming, other than: 
(1)  Video programming carried on the basic service tier; 
(2)  Video programming offered on a pay-per-channel or pay per-program basis; or 
(3)  A combination of multiple channels of pay-per-channel or pay-per-program video programming offered on a multiplexed or time-shifted basis so long as the combined service consists of commonly identified video programming and is not bundled with any regulated service tier. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission, its designee, or any successor thereto. 
    Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof issued by the village, as franchising authority, to a grantee to construct or operate a cable system. 
    Franchise agreement means a contractual agreement entered into between the village and any grantee under this article which is enforceable by the village and the grantee and which sets forth the rights and obligations between the village and the grantee in connection with the franchise. 
    Franchise area means the area within the corporate boundaries of the village, which is subject to the terms and conditions granted under the village's cable television franchise. 
    Franchise fee means any tax, fee, or assessment the village imposes on the grantee solely because of the grantee's status as such. The term "franchise fee" does not include: 
(1)  Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax for or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against the grantee); 
(2)  Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for educational or governmental access facilities; 
(3)  Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties or liquidated damages; or 
(4)  Any fee imposed under 17 USC 101 et seq. 
    Grantee means a person to whom a franchise under this article is granted and the lawful successors or assigns of such person. 
    Gross revenues means any and all revenues derived directly or indirectly by a grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents, or any person in which the grantee has a financial interest from or in connection with the operation of the cable system pursuant to this article. The term "gross revenues" includes compensation in whatever form, derived from all cable services, cable operations, and cable-related activities within the franchise area including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Revenues from subscriber rates, pay television, premium channels, service tiers, service clusters, institutional networks, on-air advertising, installations, reconnections, franchise fees or similar fees; 
(2)  Rebates or commissions received from travel, home shopping or similar services, or commercial access; and 
(3)  Any and all, compensation from all ancillary cable services, cable operations, and cable-related activities within the franchise area. 
    Initial service area means all areas in the village having at least 20 dwelling units per strand mile. 
    Normal business hours means those hours during which similar businesses in the village are open to serve customers. In all cases, the term "normal business hours" must include some evening hours at least one night per week and some weekend hours. 
    Normal operating conditions means those service conditions which are within the control of the cable operator. Those conditions which are not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
    Other programming service means information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers generally. 
    Person means any natural person or any association, firm, partnership, joint stock company, limited liability company, joint venture, corporation, or other legally recognized entity, private or public, whether for-profit or not-for-profit. 
    Public, educational, or governmental (PEG) access facilities means channel capacity designated for public, educational, or governmental use and the facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity. 
    Service tier or tier means a category of cable service or other services provided by a cable operator and for which a separate rate is charged by the cable operator. 
    Street means the surface of and space above and below any public road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway or drive, or any public right-of-way, now or hereafter existing as such within the village. 
    Subscriber means any person legally receiving any service provided by a grantee pursuant to this article. 
    Video programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station. 
    Village means the Village of Waunakee, Wisconsin, or any duly appointed designee thereof, including, but not limited to, the village board and the cable television committee, and all the area within the territorial limits of the village and its future corporate boundaries. 
    Village board means the present governing body of the village or any successors to the legislative power of such body or any duly appointed designee thereof. 
(Code 1998, § 26-77; Ord. No. 98-3, § 3, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-22. - Provisions applicable to article. 
(a)  Compliance with laws, rules, and regulations. In the event any valid law, rule or regulation of any governing authority or agency having jurisdiction, including but not limited to, the Federal Communications Commission, contravenes the provisions of this article subsequent to its adoption, the provisions of this article shall be superseded by any such valid law, rule or regulation to the extent that the provisions of this article are in conflict and contrary to any such law, rule or regulation. 
(b)  Conflicting ordinances repealed. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of any such conflict. 
(c)  Publication costs. The grantee shall assume the cost of publication of the franchise ordinance as such publication is required by law. A bill for the publication costs shall be presented to the grantee by the village upon the grantee's filing of acceptance and shall be paid at that time. 
(d)  Severability. Should any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or portion of this article or a franchise be declared to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of this article and the franchise as a whole, but shall only affect the portion thereof declared to be invalid; and the village board hereby expressly states and declares that it would nonetheless have passed this article and granted the franchise had it known that any such word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or portion of such article or franchise were invalid. 
(e)  Waiver or exemption. The village reserves the right to waive provisions of this article or exempt a grantee from meeting provisions of this article, if the village determines that such waiver or exemption is in the public interest. 
(f)  Non-enforcement. Subject to the provisions of the Cable Act, a grantee shall not be relieved of any obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this article, the franchise agreement, or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated by the village by reason of any failure of the village or its officers, agents or employees to enforce prompt compliance nor shall such be considered a waiver thereof. 
(g)  Force majeure. Any delay, preemption or other failure to provide cable service and to perform other duties contained in this article and the franchise agreement by the grantee caused by factors beyond the grantee's control, such as acts of God, labor disputes, nondelivery by program suppliers, war, riots, government order or regulation, shall not result in a breach of the terms of this article or the franchise agreement. The grantee shall exercise reasonable efforts to cure promptly any such delays and the cause thereof, and performance under the terms of this article and franchise agreement shall be excused by the village for the period of time during which such factors continue. 
(Code 1998, § 26-78; Ord. No. 98-3, § 47, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-23. - Terms of franchise. 
(a)  Right and obligation to provide service. In the event the village shall grant to a grantee or renew a nonexclusive, revocable franchise to construct, install, maintain, operate and reconstruct a cable system within the franchise area, such franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the service of a cable system as required by this article and by the terms of the franchise agreement. 
(b)  Franchise required. Subject to federal and state law, no person shall construct, install, maintain or operate within any public street in the village or within any other public property of the village a cable television system unless a franchise authorizing the use of the streets or properties or areas has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this article and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
(c)  Franchise nonexclusive. Any franchise granted under this article shall be revocable and nonexclusive. The village reserves the right to grant a similar franchise to any person at any time. 
(d)  Term. The term of any initial or renewed franchise granted under this article shall be established in the franchise agreement. 
(e)  Grantee to have no recourse. The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the village for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this article or its regulation, or from the village's exercise of its authority to grant additional franchises. 
(f)  Mortgage or pledge of system. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit a grantee from mortgaging or pledging its cable system or any part thereof. However, any such mortgage or pledge shall be subject to and subordinate to the right of the village under this article, any franchise agreement or applicable laws. 
(g)  Previous rights abandoned. The franchise shall be in lieu of any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities owned, possessed, controlled or exercisable by the grantee or any successor pertaining to the construction, operation, maintenance or reconstruction of a cable system in the village. The acceptance of the franchise shall operate, as between the grantee and the village, as an abandonment of any and all of such rights, privileges, powers, immunities and authorities within the village. All construction, operation, maintenance and reconstruction by the grantee of any cable system in the village shall be under this article and the franchise agreement and not under any other right, privilege, power, immunity or authority. 
(h)  Subject to other regulatory agencies' rules and regulations. The grantee shall, at all times during the life of the franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the village and other duly authorized regulatory state and federal bodies, and shall comply with any and all codes which the village has adopted or shall adopt applying to the public generally and to other grantees. 
(i)  Pole-use agreements required. The franchise shall not relieve the grantee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole-use or conduit-use agreements from the gas, electric and telephone companies, or others maintaining poles or conduits in the streets of the village, whenever the grantee finds it necessary to make use of such poles or conduits. 
(j)  No right of property. Anything contained in this article to the contrary notwithstanding, the franchise shall not impart to the grantee any right of property in or on village-owned property. 
(k)  Revising franchise requirements. The village may establish appropriate requirements for initial franchises or franchise renewals and may modify these requirements from time to time to reflect changing conditions and technology in the cable industry. 
(l)  Use of grantee's facilities. The village shall have the right to install and maintain, free of charge, upon the poles and within the underground pipes and conduits of the grantee, any wires and fixtures desired by the village to the extent that such installation and maintenance does not interfere with existing and future operations of the grantee. 
(m)  Franchise binding. Anything contained in this article to the contrary notwithstanding, all provisions of this article shall be binding upon the grantee, its successors, lessees or assignees. 
(Code 1998, § 26-79; Ord. No. 98-3, § 4, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-24. - Application. 
(a)  Initial franchise. All applicants for an initial franchise under this article shall prepare and file a written application with the village administrator. An initial application shall contain the following: 
(1)  Proposal bond and filing fee. Provision of the proposal bond as required in section 66-56 and payment of a nonrefundable filing fee to the village established by resolution which sum shall be due and payable concurrently with the request for application information; thereafter costs related to the application investigation to a maximum of an additional amount established by resolution shall be due and payable by the applicant on receipt of a statement rendered by the village. 
(2)  Name and address of applicant. The name and business address of the applicant, date of application and signature of the applicant or appropriate corporate officer. 
(3)  Description of proposed operation. A general description of the applicant's proposed operation in the franchise area and in other areas within the state, including but not limited to, business hours, operating staff, maintenance procedures beyond those required in this article, management and marketing staff complement and procedures, and if available, the rules of operation for public access. 
(4)  Description of proposed services. A statement of the television and radio services to be provided, including off-the-air, interconnect, microwave relay, satellite relay, pay television programming, and locally originated signals, and the proposed article of these channels into service tiers. A statement setting forth a description of the following: the automated and/or microprocessor services proposed; two-way or upstream services proposed; production facilities to be made available by the grantee for public and educational access channels required to be made available by this article and/or the Federal Communications Commission. 
(5)  Programming assistance. A statement establishing any additional funding, facilities, equipment or personnel beyond those required elsewhere to be designated to promote local programming development. It is understood that the foregoing shall be available without charge to all on a fair and nondiscriminatory basis and may be used by the grantee as well. Such funding and services shall be contingent upon a special showing, where required, that the proposed uses are consistent with the regulatory program of the Federal Communications Commission. 
(6)  Schedule of charges. A statement of the applicant's proposed schedule of charges for cable services. 
(7)  Corporate organization. A statement detailing the corporate organization of the applicant, if any, including the names and addresses of its officers and directors and the number of shares held by each officer and director. 
(8)  Stockholders. A statement identifying the number of authorized and outstanding shares of applicant's stock including a current list of the names and current addresses of its shareholders holding five percent or more of applicant's outstanding stock. 
(9)  Intra-company relationships. A statement describing all intra-company relationships of the applicant, including parent, subsidiary or affiliated companies. 
(10)  Agreements and understandings. A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings, whether written or oral, existing between the applicant and any other person with respect to any franchise awarded under this article and the conduct of the operation of the franchise existing at the time of a proposal submittal. 
(11)  Financial statement. If the applicant is a corporation, audited financial statements for the two previous fiscal years. If the applicant is a partnership, copies of the "U.S. Partnership Return of Income" (IRS Form 1065) for the two previous fiscal years. If the applicant is a sole proprietorship, copies of "U.S. Individual Tax Return" (IRS Form 1040) for the two previous fiscal years. 
(12)  Financial projection. A ten-year operations pro forma which shall include the initial and continuing plant investment, annual profit and loss statements detailing income and expenses, annual balance sheets and annual levels of subscriber penetration. Costs and revenues anticipated for voluntary services shall, if presented, be incorporated in the pro forma as required in this article, but shall be separately identified in the pro forma. 
(13)  Financial support. Suitable written evidence from a recognized financing institution, addressed to both the applicant and to the village, advising that the applicant's financial ability and planned operation have been analyzed by the institution and that the financing institution is prepared to make the required funds available to the applicant, if awarded a franchise. If the planned operation is to be internally financed, a board resolution shall be supplied authorizing the obtainment and expenditure of such funds as are required to construct, install and operate the cable system contemplated under this article. 
(14)  Technical description. A technical description of the type of cable system proposed. 
(15)  Technical statement. A statement from the applicant that its proposed cable system and proposed services shall meet all the requirements set forth in this article. 
(16)  Existing franchises. A statement of existing franchises held by the applicant indicating when the franchises were issued and when the systems were constructed and the present state of the system in each respective governmental unit, together with the name, address and telephone number of a responsible governmental official knowledgeable of the applicant and of the system performance in each such case. 
(17)  Convictions. A statement as to whether the applicant or any of its officers or directors or holders of five percent or more of its voting stock has in the past ten years been convicted of or has charges pending for any crime other than a routine traffic offense and the disposition of each such case. 
(18)  Operating experience. A statement detailing the prior cable television experience of the applicant including that of the applicant's officers, management and staff to be associated with the proposed operation. 
(b)  Franchise renewal. All applicants seeking to renew a franchise under this article shall prepare and file a written application with the village. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  A nonrefundable application fee, the amount of which shall be determined by the village board by resolution. The application fee shall be applied by the village to defray the costs it incurs in initiating renewal procedures as set forth in section 626 of the Cable Act, including any amendments thereto. 
(2)  A summary of the technical, financial and programming history of the network since the granting of the original franchise. 
(3)  A statement and timetable that outlines all proposed changes, expansion or improvements in the cable system as to services, programming or technical specifications during the forthcoming five-year period. 
(c)  Supplementation. The village may require such supplementary, additional or other information that the village deems reasonably necessary for its determinations. Such modifications, deletions, additions or amendments to the application shall be considered only if specifically requested by the village. 
(d)  Review. Upon receipt of an application under this article, the village shall review the application and make it available for public inspection at such places as the village shall designate. The village shall make a decision on the application after evaluating the application. The village may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise. 
(Code 1998, § 26-80; Ord. No. 98-3, § 5, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-25. - Modification of franchise. 
(a)  Application required. The grantee may apply to the village for modification of the franchise agreement. The application shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for the requested modification. The village shall review such application for modification based on the terms and conditions set out in section 625 of the Cable Act, including any amendments thereto. The village may approve the grantee's request for modification based on the findings of its review. 
(b)  Justification, commercial impracticability. The application for modification to the franchise agreement shall state the grantee's justifications for such proposed modification. The grantee shall indicate within such justifications any projected technical, financial and service impacts, which such proposed modifications intend to remedy. Where the grantee has indicated commercial impracticability as a justification for modification, the grantee shall show any changes in conditions arising since the execution of the franchise agreement, that such change in conditions was not foreseeable at the time of execution of the franchise agreement, and, that such change in conditions was beyond the control of the grantee. The burden of proof to justify a claim of commercial impracticability shall be borne by the grantee. 
(c)  Modification of public, educational, and governmental access. The village may prohibit award of any proposed modification to the franchise pertaining to provision of services relating to public, educational or governmental access. 
(d)  Negotiations. If, after the village has completed its review of the application for modification of the franchise agreement, the village has not made a final determination regarding the merits of the requested modification, the grantee may request negotiations with the village for modification of service requirements in accordance with section 625 of the Cable Act, including any amendments thereto. The village shall permit such negotiations to proceed only in such cases where the grantee agrees to maintain mix, quality and level of services originally required by the franchise at the time it was granted. The village and the grantee shall have 120 calendar days to negotiate and approve such modifications, unless the grantee and the village agree to an extension of time. 
(e)  Procedures for approval or denial. The village shall grant or deny the grantee's request for modification within 120 days of its receipt of the application for modification. The grantee and village may mutually agree to extend the 120-day time period. No modification of the franchise agreement shall be approved without the express approval of the village board. 
(f)  Appeal of denial. If the village denies the grantee's request for modification, the grantee may seek judicial review of the village's determination in accordance with section 625 of the Cable Act, including any amendments thereto. 
(g)  Costs incurred with modification. When the village receives an application for modification from a grantee, the village shall prepare an estimate of its costs to consider the modification request. The costs may include, but shall not be limited to, reasonable fees for any or all of the following: an attorney, an accountant, an engineer, municipal staff and others with expertise or training relating to the modification request. The village shall provide to the grantee the estimate of fees and costs within 30 days of receipt of the grantee's application. The grantee shall reimburse the village for the actual costs the village incurs in acting on the grantee's application. Should the village initiate a request for modification of the franchise, each party shall bear its own costs and fees. 
(Code 1998, § 26-81; Ord. No. 98-3, § 6, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-26. - Review of grantee's performance. 
(a)  Franchise reviews. On or about the fifth and tenth anniversaries of the effective date of the franchise, the village may schedule a public meeting or meetings with the grantee to review the franchise's performance, plans and prospects. The grantee shall make available specified records, documents and information for this purpose, and the village may inquire in particular whether the grantee is supplying a level and variety of services equivalent to those being generally offered at that time in the industry in comparable market situations. 
(b)  Reviews of franchise prior to expiration. Any franchise review conducted to determine whether the village shall renew a grantee's franchise shall be carried out in accordance with the requirements of the Cable Act. 
(c)  Costs related to franchise reviews. The cost of conducting a franchise review shall be equally divided between the village and the grantee. Such costs may include, but are not limited to, fees for legal, engineering, and accounting services. 
(Code 1998, § 26-82; Ord. No. 98-3, § 7, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-27. - Rights reserved to village. 
(a)  No impairment of village's rights. Nothing in this article shall impair or affect the right of the village to acquire the property of the grantee through the exercise of the right of eminent domain at a fair and just value, which shall not include any amount for the franchise itself or for any of the rights or privileges granted and nothing shall contract away, modify or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the village's right to eminent domain. 
(b)  Right of amendment. The village may, from time to time, add to, modify or delete provisions of this article, as it shall deem necessary in the exercise of its regulatory powers, provided that such additions, modifications, or deletions are reasonable and do not place an undue financial burden on the grantee. Such additions, modifications, or deletions shall be made only after a public hearing for which the grantee has received advanced written notice of 30 days. 
(c)  Village's right of inspection. During the life of any franchise granted under this article, the village may inspect and supervise all construction and installation work performed subject to the provisions of this article and the franchise agreement to ensure compliance with the terms of this article and the franchise agreement. 
(d)  Village's right of acquisition. Upon expiration, revocation or other termination of the franchise as provided by law or upon receipt of an application for approval of an assignment or transfer of the franchise or upon a change of de facto control, the village shall have the right to purchase the grantee's cable system as set forth in sections 66-33 and 66-34(g). 
(Code 1998, § 26-83; Ord. No. 98-3, § 8, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-28. - Acceptance and effective date of franchise. 
(a)  Effective date. Any franchise awarded under this article shall take effect 30 days after the effective date of the franchise agreement between the village and the grantee, provided that the grantee has accepted the franchise pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Acceptance. To accept a franchise granted under this article, a grantee must file any required bonds, funds and proof of insurance, as well as written notice of acceptance, with the village administrator. 
(c)  Written notice of acceptance. The grantee's written notice of acceptance shall include a certification that the grantee expressly acknowledges the following by acceptance of the franchise: 
(1)  The grantee has relied upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the village to grant the franchise. 
(2)  The grantee has not been induced to enter into the franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement, whether verbal or written, by or on behalf of the village concerning any term or condition of the franchise that is not included in this article. 
(3)  The grantee has carefully read this article and the franchise agreement and accepts all the obligations under this article and under the franchise agreement and also agrees that it will not challenge any provision of this article or the franchise agreement as unreasonable, arbitrary, invalid or void, but shall accept the validity of the terms and conditions of the franchise in their entirety. 
(Code 1998, § 26-84; Ord. No. 98-3, § 9, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-29. - Franchise renewal. 
(a)  Renewal request. The village shall determine whether to renew a franchise granted under this article in the event that the grantee files a written request for such a renewal. The grantee shall submit such a request at least 30 (but no sooner than 36) months, before the expiration of the franchise. At the time of such request, the village may revise this article, reevaluate the needs of the community for cable service, and review the performance of the grantee. The village shall conduct any proceedings necessary to consider the renewal request. 
(b)  Renewal criteria where Cable Act applies. To the extent applicable, the Cable Act shall govern the procedures and standards for renewal of any franchise awarded pursuant to this article. Accordingly, the village shall renew or extend a franchise unless it finds that: 
(1)  The grantee has not substantially complied with the material terms of this article, the franchise agreement, or with applicable law, or its officers have been convicted of a felony; 
(2)  The quality of the grantee's service, including signal quality, response to consumer complaints, and billing practices, but without regard to the mix or quality of cable services or other services provided over the cable system, has been unreasonable in light of community needs; 
(3)  The grantee lacks the legal, technical, or financial ability to provide services, facilities, and equipment it proposes to provide; 
(4)  The service, facilities, and equipment the grantee proposes to provide are unreasonable in light of the community need for and cost of such services, facilities, and equipment; or 
(5)  The proposals contained in the renewal application are otherwise unreasonable. 
(c)  Renewal where Cable Act does not apply. To the extent that the Cable Act is not applicable, the village in its sole discretion and judgment shall have the right to grant, deny or conditionally grant renewal of a franchise, provided that the village shall not unreasonably refuse to renew the franchise or unreasonably condition the renewal. The conditions the village may place on its approval shall include, but are not limited to: remedy of historical or existing violations of the franchise or ordinance; payment of all fees and penalties owed by the grantee at the time of the renewal; acceptance of any updated ordinance; and acceptance of any updated franchise agreement. 
(Code 1998, § 26-85; Ord. No. 98-3, § 10, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-30. - Revocation of franchise. 
(a)  Village's right to revoke; grounds for revocation. In addition to all other rights which the village has pursuant to law or equity, the village reserves the right to revoke, terminate or cancel any franchise granted under this article, in the event that one or more of the following occur, each of which shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise: 
(1)  The grantee violates any material provision of this article or its franchise agreement with the village; 
(2)  The grantee violates any state or federal law applicable to the grantee's operation within the village; 
(3)  The grantee practices any fraud or deceit upon the village or a subscriber; 
(4)  The grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged as bankrupt; 
(5)  The grantee ceases to provide service over the cable system for a period exceeding 14 days for any reason within the grantee's control, or abandons the management and/or operation of the cable system; or 
(6)  The grantee materially misrepresents a fact in the application for, or negotiation of, or renegotiation of, or renewal of, its franchise. 
(b)  Notice and opportunity to cure prior to revocation. In the event that the village determines that the grantee has committed a material breach of the franchise, the village may make a written demand on the grantee that the grantee cure such breach and inform the grantee that continued breach may be cause for revocation. If the breach is not cured to the satisfaction of the village within 30 days following such demand, the village may revoke the grantee's franchise and terminate the franchise agreement pursuant to the revocation procedures set out in section 66-31. 
(c)  Notice and opportunity for hearing. The village shall not revoke any franchise without giving the grantee reasonable notice and opportunity for a public hearing before the village board. 
(d)  Revocation resolution. In the event that the village determines to revoke a grantee's franchise under this section, the village shall, by resolution, declare that the grantee's franchise is terminated and any security fund and bonds forfeited and shall undertake the revocation procedures set out in section 66-31. 
(Code 1998, § 26-86; Ord. No. 98-3, § 11, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-31. - Procedures on revocation or termination. 
(a)  Removal of facilities/continued operation. In the event that a grantee's franchise is revoked, expires, or is otherwise terminated, the village may order the grantee to remove its facilities from the franchise area within 90 days of the date of such order, or the village may require the grantee to continue operating its cable system for a period not to exceed 24 months as indicated in subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  Restoration of property. In removing its facilities from the franchise area, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation it makes and shall leave all public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the grantee's removal of its facilities without affecting the electrical or telephone cables, wires, or attachments. The grantee's insurance, indemnity obligations, performance bond and security fund required by this article and by the franchise agreement, shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by the grantee with the terms and conditions of this section. 
(c)  Restoration by village, reimbursement of costs. If the grantee fails to complete any work required by subsections (a) and/or (b) of this section, or any other work required by the village within 30 days after receipt of written notice, and to the satisfaction of the village, the village may cause such work to be done and the grantee shall reimburse the village for the cost thereof within 30 days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs, or the village may recover such costs through the security fund or bonds provided by the grantee. The village shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Extended operation. Subject to federal, state and local law, upon either the expiration or revocation of a franchise, the village may require the grantee to continue to operate the cable system for a defined period of time not to exceed 24 months from the date of such expiration or revocation. The grantee shall, as trustee for its successor in interest, continue to operate the cable system under the terms and conditions of this article and the franchise agreement. 
(Code 1998, § 26-87; Ord. No. 98-3, § 12, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-32. - Other remedies in lieu of revocation or termination. 
(a)  Lesser remedies. Nothing shall prohibit the village from invoking lesser remedies than revocation for violations of the provisions of this article or the franchise agreement, including imposing forfeitures as set out in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Monetary damages. If after notice to the grantee, opportunity to cure, and opportunity for a hearing, the village determines that the grantee has failed to perform any material obligation under this article or the franchise agreement, or fails to do so in a timely manner, the village may at its option, and in its sole discretion assess monetary damages against the grantee as provided in this subsection. This provision for monetary damages is intended to be separate and apart from the village's right to enforce the provisions of the construction and performance bonds provided for in this article and is intended to be in addition to any other remedies. This provision is intended to provide compensation to the village for actual damages. 
(1)  For failure to comply with any of the customer service standards adopted by the village in this article or set out in the franchise agreement, the grantee shall pay to the village the sum of $200.00 for each day the grantee fails to comply. 
(2)  For failure to furnish, maintain, or offer cable services to any potential subscriber within the franchise area in accordance with section 66-36 or on order of the village, the grantee shall pay to the village the sum of $200.00 for any such occurrence. 
(3)  For failure to obtain or file evidence of required insurance or other required financial security, the grantee shall pay to the village the sum of $300.00 for any such occurrence. 
(4)  For failure to provide access to data documents, records or reports to the village as required by this article, the grantee shall pay to the village the sum of $100.00 for any such occurrence. 
(5)  For failure to comply with applicable construction, operation, or maintenance standards, the grantee shall pay to the village the sum of $300.00 for any such occurrence. 
(6)  For failure to comply with the requirements of section 66-48, the grantee shall pay to the village the sum of $200.00 for any such occurrence. 
(7)  For failure to comply with a rate decision or refund order issued by the village, the grantee shall pay to the village the sum of $500.00 for any such occurrence. 
(c)  Opportunity to cure prior to imposition of monetary damages. Prior to assessing monetary damages against the grantee as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the village shall make a written demand on the grantee that the grantee cure its failure to perform any material obligation under this article or the franchise agreement and inform the grantee that its continued failure may result in the assessment of monetary damages. If the grantee's failure to perform is not cured to the satisfaction of the village within 30 days following such demand, the village may impose monetary damages on the grantee pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. The village may extend the cure period beyond 30 days in the event that the grantee is proceeding in good faith with due diligence to cure its failure to perform but is unable to do so within 30 days. 
(Code 1998, § 26-88; Ord. No. 98-3, § 13, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-33. - Purchase of system by village. 
(a)  Purchase of system on revocation. If the village revokes the franchise for cause, the grantee shall first offer the cable system for sale to the village at an equitable price under the following procedures: 
(1)  If an equitable price cannot be negotiated or determined by the village and the grantee, the price shall be determined by an impartial appraisal procedure pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 788, wherein the grantee and the village shall each choose an appraiser and the appraisers chosen shall choose a third appraiser and the price determined by such appraisers shall be considered the equitable price at which the cable system will be offered to the village. The determination of the price of the cable system shall be decreased by the amount of any and all damages sustained by the village in connection with revocation, including without limitation, payment made by the village to another person or entity to operate the cable system for a temporary period after revocation. The cost of the appraisal procedure shall be shared equally by the village and the grantee. 
(2)  The village shall have 90 days commencing on the day the equitable price of the cable system is determined either through negotiation or the appraisal procedure to exercise its option to purchase. If the village does not exercise its option to purchase, and the cable system is not sold to another operator who has obtained a franchise from the village, the grantee, upon request by the village, shall promptly remove all its facilities from the franchise area. While transfer of the cable system and franchise is being negotiated, arranged or ordered, the grantee may be required to continue service to the public. 
(b)  Purchase of system on nonrenewal. If the village determines not to renew a grantee's franchise, the grantee shall first offer the cable system for sale to the village at fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern but with no value allocated to the franchise itself. The following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  If the fair market value cannot be negotiated or determined, the value shall be determined by an impartial appraisal procedure pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 788, wherein the grantee and the village shall each choose an appraiser and the appraisers chosen shall choose a third appraiser and the valuation determined by such appraisers shall be considered the fair market value at which the cable system will be offered to the village. The determination of the value of the cable system shall be decreased by the amount of any damages sustained by the village in connection with nonrenewal, including without limitation, payment made by the village to another person or entity to operate the cable system for a temporary period after nonrenewal. The cost of the appraisal procedure shall be shared equally by the village and the grantee. 
(2)  The village shall have 90 days commencing on the day the fair market value of the cable system is determined either through negotiation or the appraisal procedure to exercise its option to purchase. If the village does not exercise its option to purchase, and the cable system is not sold to another operator who has obtained a franchise from the village, the grantee, upon request by the village, shall promptly remove all its facilities. While transfer of the cable system and franchise is being negotiated, arranged or ordered, the grantee may be required to continue service to the public. 
(Code 1998, § 26-89; Ord. No. 98-3, § 14, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-34. - Transfer of ownership or control. 
(a)  Transfer of franchise. Any franchise granted under this article shall be a privilege to be held for the benefit of the public. Any franchises granted cannot, in any event, be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of by any method, including, but not limited to, forced or voluntary sale, merger, or consolidation, either in whole or in part, without the prior written consent of the village, and then only under such reasonable conditions as the village may establish. Such consent as required by the village, shall be given or denied no later than 120 days following any request, and shall not be unreasonably withheld. Prior consent shall not be required when transferring the franchise between wholly owned subsidiaries of the same entity. 
(b)  Notice to village on 20 percent change of ownership or control. A grantee shall promptly notify the village in writing of any proposed change in, or transfer of, control of the grantee. For the purpose of this subsection, a change in, or transfer of, control shall occur on the acquisition or transfer by any person of 20 percent or more of the beneficial ownership interest in the grantee. 
(c)  Consent of village required on 51 percent change of ownership or control. In the event that any person or group of persons acquires or transfers 51 percent or more of the beneficial ownership interest in the grantee, the grantee's franchise shall be subject to cancellation unless and until the village shall have consented in writing to the acquisition or transfer. The village shall give or deny consent no later than 120 days after receiving written notice of the acquisition or transfer. The village's consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or acquisition of control, the village may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the grantee shall assist the village in any such inquiry. 
(d)  Grantee's responsibility. In seeking the village's consent to any change in ownership or control, the grantee shall have the responsibility to do the following: 
(1)  To establish to the village's satisfaction whether the proposed purchaser, transferee, or assignee (the "proposed transferee"), which in the case of a corporation, shall include all directors and all persons having a legal or equitable interest of 51 percent or more of the voting stock: 
a.  Has ever been convicted of a felony or is presently under an indictment, investigation or complaint charging a felony; 
b.  Has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit or misrepresentation entered against it by any court of competent jurisdiction; or 
c.  Has pending any legal claim, lawsuit or administrative proceeding arising out of or involving a cable system. 
(2)  To establish to the village's satisfaction the financial solvency of the proposed transferee by submitting all current financial data for the proposed transferee which the grantee was required to submit in its franchise application, and such other data as the village may request, where such data shall be audited, certified and qualified by a certified public accountant. 
(3)  To establish to the village's satisfaction that the legal, financial and technical capability of the proposed transferee is such as shall enable it to maintain and operate the cable system for the remaining term of the franchise under the existing franchise terms. 
(e)  Effect of village's consent to transfer. The consent or approval of the village to any transfer by the grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the village in and to the streets, and any transfer shall by its terms, be expressly subject to the terms and conditions of any franchise. The grantee shall not be released from its obligations under this article and the franchise agreement without the express written consent of the village. 
(f)  Transfer document to be filed with village. A grantee, upon transfer, shall within 60 days thereafter file with the village a copy of the deed, agreement or other written instrument evidencing such sale, transfer of ownership or control or lease, certified and sworn to as correct by the grantee. 
(g)  Village's right to purchase system. The village shall be entitled to a right of first refusal of any written offer to purchase the grantee's cable system, which offer the grantee has accepted subject to the village's rights under this article. The price to be paid by the village shall be the price of such offer on the same terms and conditions as such offer. The village shall notify the grantee of its decision to purchase within 90 days of the village's receipt from the grantee of a copy of the offer. 
(Code 1998, § 26-90; Ord. No. 98-3, § 15, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-35. - Franchise area. 
    The village may grant a franchise for the area within the corporate boundaries of the village, or any defined section of the village. The franchise agreement shall indicate the specific boundaries for the franchise area. 
(Code 1998, § 26-91; Ord. No. 98-3, § 16, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-36. - Initial provision of service and extension of service. 
(a)  Service to initial service area. Within two years from the date of the award of an initial franchise, the grantee must make cable television service available to every dwelling unit within the initial service area. Thereafter, the grantee must extend service according to subsections (c), (d), and (e) of this section. 
(b)  New construction timetable. 
(1)  Within six months from the date of the award of an initial franchise, the grantee shall make cable television service available to at least 20 percent of the dwelling units within the initial service area. Within one year from the date of the award of the initial franchise, the grantee must make cable television service available to at least 50 percent of the dwelling units within the initial service area. 
(2)  In its application for an initial franchise, the prospective grantee may propose a timetable of construction which will make cable television service available in the initial service area sooner than the above minimum requirements, in which case such schedule shall be made part of the franchise agreement. 
(3)  Any delay beyond the terms of the timetable set out in this section or the franchise agreement, unless specifically approved by the village in writing, shall be considered a material breach of the franchise. 
(c)  Service to newly annexed or developed areas. In newly annexed or developed areas of the village, the grantee shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The grantee shall extend and make cable television service available to every dwelling unit in any newly annexed areas no later than six months after such annexation, where there are least 20 dwelling units per strand mile, as measured from the existing plant from which service can be reasonably provided. 
(2)  Without regard to density of dwelling units, the grantee shall extend and make cable television service available to any dwelling unit within 300 feet of the existing cable plant. 
(3)  Where the dwelling unit is not within 300 feet of the existing cable plant, the grantee shall provide to any potential subscriber desiring service an estimate of the cost to extend service to the potential subscriber. The grantee shall extend service upon request of the potential subscriber. The grantee and the potential subscriber shall share the cost of the extension as follows: the grantee shall pay 100 percent of the cost of the first 300 feet of the extension and shall pay 60 percent and the potential subscriber 40 percent of the cost of the next 300 feet of the extension, up to a maximum of 600 feet. For that part of an extension that is longer than 600 feet, the grantee may charge the potential subscriber for the grantee's actual cost of that portion of the extension. Any amount paid by a subscriber for an extension under this subsection shall be refundable to that subscriber in the event that, during the subsequent five-year period, the area subsequently reaches a density level of 20 dwelling units per strand mile. In no event shall the amount of the refund exceed the amount paid by the subscriber for the extension. 
(d)  Service to new subdivisions or newly developed areas. The grantee shall, at its expense, extend its system so that cable television service is available in all new subdivisions or newly developed areas in the village as follows: 
(1)  All new cable facilities shall be placed underground unless the village determines otherwise. 
(2)  Where cable facilities are to be placed underground, the village's light, water and sewerage commission (utility) shall give the grantee at least ten days' advance written notice of the date on which open trenching will be available for the grantee's installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals to be provided at the grantee's expense. The grantee shall provide the utility with specifications as needed for trenching and shall place its facilities in the trenches on the date specified by the utility. The grantee shall be responsible for its share of trenching costs and the cost of any easements required to bring cable television service to the new subdivision or developing area. The trenching rate shall be set forth in the franchise agreement. The grantee shall activate its facilities and make cable television service available to every dwelling unit in the new subdivision or developing area when at least 20 dwelling units per strand mile have been constructed. 
(3)  Where cable facilities are to be placed above ground, the village will forward to the grantee an approved engineering plan of the project. Once the density level of the new subdivision or developing area reaches 20 dwelling units per strand mile, the grantee shall have three months to extend and make cable television service available to every dwelling unit in the new subdivision or developing area, unless the village agrees to extend the three-month time period on a project-by-project basis. 
(e)  Special agreements. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the grantee from serving areas not covered under this section upon agreement with developers, property owners, or residents, provided that five percent of the gross revenues derived from such service within the franchise area are returned to the village as required under section 66-41. 
(Code 1998, § 26-92; Ord. No. 98-3, § 17, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-37. - Rate regulation. 
(a)  Village reserves right of rate regulation. The grantee shall establish rates for its services which shall be applied on a nondiscriminatory basis in the franchise area. Pursuant to federal law, the village reserves the right to assume regulation of rates paid by cable subscribers; such rate regulation shall be performed by the village board in accordance with Federal Communications Commission Rules and Regulations Part 76, Subpart N (47 CFR 76.901 et seq.). As specified by the Federal Communications Commission's Rules and Regulations (Part 76, Subpart N (47 CFR 76.901 et seq.)), such rate regulation shall cover basic service rates and customer premises installations and equipment rates (including charges for, but not limited to, converter boxes, remote control units, connections for additional television receivers and other cable home wiring). The village reserves the right to further regulate rates pursuant to any additional powers granted it by either the Federal Communications Commission or federal or state law. 
(b)  Notice of certification. In the event that the village assumes rate regulatory powers, the village shall notify the grantee of the village's Federal Communications Commission certification. Upon receipt of such notification by the grantee, basic service rate regulation shall become effective. 
(c)  Service disconnection. A subscriber shall have the right to have its service disconnected without charge, except for actual costs incurred by the grantee or other charges that are allowable under state or federal law. Service disconnections shall include the removal of any equipment owned by the grantee from the subscriber's residence. Such disconnection shall be made as soon as practicable and in no case later than 30 days following written notice to the grantee of such disconnection. No grantee shall enter into any agreement with a subscriber which imposes any charge following disconnection of service, except for reconnection and subsequent monthly or periodic charges, and those charges shall be no greater than charges for new customers. This subsection shall not prevent a grantee from entering into an agreement with a subscriber regarding the collection of any past due amounts, nor shall this subsection prevent a grantee from refusing service to any person because of the grantee's prior accounts with that person which remain due and owing. 
(d)  Buried service charge. In the event that a subscriber requests a buried service drop to a residence in an area where telephone, electric power, and cable television distribution cables are above ground, the grantee shall bury, or allow the subscriber to bury, a direct-burial drop. Where the grantee does the work, the grantee may charge the subscriber for the actual costs the grantee incurs in providing the buried service drop. 
(Code 1998, § 26-93; Ord. No. 98-3, § 18, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-38. - Protection of individual rights. 
(a)  Discriminatory practices prohibited. 
(1)  A grantee shall not refuse cable television service or otherwise discriminate against any person or organization who requests such service on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, creed or sex. A grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations or in any other respect, make or grant any unreasonable preference or advantage, nor subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage. The grantee shall comply at all times with the Cable Act and all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, and all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination which are hereby incorporated and made part of this article by reference. 
(2)  This section shall not be deemed to prohibit promotional rates for service introductions or temporary promotional discounts. This section does not preclude a grantee from offering special services or rates to senior citizens, or services to commercial subscribers at rates different from those charged to residential subscribers, which shall include, but not be limited to, charges for installation on a time and material basis. The grantee may also enter into separate contracts with multiple dwelling unit buildings and may charge discounted rates for services based upon single point billing or other contractual considerations. 
(b)  Fairness and equal access. A grantee's cable system shall be operated in a manner consistent with the principles of fairness and equal access to its facilities, equipment, channels, studios and other services for all citizens, businesses, public agencies or other entities having a legitimate use for the cable system and no one shall be arbitrarily excluded from its use. Allocation of use of such facilities shall be made according to the rules or decisions of regulatory agencies affecting the allocation and use of such facilities, and where such rules or decisions are not effective to resolve a dispute between conflicting users or potential users, the matter shall be submitted for resolution by the village. 
(c)  Equal employment. A grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of federal, state and local laws and regulations in effect on the date of the franchise grant, and as amended from time to time. 
(d)  Subscriber protection. No property owner, manager, lessee, tenant or other person may request or accept payment in any form for permitting cable system access to such person's property or premises, nor discriminate in rental charges or conditions or otherwise between tenants who subscribe to cable services and those who do not. 
(e)  Discontinuation of service. If a subscriber fails to pay any proper fee or charge for any service provided by the grantee, the grantee may discontinue such service, provided that the unpaid bill is at least 45 days past due and the subscriber has been given at least ten business days prior notice of the intention to discontinue service. If the grantee receives payment of all outstanding fees and charges, including any late charges, before any service has been discontinued, then the grantee shall not discontinue such service. After any service has been discontinued, upon request of the subscriber accompanied by payment in full of all fees or charges due the grantee and the payment of an appropriate reconnection charge, if any, the grantee shall promptly reinstate such service. Subscribers shall retain the right to deactivate their terminals, but shall continue to be responsible for charges until the grantee is notified to terminate service. The subscriber shall not be charged any fee for the cancellation or downgrading of cable service, except in accordance with applicable state or federal law. 
(f)  Rights of residents. 
(1)  An owner or operator of an apartment building, condominium, nursing home, mobile home park, or any other rental facility may not interfere with or charge a fee for the installation of cable system facilities for the use of a lessee of such property or premises, except that such owner or operator may require: 
a.  Installation to conform to reasonable conditions necessary to protect the safety, appearance and functioning of the premises; 
b.  The grantee, occupant, or tenant to pay for the installation, operation, or removal of such facilities; and 
c.  The grantee, occupant, or tenant to agree to indemnify the owner or operator for any damages caused by the installation, operation or removal of such facilities. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the grantee to compensate or offer to compensate any person, or for any person to demand or receive compensation from the grantee, for the placement upon the premises of such person of grantee's facilities necessary to connect such person's premises to the distribution lines of grantee to provide cable service to such premises. 
(Code 1998, § 26-94; Ord. No. 98-3, § 19, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-39. - Regulatory jurisdiction and procedures. 
(a)  Continuing regulatory jurisdiction. The village board shall have continuing regulatory jurisdiction and supervision over the operation of any franchise granted under this article and may from time to time adopt such reasonable rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry out its regulatory functions. 
(b)  Cable television committee. The continuing regulatory functions of the village board shall be conducted by the cable television committee. The cable television committee shall be composed of six citizen members and one trustee, appointed by the village president, subject to approval of the village board. One citizen member shall be a representative of the Waunakee Area School District, and one citizen member shall be a representative of the Waunakee Chamber of Commerce. The citizen members and trustee shall serve at the pleasure of the village board. The cable coordinator shall be an ex officio member of the cable television committee. 
(c)  Powers and duties of the cable television committee. The duties of the cable television committee shall be as follows: 
(1)  Coordinate with the village administrator and the cable coordinator to ensure village citizens adequate and efficient cable television service and to protect and promote public health, safety and welfare. 
(2)  Resolve subscriber complaints or disputes between subscribers and the grantee which have been submitted to the cable television office pursuant to section 66-47. 
(3)  Prepare a budget based on the franchise fee collected by the village from the grantee. Franchise fee revenues shall be allocated in the discretion of the cable television committee as it deems necessary to provide public access programming, to assist production and programming on the public access channels, and to carry out the cable television committee's duties under this article. 
(4)  Review and audit reports and records submitted to the village by the grantee as required by section 66-56, and such other correspondence as submitted concerning the operation of the cable television system so as to ensure that the necessary reports are completed, submitted and fulfilled pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(5)  Ensure that all records, tariffs, rates, charges and rules pertinent to the operation of the cable television system in the village are made available for inspection by the public during normal business hours on reasonable notice. 
(6)  Review rates charged by the grantee and recommend to the village board approval or disapproval of any rate changes subject to the village's jurisdiction. 
(7)  Administer the remedies established in section 66-32 to ensure the grantee's compliance with this article and the franchise agreement. 
(8)  Confer and coordinate with the grantee on the interconnection of its cable system with other cable and communications systems. 
(9)  Carry out such other duties as the village board may assign. 
(d)  Rules and regulations of the cable television committee. 
(1)  The cable television committee shall adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary to ensure that due notice is given to all parties concerning any hearing on any complaints to the cable television committee and that the hearings are held promptly. 
(2)  The findings and decisions of the cable television committee shall be final, subject to written appeal to the village board. The decision of the village board shall be final, subject to written appeal to a court or agency of competent jurisdiction. 
(e)  Cable television office. There shall be a cable television office within the office of the village administrator for the purpose of exercising the village's continuing regulatory jurisdiction over any franchise granted by the village for the operation of a cable television system. 
(f)  Responsibilities of village administrator. The village administrator shall be charged with such responsibilities as may be assigned to the village administrator by the village board, including but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Manage and direct the cable television office and supervise the activities of the cable television coordinator. 
(2)  Receive and investigate such complaints, disputes or disagreements as may be directed or referred to the village between subscribers and a grantee, not first able to resolve their differences. 
(3)  Report and present recommendations on complaints, disputes or disagreements after investigation to the cable television committee for the issuance of a finding or the scheduling of a hearing as provided by this article. 
(4)  Confer with the grantee and advise on the interconnection of the cable television system with other cable and communications systems. 
(5)  Review and audit reports, records, communications and the grantee's regulations submitted to the village and conduct such inspections of grantee's cable television system as may be necessary in support of such review as provided for in this article. 
(6)  Work with the cable television committee, the public and the media to ensure that all tariffs, rates, charges and rules pertinent to the operation of the grantee's cable television system are made available for inspection by the public during normal business hours and upon reasonable request. 
(7)  Carry out such other duties as the cable television committee may assign. 
(g)  Cable television coordinator. There shall be created the position of cable television coordinator. The cable television coordinator shall be appointed by the village president, subject to the approval of the village board. The cable television committee shall recommend candidates for the position of cable television coordinator to the village president. The terms and conditions of the cable television coordinator's service contract with the village shall be determined by the village president in consultation with the village board. The cable television coordinator shall be supervised by the village administrator and shall be a nonvoting member of the cable television committee. 
(h)  Responsibilities of the cable television coordinator. The cable television coordinator shall be charged with the following responsibilities: 
(1)  Maintain an inventory of cable-related equipment either owned or operated by the village. 
(2)  Evaluate the village's cable-related equipment and facilities needs and report on such needs to the village administrator and the cable television committee. 
(3)  Assist in establishing and, once established, operate the village's public access studio facility. 
(4)  Carry out such other duties as the cable television committee or the village administrator may assign. 
(i)  Relationship to other departments. 
(1)  All departments of the village government shall cooperate with the cable television coordinator, the village administrator, and the cable television committee to effectuate compliance with the duties and responsibilities as contemplated by this article. Departments are directed to cooperate fully with the cable television coordinator, the village administrator, and the cable television committee in this purpose. 
(2)  All village departments shall make available all information pertaining to the cable television system as may be required by the cable television coordinator, the village administrator, and the cable television committee. 
(3)  The village administrator shall keep the village department heads informed on matters pertaining to the cable television system which affect or appear likely to affect operation of the department. 
(4)  The village attorney or the village attorney's designated assistant shall provide legal counsel to the cable television coordinator, the village administrator, and the cable television committee. 
(j)  Regulatory procedures. 
(1)  The cable television committee shall first consider any inquiry or proceeding requiring village board action to be taken in regard to any franchise granted under this article, whether upon application or request by the grantee or any other party, or on its own motion, and shall submit its report, together with a recommendation, to the village board within 60 days of the receipt of such request unless such time is extended by agreement between the cable television committee and the requesting party. Any final action by the village board on the cable television committee's recommendation shall be taken only after 30 days' notice of such proposed action, inquiry or proceeding is published in the official newspaper having general circulation and a copy of such notice is served upon the grantee. The grantee shall have an opportunity to respond at the hearing and in writing. Members of the public shall have an opportunity to respond or comment in writing on the proposed action and appear at such proceeding or hearing. The hearing or proceeding shall be set no later than 90 days after notice to the grantee. The village board shall act upon this proceeding within 180 days of the notice of hearing unless the time is extended by agreement between the village and grantee. 
(2)  The public notice required by this section shall state clearly the action or proposed action to be taken, the time provided for response, including response by the public, the person or persons in authority to whom such response shall be addressed, and such other procedures as may be specified by the village board. If a hearing is to be held, the public notice shall give the date, location and time of such hearing. The grantee shall be a necessary party to any hearing conducted in regard to its operation. 
(k)  Failure to enforce provisions. The grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms or conditions of the franchise by any failure of the village upon one or more occasions to insist upon or seek compliance with any such terms or conditions. 
(l)  Contravention of provisions. The cost of any successful litigation incurred by the village to enforce any provision of this article or of the franchise agreement shall be reimbursed to the village by the grantee. Such costs shall include filing fees, costs of deposition, discovery and expert witnesses, all other expenses of suit and reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Code 1998, § 26-95; Ord. No. 98-3, § 20, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 00-3, § 1, 2-21-2000) 
Sec. 66-40. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  Payment; amount. A grantee shall pay to the village a franchise fee in the amount designated in the franchise agreement. Unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement, such franchise fee shall be five percent of the grantee's gross revenues, or such other maximum amount as allowed by law. In the event that a change in either state or federal law would allow the village to increase the franchise fee above five percent of the grantee's gross revenues, the grantee shall not be liable for such increase until the village shall give grantee written notice of such change in the law. The franchise fee payment shall be in addition to any other payment owed to the village by the grantee and shall not be construed as payment in lieu of municipal property taxes or other state, county or local taxes. 
(b)  Payment schedule. The franchise fee shall be paid on a quarterly basis according to the following schedule: revenues for January through March shall be reflected in a May 15 payment; revenues for April through June shall be reflected in an August 15 payment; revenues for July through September shall be reflected in a November 15 payment; and revenues for October through December shall be reflected in a February 15 payment. The payment period shall commence as of the effective date of the franchise or any renewal date. 
(c)  Estimated payments and true-up. The grantee may make estimated payments for the first three quarters of a calendar year, provided that no estimated quarterly payment is less than 25 percent of the previous year's total annual payment and that any discrepancy between the estimated quarterly payments and the total owed for the calendar year is trued up by the February 15 payment. 
(d)  Financial statement to be provided by grantee. With each February 15 franchise fee payment, the grantee shall furnish to the village a financial statement, indicating: 
(1)  The total amount of the grantee's annual gross revenues derived from the operation of the grantee's cable system within the franchise area in the immediately preceding year; and 
(2)  The amount of revenue derived from each category of service (e.g., basic service, extended basic service, premium channels, equipment rental). The village shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of the grantee's records, and if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of five percent or more, the grantee shall assume all reasonable costs of such audit. 
(e)  Interest on delinquent payments. If any payment is not made as required, interest on the amount due shall accrue from the date of the required submittal at an annual rate of 12 percent. The grantee shall pay an additional compensation to the village if the payment is late by 45 days or more. Such additional compensation shall be equal to an additional six percent per annum in order to defray those additional expenses and costs incurred by the village by reason of the delinquent payment. 
(f)  Acceptance by the village. No acceptance of any payment by the village shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the village may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this article or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. 
(g)  Alternative fee basis. In the event the franchise fee payment established under this article is ruled unconstitutional or unenforceable, the village may impose and collect an equivalent charge on any legally permissible basis, provided such charge does not exceed the previously allowed limit on franchise fee payments. 
(Code 1998, § 26-96; Ord. No. 98-3, § 21, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-41. - Customer service standards. 
(a)  Additional standards may be imposed. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the grantee and village from agreeing to exceed the customer service standards set out in this article or the establishment or enforcement of any state or local law or regulation concerning customer service or consumer protection that imposes customer service standards or consumer protection requirements that exceed the customer service standards set out in this article or address matters not addressed in this article. 
(b)  Local payment center. The grantee shall maintain a local village payment center, which shall be open during normal business hours. This payment center shall accept subscriber payments, make adjustments to subscriber bills, and handle disconnections and equipment returns. 
(c)  Telephone availability. 
(1)  The grantee shall maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Trained representatives of the grantee will be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours. After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained representative of the grantee on the next business day. 
(2)  Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than 90 percent of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. 
(3)  The grantee shall not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards above unless an historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply. 
(4)  Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time. 
(d)  Installations, outages and service calls. Under normal operating conditions, each of the following four standards shall be met by the grantee no less than 95 percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis: 
(1)  Standard installations will be performed within seven business days after an order has been placed. Standard installations are those that are located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system. 
(2)  Excluding conditions beyond the control of the grantee, the grantee shall begin working on service interruptions promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known to the grantee. The grantee must begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after receiving notification of the service problem. 
(3)  The appointment window alternatives for installations, service calls, and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. (The grantee may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer.) 
(4)  The grantee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If the grantee's representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer. 
(e)  Repair standards. The grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians who, under normal operating conditions, are capable of responding to subscriber requests for service within the following time frames: 
(1)  System service interruption. Under normal operating conditions, within two hours, including weekends, of receiving subscriber's calls which by number identify a system service interruption of sound or picture on one or more channels, affecting all the subscribers of the system or an interruption of all services to two percent of all subscribers. 
(2)  Isolated service interruption. Within 24 hours, including weekends, of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated service interruption (less than two percent of subscribers) of sound or picture for one or more channels. This standard shall be met no less than 95 percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis. 
(3)  Inferior reception quality. Within 48 hours, including weekends, of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality the grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of this section when a technician arrives at the service location or contacts the customer by telephone and begins work on the problem. In the case of a subscriber not being home when the technician arrives, response shall be deemed to have taken place if the technician leaves written notification of arrival. 
(f)  Notification of service interruption to cable television officer. The grantee shall promptly notify the cable television officer, in writing, or, if appropriate, by oral communication, of any significant interruption in the operation of the cable system. For the purposes of this section, a significant interruption in the operation of the cable system shall mean any interruption of sound or picture on one or more channels of a duration of at least 24 hours to at least five percent of the subscribers. 
(g)  Subscriber credit for service interruptions. Upon notification by a subscriber of a service interruption of more than four hours in one day, the grantee shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Where the service interruption is caused by the grantee, the grantee shall give the subscriber a credit for one day of cable service. 
(2)  Where the service interruption is not caused by the grantee, the grantee shall give the subscriber a credit for each hour that cable service is interrupted. 
(h)  Antenna switch; removal of antenna. The grantee, upon request of any subscriber, may provide and install, at a reasonable charge, a switching device so as to permit a subscriber to continue to use the subscriber's own television antenna, if the subscriber so chooses. The grantee shall not require the removal, or offer to remove or provide any inducements for removal of any potential or existing subscriber's antenna, as a condition of provision of service. 
(i)  Notice of operating policies. The grantee shall provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request: 
(1)  Products and services offered; 
(2)  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; 
(3)  Installation and service maintenance policies; 
(4)  Instructions on how to use the cable services; 
(5)  Channel positions of programming carried on the cable system; 
(6)  The procedures for billing and making inquiries or complaints (including the name, address and local telephone number of the employee or employees or agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed) and also furnish information concerning the village office responsible for administration of the franchise including the name and telephone number of the office. 
The written information shall also include a description of the grantee's business hours, legal holidays and procedures for responding to inquiries after normal business hours. The grantee shall provide all subscribers and the village with written notice no less than 30 days prior to any proposed change in any of the areas listed in this subsection. 
(j)  Notice of rates, programming service, and channel position. The grantee shall provide the village and subscribers with written notice of any changes in rates, programming services, or channel position at least 30 days prior to implementing such change. Such notice shall state the precise amount of any rate change and briefly explain in readily understandable fashion the cause of the rate change (e.g., inflation, changes in external costs or the addition/deletion of channels). When the change involves the addition or deletion of channels, each channel added or deleted must be separately identified. Notices to subscribers shall inform them of their right to file complaints about changes in cable programming service tier rates and services, shall state that the subscriber may file the complaint within 90 days of the effective date of the rate change, and shall provide the address and telephone number of the village administrator. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the grantee shall not be required to provide prior notice of any rate change that is the result of a regulatory fee, franchise fee, or any other fee, tax, assessment or charge of any kind imposed by the village or any federal or state agency on the transaction between the grantee and the subscriber. 
(k)  Copies of notices to be filed with the village. Copies of all notices provided to subscribers pursuant to subsections (i) and (j) of this section shall be filed concurrently with the village. 
(l)  Billing. Bills shall be clear, concise, understandable and shall include the grantee's toll free or collect telephone number for subscriber use. Bills shall be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills shall also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. In case of a billing dispute, the grantee shall respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days. Refund checks will be issued promptly, and no later than either: 
(1)  The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or 30 days, whichever is earlier; or 
(2)  The return of the equipment supplied by the grantee if service is terminated. Credits for service shall be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
(Code 1998, § 26-97; Ord. No. 98-3, § 22, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-42. - System design. 
(a)  Channel capacity. The grantee shall operate a cable system having a minimum capacity of 78 analog or equivalent downstream video channels. The grantee shall upgrade its cable system as required in the franchise agreement. 
(b)  Service requirements and continuous operation. The grantee shall design its cable system with the capability to provide two-way interactive system programming, upstream channel and downstream channel capacity, digital radio and FM radio services, and access channels. Services shall also include capacity to retransmit stereo audio signal of commercial AM and FM radio stations and stereo audio signals carried on video broadcast and cable programming. The grantee shall also operate and maintain its cable system in a manner which will enable continuous 24-hour operation of all services, as required herein. 
(Code 1998, § 26-98; Ord. No. 98-3, § 23, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-43. - Construction. 
(a)  System construction schedule. The grantee shall comply with the requirements of the cable system construction or upgrade schedule contained in the franchise agreement. The grantee shall provide a detailed construction or upgrade plan indicating progress schedules, area construction maps, test plan, and projected dates for adding service. In addition, the grantee shall update this information on a monthly basis, by submitting a copy of its normal internal progress reports, showing specifically whether schedules are being met and the reason for any delays. 
(b)  Approval of proposed construction. The grantee shall first obtain the village's approval prior to commencing construction on the streets, alleys, public grounds or places of the village. Applications for approval of construction shall be in a form provided by the village. The right of construction, including easements, is not implied except on locations where the village has the authority to grant such rights and easements and then only in conformity with the provisions of this article. All other rights of construction, including easements, shall be the responsibility of the grantee. 
(c)  Excavation permits. The grantee shall not open or disturb the surface of any street, sidewalk, driveway, or public place for any purpose without first having obtained all necessary permits. 
(d)  Use of existing poles or conduits. Nothing in this article shall authorize the grantee to erect and maintain in the village, new poles where existing poles are servicing the area. The grantee shall seek and obtain permission from the village before erecting any new poles, underground conduit or appurtenances where none exist at the time the grantee seeks to install or expand its cable system. 
(e)  Method of installation. 
(1)  All wires, cables, amplifiers and other property of the grantee shall be constructed and installed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All cables and wires shall be installed parallel with existing telephone and electric wires whenever possible. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled, with due respect for engineering and safety considerations. 
(2)  All installations shall be underground in those areas of the village where public utilities providing telephone and electric service are underground at the time of installation. 
(3)  In areas where telephone or electric utility service is aboveground, the grantee shall place its facilities underground without additional cost to the village or to the residents of the village (other than as may be reflected in rates charged to subscribers) at such time as such telephone and electric facilities are required to be placed underground by the village or are placed underground. 
(f)  Initial service. After service has been established by activating trunk and distribution cables for any area, the grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within the area within 30 days from the date of the request. 
(g)  Upgrade of facilities, equipment and service. The grantee shall upgrade its facilities, equipment and service as the demands of subscribers dictate so that the cable system is as advanced as the current state of technology with field-proven equipment will allow. Changes in facilities and equipment involving a substantive upgrade of the cable system shall be subject to consideration and approval by the cable television committee. 
(Code 1998, § 26-99; Ord. No. 98-3, § 24, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-44. - Technical standards. 
(a)  Standards. The grantee's cable system shall be constructed and operated so as to meet those technical and performance standards required by the Federal Communications Commission rules and regulations relating to cable television systems and found in 47 CFR 76.601 to 76.630, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Tests and compliance procedures. Within 60 days after the effective date of the franchise agreement, the grantee shall, upon the village's request, submit a detailed test plan describing the methods and schedules for testing its cable system on an ongoing basis to determine compliance with this article and the franchise agreement. The test plan shall be subject to the approval of the village, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. The tests for basic cable service shall be performed at intervals of no greater than 12 months. The tests may be witnessed by representatives of the village, and the grantee shall submit written test reports to the village. If more than ten percent of the locations tested fail to meet the performance standards, the grantee shall be required to indicate what corrective measures have been taken, and the entire test shall be repeated. The grantee's failure to take corrective measures within 30 days after the initial tests are performed may be considered a breach of the franchise. 
(c)  Additional testing. At any time after commencement of service to subscribers, the village may require the grantee to perform additional tests, full or partial repeat tests, or tests involving service to a specific subscriber. Such additional tests will be made on the basis of complaints received or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or significant noncompliance with the technical standards established in this article or the franchise agreement. 
(d)  Costs of tests. The costs of all tests required in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, and retesting as necessary, shall be paid by the grantee and may be passed through to subscribers. 
(Code 1998, § 26-100; Ord. No. 98-3, § 25, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-45. - Construction standards. 
(a)  Compliance with safety codes. All construction practices shall be in accordance with all applicable sections of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 and any amendments thereto as well as all state and local codes where applicable. 
(b)  Compliance with electrical codes. The construction, installation, and maintenance of all of the grantee's electronic equipment shall be in accordance with the applicable sections of the then-current edition of the National Electrical Safety Code, the National Electrical Code, and all state and local codes where applicable. 
(c)  Compliance with aviation requirements. Antennas and their supporting structures (towers) shall be painted, lighted, erected and maintained in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Aeronautical Administration and all other applicable federal, state, or local laws, codes and regulations governing the erection and operation of supporting structures or television towers. 
(Code 1998, § 26-101; Ord. No. 98-3, § 26, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-46. - Proof of compliance. 
    Upon reasonable notice by the village, the grantee shall demonstrate compliance with any or all of the standards and requirements imposed by this article. The grantee shall provide sufficiently detailed information to permit the village to readily verify the extent of compliance. 
(Code 1998, § 26-102; Ord. No. 98-3, § 27, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-47. - Complaint procedures. 
(a)  Complaints to grantee. A grantee shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the village. The procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint, either orally or in writing, to the grantee. At the conclusion of the grantee's investigation of a subscriber complaint, but in no event more than ten days after receiving the complaint, the grantee shall notify the subscriber of the results of the investigation and its proposed action or resolution, if any. The grantee shall also notify the subscriber of the subscriber's right to file a complaint with the village in the event the subscriber is dissatisfied with the grantee's decision. 
(b)  Complaints to the village. A subscriber who is dissatisfied with the grantee's proposed decision shall be entitled to have the complaint reviewed by the village. The subscriber shall initiate the review by filing a complaint, together with the grantee's decision, if any, with the cable television office and by notifying the grantee of the filing. The subscriber shall make such filing and notification within 20 days of receipt of the grantee's decision or, if no grantee decision has been provided, within 30 days after filing the original complaint with the grantee. The village may extend these time limits for reasonable cause. 
(c)  Review by the village. The village shall determine, upon a review of a subscriber complaint and the grantee's decision, if any, whether further action is warranted. In the event the village does not initiate further proceedings within 15 business days of the filing of the complaint, the grantee's proposed action or resolution shall be final. If the village decides to initiate further investigation, the village shall require the grantee and the subscriber to submit, within ten business days of notice thereof, a statement of the facts and arguments in support of their respective positions. The village shall issue a written decision within 30 days of receipt of the statements or, if a hearing is requested, within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing, setting forth the basis of the decision. 
(d)  Remedies for violations. The village may, as a part of a subscriber complaint decision issued by the village under the provisions of this article, impose monetary damages on the grantee. Damages may be imposed only if the village finds that the grantee has arbitrarily refused or failed without reasonable justification to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1998, § 26-103; Ord. No. 98-3, § 28, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-48. - Complaint file, service request log and outage log. 
(a)  Complaint file. A grantee shall keep an accurate and comprehensive file of any and all complaints regarding the cable system. A grantee shall establish a procedure to remedy complaints quickly and reasonably to the satisfaction of the village. A grantee shall keep complete records of its actions in response to all complaints for a period of three years. The grantee shall make a copy of its complaint file available to the village upon request. 
(b)  Service request log and summary. The grantee shall maintain a log and summary of all subscriber service requests, identifying the number and nature of the requests and their disposition for a period of three years. The grantee shall make a copy of such log and summaries available to the village upon request. 
(c)  Outage log and summary. A grantee shall maintain a log and summary of all major service outages for a period of three years. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "major service outage" means any interruption of sound or picture on one or more channels of a duration of at least 12 hours to at least two subscribers. A copy of such log and summaries shall be made available to the village upon request. 
(Code 1998, § 26-104; Ord. No. 98-3, § 29, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-49. - Authority for use of streets. 
(a)  Use of streets. For the purpose of constructing, operating and maintaining a cable system in the village, a grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, relocate, reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along the streets within the village such lines, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the grantee's cable system, provided that the grantee applies for and obtains all applicable permits, pays all fees, and otherwise complies with this article and all other village codes and ordinances. 
(b)  Filing of plans with the village. Prior to construction, reconstruction, upgrade, rebuild or any other major modification or change of the grantee's system, other than routine repairs, the grantee shall, in each case, file its plans for such work with the village and shall not commence any such work until it receives written approval of its plans from the village. The village shall not unreasonably withhold its approval. Upon the village's request, the grantee shall provide written progress reports to the village until the work is completed. 
(c)  Noninterference; notice. The grantee shall construct, maintain, and operate its cable system so as not to interfere with other uses of the streets. The grantee shall individually notify all residents directly affected by the proposed work at least five business days prior to the commencement of such work. 
(Code 1998, § 26-105; Ord. No. 98-3, § 30, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-50. - Conditions on use of streets. 
(a)  Facilities not to be hazardous or interfere. 
(1)  All wires, conduits, cables and other property and facilities of the grantee shall be so located, constructed, installed and maintained as not to endanger any person or unnecessarily interfere with the usual and customary trade, traffic and travel upon the streets and public places of the village. 
(2)  The grantee shall keep and maintain all its property in good condition, order and repair. The village reserves the right to inspect and examine at any reasonable time and upon reasonable notice the property owned or used, in part or in whole, by the grantee. 
(3)  The grantee shall keep accurate maps and records of all its facilities and furnish copies of such maps and records when requested by the village. 
(4)  The grantee shall not place poles or other equipment where they will interfere with the rights or reasonable convenience of adjoining property owners, or with any gas, electric or telephone fixtures or with any water hydrants or mains. All poles or other fixtures placed in a street shall be placed in the right-of-way between the roadway and the property, as specified by the village. 
(b)  Restoration and reimbursement. 
(1)  In the event of disturbance of any street or private property by the grantee, it shall, at its own expense and in a manner approved by the village and the owner, replace and restore such street or private property in as good a condition as before the work causing such disturbance was done. 
(2)  If the grantee fails to perform such replacement or restoration, the village or the owner shall have the right to do so at the sole expense of the grantee. Payment to the village or owner for such replacement or restoration shall be immediate, upon demand, by the grantee. All requests for replacement or restoring of such streets or private property as may have been disturbed must be in writing to the grantee. 
(c)  Emergency removal of facilities. If, at any time, in case of fire or disaster in the village, it shall become necessary in the reasonable judgment of the village to cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances or appurtenances thereto of the grantee, such cutting or moving may be done and any repairs rendered necessary thereby shall be made by the grantee, at its sole expense. 
(d)  Changes required by public improvements. The grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place, or remove from the street or other public place, any property of the grantee when required by the village by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, village-owned power or signal lines, and tracts or any other type of structure or improvement by public agencies. 
(e)  Requests for removal or change. The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of such building. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering the wires shall be paid by the person requesting such temporary removal, raising or lowering of the wires, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than 72 hours' prior notice of any move contemplated to arrange for temporary wire changes. 
(f)  Authority to trim trees. The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks, and other public places of the village so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the grantee. All trimming is to be done under the supervision and direction of the village after the explicit, prior written notification and approval of the village and at the expense of the grantee. 
(Code 1998, § 26-106; Ord. No. 98-3, § 31, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-51. - Services. 
(a)  Services provided. The grantee shall provide, at a minimum, the services listed in the franchise agreement and this section. The grantee shall not reduce such services without prior notification to and approval by the village. 
(b)  Basic cable service. Basic cable service, which shall include any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television signals, shall be provided to all subscribers at the established monthly subscription rates. 
(c)  Public educational and government (PEG) access channel. The grantee shall provide at least two channels for use by the village for public, educational and government cable casting. 
(d)  Education and governmental connection to cable system. Upon request by the village, the grantee shall provide free outlets, as necessary, and free basic and extended basic service to any and all village buildings used for municipal purposes and to all public and parochial school buildings used for educational purposes within the franchise area and within 300 feet of existing cable plant. Service may be extended within each building so served as long as such extensions are in compliance with applicable Federal Communications Commission rules and regulations. 
(e)  Cable channel for commercial use. The grantee shall designate channel capacity for commercial use as required by the Cable Act and applicable law. 
(Code 1998, § 26-107; Ord. No. 98-3, § 32, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-52. - Subscriber privacy. 
(a)  Collection of subscriber information. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, no grantee shall use the cable system to collect personally identifiable information concerning any subscriber without the prior written or electronic consent of the subscriber concerned. A grantee may use the cable system to collect such information in order to obtain information necessary to render a cable service or other service provided by the grantee over the cable system to the subscriber or to detect unauthorized reception of cable communications. As used in this section, the term "personally identifiable information" does not include any record of aggregate data which does not identify particular persons, the village or any other person shall not initiate or use any form, procedure or device for procuring information or data from cable subscribers' terminals by use of the cable system, without prior written authorization from each subscriber so affected. 
(b)  Disclosure of subscriber information. Except as otherwise permitted by the Cable Act, the grantee shall not disclose personally identifiable information concerning any subscriber without the prior written or electronic consent of the subscriber concerned and shall take such actions as are necessary to prevent unauthorized access to such information to a person other than the subscriber or the grantee. 
(c)  Subscriber access to information. A subscriber shall be provided all personally identifiable information regarding that subscriber which is collected and maintained by the grantee. Such information shall be made available to the subscriber at reasonable times and at a convenient place designated by the grantee. A subscriber shall be provided reasonable opportunity to correct any error in such information. 
(d)  Destruction of subscriber information. A grantee shall destroy personally identifiable information if the information is no longer necessary for the purpose for which it was collected and there are no pending requests or orders for access to such information under subsection (c) of this section or pursuant to a court order. 
(Code 1998, § 26-108; Ord. No. 98-3, § 33, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-53. - Quality of service. 
    The overall quality of service provided by a grantee to subscribers may be subject to evaluation by the village, at least annually. In addition, the village may evaluate the quality of service at any time, based on subscriber complaints received by the grantee, and the village, and the grantee's response to those complaints. Upon determining that service quality is inadequate, the village may order the grantee to cure the inadequacies. The grantee shall commence corrective action within 30 days after receipt of written notice of such order. Failure to do so shall be deemed to be a material breach of the franchise and subject to the remedies prescribed in this article. The village may use the performance bond and/or security fund provided for in this article to remedy any such franchise breach. 
(Code 1998, § 26-109; Ord. No. 98-3, § 34, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-54. - Open books and records. 
(a)  Maintenance of books and records. All records pertaining to subscribers, cable system operations and finances of the grantee shall be maintained in a local office or a regional office that is no more than 100 miles from the corporate offices of the village. 
(b)  Village right to inspect. On 24 hours' written notice, at any time during normal business hours at the grantee's local office or regional office, the village shall have the right to inspect all books, records, maps, plans, financial statements, all logs required under this article, performance test results, record of requests for service and other like materials of the grantee relating to the operation of the cable system in the franchise area. 
(c)  Confidential information. When requested by the grantee and to the extent allowed by law, the village shall treat as confidential proprietary information or trade secrets obtained by the village during records inspection; the village shall make such information available only to those persons who must have access to the information to perform their duties on behalf of the village. 
(Code 1998, § 26-110; Ord. No. 98-3, § 35, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-55. - Reports and records. 
(a)  Annual submissions to the village. The grantee shall file annually with the village administrator, not later than three months after the end of grantee's fiscal year during which it accepted a franchise under this article and within three months after the end of each subsequent fiscal year, two copies of the following: 
(1)  A summary of the previous year's activities in development of the cable system, including, but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during the reporting year, and the number of subscribers for each class of service. 
(2)  A statement of projected construction within the franchise area, if any, for the next three years. 
(3)  Accurate maps and/or plats of the location and character of all existing and proposed installations of the grantee over, upon or under the streets of the village. A description of the location of any businesses or dwelling units adjacent to the grantee's physical plant, to which cable access is not technologically or economically feasible shall be identified and listed separately along with the reason cable television service is not available. 
(4)  Each type of subscriber agreement if different from those already on file with the village. Copies of individual subscribers' agreements shall not be filed with the village. 
(5)  Copies of all pertinent agreement or contracts, including any pole-use agreements, entered into by the grantee during the fiscal year in the conduct of its business pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Submissions required upon request. Upon request by the village, the grantee shall file two copies of the following with the village administrator: 
(1)  Any quarterly or annual reports to the grantee's stockholders, partners, or other equity owners, including reports of parent companies or other controlling or related entities. 
(2)  A list of grantee's officers, members of its board of directors, and other principals of the grantee. 
(3)  A list of all stockholders, partners or other entities holding five percent or more of the owner's equity in the grantee, including similar lists for the parent companies or other controlling or related entities of the grantee. 
(4)  All rules and regulations promulgated by the grantee during the fiscal year in the conduct of its business under this article. 
(c)  Other submissions. Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by the grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matter affecting cable operation within the franchise area shall also be submitted simultaneously to the village. 
(d)  Records to be kept on file. All records required by this section shall be kept on file by the grantee for the applicable periods under federal and state law or, where no period is designated by law, for the duration of the franchise. 
(e)  Public availability of reports. The reports and records required under this article shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours in the office of the village administrator. Subscribers shall be notified of the availability of such reports and records. 
(Code 1998, § 26-111; Ord. No. 98-3, § 36, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-56. - Bonds. 
(a)  Proposal bond. Each applicant for an initial franchise under this article shall submit a proposal bond in a form acceptable to the village president, or a certified check on a bank that is a member of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, payable to the order of the village in the amount of $25,000.00. 
(b)  Forfeit of proposal bond. Should the applicant for an initial franchise fail or refuse to accept a franchise under this article or fail or refuse to furnish the performance bond as required in subsection (d) of this section within 30 days after receiving written notification of the award of a franchise by the village, the applicant shall be considered to have abandoned its proposal and the village shall enforce the proposal bond in accordance with its terms or retain the proceeds of the certified check. 
(c)  Return of proposal bond. Proposal bonds or certified checks received in lieu thereof from applicants whose proposals are not accepted by the village shall be returned to the applicant within 30 days after the proposal is rejected. 
(d)  Performance bond. 
(1)  Within 30 days after the effective date of the franchise agreement, the grantee shall furnish and file with the village a performance bond running to the village, with at least two good and sufficient sureties or other financial guaranties approved by the village president, in the amount set out in the franchise agreement to ensure the faithful performance of the grantee of all of its obligations under this article and the franchise agreement and for the payment by the grantee of any claims, liens, taxes, monetary damages, and fees due to the village which arise by reason of construction, operation, or maintenance of the grantee's cable system, and on the further condition that in the event the grantee shall fail to comply with any law, ordinance, regulation or agreement governing the franchise, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and sureties on the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the village as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the grantee, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond. The bond shall contain the following endorsement: 
"It is understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the village administrator, by registered mail of two copies of a written notice of such intent to cancel or not to renew." 
(2)  At the time of a franchise review, the grantee may submit to the village a written application for a reduction in the sum total amount of the performance bond for the remainder of the franchise term and any renewal or extension of the franchise. The cable television committee shall determine and submit a revised sum total amount to the village board for action. The decision of the board shall be final. 
(e)  Construction bond. Prior to undertaking any construction work costing $50,000.00 or more relating to the franchise granted under this article, the grantee shall file with the village a construction bond in the amount specified in the franchise agreement in favor of the village and any other person who may claim damages as a result of the breach of any duty by the grantee assured by such bond. Such construction bond shall be in the form approved by the village and issued by a company approved by the village. In no event shall the amount of such construction bond be construed to limit the liability of the grantee for damages. The village may waive this requirement or permit consolidation of the construction bond with the performance bond specified above in subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)  Bond evidence to be filed with the village. Two copies of all bonds or certified copies thereof and written evidence of payment of any required premium shall be filed and maintained with the village administrator during the term of any franchise granted under this article or any renewal thereof. 
(Code 1998, § 26-112; Ord. No. 98-3, § 37, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-57. - Security fund. 
    Within 30 days after the effective date of the franchise agreement, the grantee may be required to deposit into a bank account established by the village, and maintain on deposit through the term of this franchise, the sum specified in the franchise agreement, as security for the grantee's faithful performance of all of its obligations under this article and the franchise agreement and for the payment by the grantee of any claims, liens, taxes and fees due to the village which arise by reason of the construction, operation, or maintenance of the grantee's cable system. 
(Code 1998, § 26-113; Ord. No. 98-3, § 38, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-58. - Work performed by others. 
    The grantee shall give prior notice to the village specifying the names and addresses of any entity, other than the grantee, that performs services valued at $10,000.00 within one calendar year or more relating to the franchise, provided, however, that all provisions of the franchise remain the responsibility of the grantee. All provisions of any franchise shall apply to any subcontractor or others performing any work or services pursuant to the provisions of the franchise. Nothing in this section shall be construed as allowing the transfer of any rights or responsibilities of the grantee without written approval of the village. 
(Code 1998, § 26-114; Ord. No. 98-3, § 39, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-59. - Indemnity. 
(a)  Extent of indemnity. 
(1)  The grantee shall, by acceptance of any franchise granted, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the village, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees from any and all claims, suits, judgments for damages or other relief, costs and reasonable attorney's fees in any way existing out of or through or alleged to arise out of or through: 
a.  The acts of the village in granting the franchise; 
b.  The acts or omissions of the grantee, its servants, employees, or agents including, but not limited to, any failure or refusal by grantee, its servants, employees or agents to comply with any obligation or duty imposed on the grantee by this article or the franchise agreement; or 
c.  The grantee's exercise of any right or privilege granted or permitted by this article or the franchise agreement; or 
d.  The release, threatened release by the grantee's facilities or the storage by the grantee of any hazardous wastes or hazardous substances on, under or adjacent to the streets (collectively referred to as "covered claims"). 
(2)  The term "hazardous substances" shall be interpreted broadly to mean any substance or material designated or defined as hazardous or toxic waste, hazardous or toxic material, hazardous or toxic or radioactive substance, or other similar term used by any federal, state, or local laws, regulations or rules now or hereafter in effect including any amendments. Such indemnification shall include, but not be limited to, all claims arising in tort, contract, infringements of copyright, violations of statutes, ordinances or regulations or otherwise. 
(b)  Notification of claims. The village shall notify the grantee within ten business days after the presentation of any claim or demand, either by suit or otherwise, made against the village. The village's failure to so notify the grantee does not relieve the grantee of its obligation under this section. 
(c)  Defense of claims. In the event any claims shall arise, the village or any other indemnified party shall tender the defense thereof to the grantee. Defense of any such claim shall be by counsel reasonably acceptable to the village or other indemnified party. Provided, however, in the event the village, in its sole discretion, determines that its interests cannot be represented in good faith by the grantee, the grantee shall pay all expenses (including reasonable attorney's fees) incurred by the village in defending itself. The grantee shall not agree to any settlement of claims that affects the village without the village's approval. 
(d)  Village's negligence. The grantee shall not be required to indemnify the village to the extent that any covered claim solely arises from the negligence or willful misconduct on the part of the village's officials, boards, commissions, agents or employees. 
(Code 1998, § 26-115; Ord. No. 98-3, § 40, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-60. - Insurance. 
(a)  Liability insurance. The grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise, and any extensions thereto, the insurance policies described in this section, which shall be written on an occurrence basis. Such policies shall name as an additional insured the village, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, shall be primary to any insurance carried by the village, and shall be obtained from a company or companies approved by the village and in a form satisfactory to the village. Such policies shall be as follows: 
(1)  General comprehensive liability insurance. General comprehensive liability insurance containing the following coverages: premises/operations; products/completed operations; broad form property damage; contractual liability coverage for explosion, collapse and underground hazards; and pollution control liability. The policy shall include limits of not less than $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury (including death) and property damage for each occurrence of not less than $2,000,000.00 in the aggregate. 
(2)  Workers' compensation. Workers' compensation insurance in compliance with Wis. Stats. § 102.31 and in compliance with the laws of each state having jurisdiction over each employee. 
(3)  Comprehensive automobile liability insurance. Comprehensive automobile liability including owned, non-owned, and hired vehicles with limits of not less than $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury (including death) and $1,000,000.00 for property damage for each occurrence. 
(4)  Umbrella liability. Umbrella liability with limits of not less than $8,000,000.00, which shall be in excess of the insurance required in subsections (a)(1) and (3) of this section and which shall carry the following endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that despite anything to the contrary where underlying insurance, as described herein, provides greater protection or indemnity to the insured than the terms and conditions of this policy, this insurance shall pay on behalf of the insured the same terms, conditions and coverages which apply to the basic underlying insurance. Where no such broader underlying insurance exists, this policy shall pay on behalf of the insured upon terms and conditions and limitations of the carrier's umbrella excess policy." 
(b)  Notice of cancellation or reduction of coverage. The insurance policies mentioned above shall contain an endorsement stating that the policies are extended to cover the liability assumed by the grantee under the terms of this article and the franchise agreement and shall provide that the policy may not be canceled nor the amount of coverage thereof reduced until 30 days after receipt by the village administrator by registered mail of written notice of such intent to cancel or reduce the coverage. 
(c)  Evidence of insurance filed with village administrator. During the term of the franchise or any renewal term, the grantee shall file and maintain with the village administrator all policies of insurance or certified copies thereof and written evidence of payment of required premiums. 
(d)  Village's right to revise insurance requirements. The village reserves the right to revise the insurance requirements stated in this article at any time during the term of any franchise granted under this article. 
(e)  No waiver. 
(1)  Neither the provisions of this article nor any insurance accepted by the village pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the village thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee or limit the liability of the grantee under this franchise or for damages, either to the full amount of any bond required by this article or the franchise agreement or otherwise. 
(2)  No provision of this article is intended, or shall be construed, to be a waiver for any purpose by the village of the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 893.80 or other applicable limits on municipal liability. 
(Code 1998, § 26-116; Ord. No. 98-3, § 41, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-61. - Protection of nonsubscribers. 
    A grantee shall at all times keep its cables and other appurtenances used for transmitting signals shielded in such a manner that there will be no interference with signals received by radios or televisions not connected to the grantee's service. 
(Code 1998, § 26-117; Ord. No. 98-3, § 42, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-62. - Grantee rules, regulations. 
(a)  Generally. A grantee may promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under the franchise and to ensure uninterrupted service to all its subscribers. 
(b)  Rules to be in conformance with other regulations. No rules, regulations, terms and conditions promulgated by a grantee under this section shall be in conflict with the provisions of this article, the franchise agreement or state or federal law. 
(c)  Rules to be filed with village. Two copies of all rules, regulations, terms and conditions promulgated by the grantee and any additions or deletions thereto shall be kept currently on file with the village administrator and another copy shall be maintained for public inspection during normal business hours at the grantee's local payment center. No such rules, regulations, terms, and conditions or amendments, additions or deletions thereto shall take effect until so filed and maintained. 
(Code 1998, § 26-118; Ord. No. 98-3, § 43, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-63. - Unauthorized reception or use of cable services. 
(a)  Unauthorized use. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a grantee's cable system within the franchise area for the purpose of enabling reception of any television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound, without payment to the grantee. 
(b)  Tampering. It shall be unlawful for any person, without the grantee's consent, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used by a grantee for distribution of television signals, radio signals, picture, programs or sound. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture for each day of violation or failure to comply, not to exceed $300.00. 
(Code 1998, § 26-119; Ord. No. 98-3, § 44, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-64. - Emergency alert system. 
    The grantee shall provide and maintain all equipment, systems, software, services, security provisions, and procedures required for a fully operational emergency cable override warning system in accordance with the Federal Communications Commission rules. The grantee shall provide, in a location to be approved by the cable television committee, all equipment necessary for use of the emergency alert override system and shall cooperate with the committee in the use and operation of the emergency alert override system. 
(Code 1998, § 26-120; Ord. No. 98-3, § 45, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 66-65. - Interconnection. 
(a)  Interconnection study. At the village's request, the grantee shall conduct a study to determine whether interconnection of its cable system with other adjacent cable systems for the purpose of sharing public, educational, and governmental access programming is technically feasible. The grantee shall submit a report of any such study to the village for its review. The report shall include a statement of the likely impact of such interconnection on subscriber rates. 
(b)  Interconnection procedure. Where the village determines that interconnection is technically and economically feasible, the village may request that the grantee initiate negotiations with the other affected systems in order that all costs may be shared equally among the owners of the systems to be interconnected for both construction and operation of the interconnection link. 
(c)  Relief. The village may grant the grantee reasonable extensions of time to interconnect, or the village may rescind its order to interconnect upon petition by the grantee to the village. The village shall grant the petition if it finds that the grantee has negotiated in good faith and has failed to obtain an approval from the operator or franchising authority of the systems to be interconnected or that the cost of the interconnection would cause an unreasonable or unacceptable increase in subscriber rates. 
(d)  Cooperation required. The grantee shall cooperate with any interconnection corporation, regional interconnection authority or village, county, state and federal regulatory agency which may be hereafter established for the purpose of regulating, financing, or otherwise providing for the interconnection of cable systems beyond the boundaries of the village. 
(Code 1998, § 26-121; Ord. No. 98-3, § 46, 4-6-1998) 
Chapter 70 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic and vehicles, Wis. Stats. chs. 340-350; powers of local authorities, Wis. Stats. ch. 349. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Penalties. 
(a)  Forfeiture penalty. The penalty for violation of any section of this chapter shall be a forfeiture, as provided in this section. Payment of the judgment and applicable court costs, fees, assessments and surcharges may be suspended by the sentencing court for not more than 60 days. Any person 18 years of age or older who shall fail to pay the amount of the forfeiture, court costs, any penalty assessment or driver surcharge or other penalty imposed for violation of any section of this chapter may, upon order of the court entering judgment therefor and having jurisdiction of the case, be imprisoned until such forfeiture, costs and assessments are paid, but not exceeding 90 days. 
(b)  Other sanctions. 
(1)  Authority of court. Nothing in this section shall preclude or affect the power of the sentencing court to exercise additional authorities granted by state law to suspend or revoke the operating privileges of the defendant, to order the defendant to submit to assessment and rehabilitation programs or to attend traffic safety school in addition to payment of a monetary penalty or in lieu or imprisonment. 
(2)  Authority of village. No person who has been convicted of a violation of any section of this chapter shall be issued a license or permit by the village, except an animal license, until the forfeiture imposed for such violation and any penalty assessments, court costs and fees or surcharges are paid. 
(c)  Forfeitures for violation of uniform moving traffic regulations. Forfeitures for violations of any moving traffic regulation set forth in the state statutes adopted by reference in section 70-2 shall conform to the forfeiture penalty permitted to be imposed for violations of the comparable state statute, including any variations or increases for subsequent offenses; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be construed to permit prosecution under this chapter for any offense described in Wis. Stats. chs. 341-348, for which an imprisonment penalty or fine may be imposed upon the defendant. 
(d)  Forfeitures for parking violations. 
(1)  Uniform statewide parking, stopping and standing offenses. Minimum and maximum forfeitures for violation of nonmoving traffic violations adopted by reference in section 70-2, as described in Wis. Stats. chs. 341-348, shall be as found in the current edition of the Revised Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule. 
(2)  Penalty for other parking violations. The penalty for all other parking violations not included under subsection (d)(1) of this section, subject to the exceptions listed below, shall be $10.00 if paid within the first ten days after issuance of the violation. Failure to pay the penalty within ten days after issuance of the violation causes the penalty to be increased to $20.00. Failure to pay the increased penalty within 30 days after issuance of the violation causes the penalty to be increased to $40.00. 
(e)  Other violations. Any person who shall violate any section of this chapter for which a penalty is not otherwise established by this section shall be subject to punishment as provided under section 1-32. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-50; Code 1998, § 94-10; Ord. No. 99-4, § 1, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 70-2. - State traffic laws adopted. 
(a)  Generally. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, the statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. chs. 340-348, describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic, for which the penalty is a forfeiture only, exclusive of any regulations for which the statutory penalty is a fine or term of imprisonment or exclusively state charges, are adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this section. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any regulation incorporated by reference in this section is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutory regulations in Wis. Stats. chs. 340-348 incorporated in this section are intended to be made part of this chapter in order to secure to the extent legally practicable uniform statewide regulation of vehicle traffic on the highways, streets and alleys of the state. Any person who shall, within the village, violate any provision of any statute incorporated by reference in this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense under this section. 
(b)  Statutes specifically incorporated by reference. Whenever this chapter incorporates by reference specific sections of the state statutes, such references shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes as from time to time amended, repealed or modified by the state legislature. 
(c)  General references. General references in this chapter to state statutory sections or chapters describing or defining procedures or authority for enactment or enforcement of local traffic regulations shall be deemed to refer to the most recent enactments of the state legislature describing or defining such procedures or authorities. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-1(a), (c), (d); Code 1998, § 94-1) 
Sec. 70-3. - State administrative code provisions adopted. 
(a)  Generally. The following administrative rules and regulations adopted by the secretary of the state department of transportation and published in the Wisconsin Administrative Code, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to the penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth: 
(1)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 146, Vehicle Registration and Fuel Trip Permits (penalties of Wis. Stats. §§ 341.04(3) and 341.45(b) apply). 
(2)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 305, Standards for Vehicle Equipment. 
(3)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 300, Transportation of School Children. 
(4)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 304, Slow Moving Vehicle Emblem. 
(b)  Noncompliance prohibited. No person shall operate or allow to be operated on any highway, street or alley within the village a vehicle that is not in conformity with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section or the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 110.075 and Wis. Stats. ch. 347, incorporated by reference in section 70-2. 
(c)  Penalty. Penalty for violation of this section, including the provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code incorporated by reference, shall be as provided in section 1-32, together with the costs of prosecution and applicable penalty assessment. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-2; Code 1998, § 94-2; Ord. No. 99-8, § 1, 5-17-1999) 
Sec. 70-4. - School bus warning lights. 
    Flashing red or amber warning lights may be used by school bus operators in a residence or business district when pupils or other authorized passengers are to be loaded or unloaded at a location at which there are no traffic signals and such persons must cross the street or highway before being loaded or after being unloaded. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-5; Code 1998, § 94-6; Ord. No. 95-4, 4-3-1995) 
Sec. 70-5. - State all-terrain vehicle and utility terrain vehicle laws adopted. 
    The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 23.33 are adopted by reference and made part of this section as if fully set forth in this section. Any acts required to be performed by such section are required to be performed by this section or are prohibited by this section. 
(Code 1988, § 10-4-1; Code 1998, § 94-3) 
Secs. 70-6-70-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-29. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Procedures. Procedures for enforcement of this chapter are as follows: 
(1)  Generally. This chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the applicable provisions of state law and this section. 
(2)  Applicable court procedures. Except where otherwise specifically provided by the laws of the state or this Code, the traffic regulations in this Code shall be enforced in the circuit court or municipal court. 
(b)  Citations. 
(1)  Uniform citation and complaint. The state uniform traffic citation and complaint described and defined in state law shall be used for enforcement of all sections of this chapter, except those sections which describe or define nonmoving traffic violations and violations of Wis. Stats. §§ 346.71-346.73. Violations of Wis. Stats. §§ 346.71-346.73 shall be reported to the district attorney, and the state uniform traffic citation shall not be used in such cases except upon written request of the district attorney. 
(2)  Parking citations. The police chief shall recommend a citation for use in enforcing the nonmoving traffic offenses in this chapter. Such citation shall be used for enforcement of nonmoving traffic regulations created or adopted by this chapter, including violations of nonmoving traffic regulations defined and described in state law, adopted by reference in section 70-2, and all sections regarding nonmoving traffic violations in this chapter. The citation for nonmoving traffic violations shall contain a notice that the person cited may discharge the forfeiture for violation of a nonmoving traffic regulation and penalty thereof by complying with subsection (c)(2) of this section. Nonmoving traffic citations may be issued by law enforcement officers or by civilian employees of the police department. 
(c)  Deposits and stipulations. 
(1)  Uniform traffic offenses. Deposits and stipulations for uniform traffic offenses are as follows: 
a.  Authority. Persons arrested or cited for violation of moving traffic offenses created by this chapter shall be permitted to make deposits and stipulations of no contest or shall be released by the arresting officer in accordance with the applicable provisions of state law. Stipulations of guilt or no contest may be made by persons arrested for violations of this chapter in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.01141)(b) whenever the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 345.27 are inapplicable to such violations. Stipulations shall conform to the form contained in the uniform traffic citation and complaint under Wis. Stats. § 345.11 and may be accepted up to the court date of the alleged violation. Stipulations may be accepted by the police department. 
b.  Delivery or mailing of deposit and stipulation. Any person stipulating guilt or no contest under the subsection (c)(1)a of this section must make the deposit required under Wis. Stats. § 345.26 or, if the deposit is not established under such statute, shall deposit a forfeited penalty as provided in the schedule established by the police chief and approved by the village board. Deposits may be brought or mailed to the police department up to the date of court appearance. 
c.  Receipt required. Every officer accepting a stipulation under this chapter shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 343.28, 345.26(1)(a) and 345.27(2) and shall require the alleged violator to sign a statement of notice in substantially the form contained on the uniform traffic citation and complaint promulgated under Wis. Stats. § 345.11. The official or person receiving the deposit shall furnish and deliver or mail an original receipt for such deposit to the alleged violator and shall deliver the deposit and stipulation and a copy of the receipt within seven days to the clerk of courts. 
(2)  Nonmoving traffic offenses. Deposits and payment of penalties for nonmoving traffic offenses shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Direct payment of penalty permitted. A person cited (summons not issued) for violation of a nonmoving traffic offense described and defined in this chapter may discharge the penalty thereof and avoid court prosecution by mailing or forwarding, within five days of the issuance of the citation, to the police department the minimum forfeiture specified for the violation. If not forwarded, the penalty may be discharged by forwarding, within ten days of the date of citation, to the police department the amount of $10.00. When payment is made as provided in this subsection, no court costs shall be charged. 
b.  Court prosecution. If the alleged violator does not deliver or mail a deposit, as provided in subsection (c)(2)a of this section, within ten days of the date of the citation, the police chief shall forward a copy of the citation to the village attorney for prosecution. 
c.  Registration suspension. If the alleged violator does not pay the forfeiture or appear in court in response to the citation for a nonmoving traffic violation on the date specified in the citation or, if no date is specified on the citation, within 28 days after the citation is issued, the village may ask the state department of transportation to suspend the registration of the vehicle involved or refuse registration of any vehicle owned by the person pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 345.28(4) and subsection (c)(4) of this section. 
d.  Deposits delivered to village administrator. Officers receiving deposits for nonmoving traffic violations under this subsection shall pay over such deposits to the village administrator within seven days of receipt. Such payment shall be accompanied by an itemized statement for each deposit of the offense charged and the name of the depositor. 
e.  Bond. Any officer authorized to accept deposits under Wis. Stats. § 345.26 or this section shall qualify by taking the oath prescribed by Wis. Stats. § 19.01. 
(3)  Notice of demerit points and receipt. Every officer accepting a forfeited penalty or money deposit under this section shall receipt therefor in triplicate as provided in Wis. Stats. § 345.26(3)(b). Every officer accepting a stipulation under this section shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 343.28, 345.26(1)(a) and 345.27(2) and shall require the alleged violator to sign a statement of notice in substantially the form contained on the uniform traffic citation and complaint promulgated under Wis. Stats. § 345.11. 
(4)  Registration suspension program. 
a.  The village shall participate in the state department of transportation traffic violation and registration program as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 345.28 and Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans. 128 and all amendments or changes thereto. 
b.  The police department is designated as a delegated authority for purposes of Wis. Stats. §§ 85.13 and 345.28 and Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans. 128. The police department is authorized to perform, on behalf of the village, all functions required of a local authority under such statutes and code, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Preparing and completing forms and notices, notifying the state department of transportation of unpaid citations for nonmoving traffic violations; 
2.  Specifying whether the registration of vehicles involved in unpaid citations for nonmoving traffic violations should be suspended and whether registration should be refused for any vehicle owned by a person with unpaid citations for nonmoving traffic violations; 
3.  Determining the method by which the village will pay the state department of transportation for administration of the program; 
4.  Establishing the effective date for participation; and 
5.  Taking such other action as is necessary to institute and continue participation in the state department of transportation traffic violation and registration program. 
c.  The police chief is authorized to assign a member of the police department to perform such acts as are necessary to effectuate this subsection. 
d.  In addition to all applicable fines and court costs, the cost of using the state department of transportation traffic violation and registration program shall be assessed as permitted by Wis. Stats. § 345.28(4)(d). The police department may refuse to notify the state department of transportation of payment on a citation until all applicable fines and costs, including costs of using the state program assessed under this subsection, are paid. 
e.  This subsection shall not be interpreted as requiring that all unpaid citations for nonmoving traffic violations be processed through the state department of transportation traffic violation and registration program. The village's participation in such program shall be in addition to any and all other means legally available to enforce such citations. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-51; Code 1998, § 94-11) 
State Law reference- Nonmoving violations, Wis. Stats. § 345.28. 
Sec. 70-30. - Registration record of vehicle as evidence of parking violations. 
    When any vehicle is found upon a street or highway in violation of any section of this chapter regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles and the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the owner, as shown by the ownership registration of the vehicle supplied by the state department of transportation or a comparable authority of any other state shall be deemed to have committed the violation for purposes of enforcement of this chapter and specifically section 70-2 and shall be subject to the applicable forfeiture penalty. However, the defenses defined and described in Wis. Stats. § 346.485(5)(b) shall be a defense for an owner charged with such violation. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-4; Code 1998, § 94-5) 
Secs. 70-31-70-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND DEVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic signs, signals and markings, Wis. Stats. § 346.37 et seq. 

Sec. 70-49. - Official traffic map. 
(a)  Established. There is established an official traffic map for the village upon which shall be indicated no parking areas, restricted parking areas, stop signs, arterial intersections, yield signs, special speed limits, one-way highways, school crossings and all other restrictions or limitations contained in this chapter, as from time to time amended or modified by the village board when the laws of the state require the erection or use of official traffic control devices to enforce such restrictions of limitations. 
(b)  Violations prohibited. When official traffic control devices giving notice of the restrictions, prohibitions and limitations shown on the official traffic map are erected and maintained in accordance with this section, a violation of the restriction, prohibition or limitation shown on the official traffic map shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Maintenance and display. A copy of the official traffic map shall be maintained and displayed in the office of the police department. 
(d)  Additions. The village board may from time to time make additions to or deletions from the official traffic map, and the police chief shall keep such official traffic map current. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-7; Code 1998, § 94-8) 
Sec. 70-50. - Duty of director of public works to erect and install. 
    Whenever traffic regulations created by this chapter, including a state traffic regulation adopted by reference in section 70-2, require the erection of traffic control devices for enforcement, the director of public works, with the cooperation of the police department, shall procure, erect and maintain uniform traffic control devices conforming to the Uniform Traffic Control Device Manual promulgated by the state department of transportation, giving notice of such traffic regulation to the users of the streets and highways on which such regulations apply. Whenever state law grants discretion to local authorities in erecting or placement of a uniform traffic control device, devices shall be erected in such locations and in such a manner as, in the judgment of the director of public works, will carry out the purposes of this chapter and give adequate warning to users of the streets and highways of the village. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-3(a); Code 1998, § 94-116) 
Sec. 70-51. - Code numbers for devices. 
    The director of public works shall cause to be placed on each official traffic control sign a guide board, milepost, signal or marker erected under section 70-50 a code number assigned by the state department of transportation and shall also place or direct the placing of code numbers on all existing official traffic control devices as required by state law. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-3(b); Code 1998, § 94-117) 
Sec. 70-52. - Authority to remove prohibited signs or signals. 
    Every sign, signal, marking or device which is placed, maintained or displayed in violation of Wis. Stats. § 346.41 is declared to be a public nuisance. The village may notify in writing the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the nuisance exists or the person causing or maintaining the nuisance to remove the nuisance. If such nuisance is not removed within 30 days after such notice is given or if an unauthorized signal or device is found to be in operation at any time after such notice is given, the village may cause the nuisance to be removed and collect the expense of removal from the person notified to remove it. The expense of removal may be charged against the premises and, upon certificate of the village, assessed as are other special taxes. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-3(d); Code 1998, § 94-119) 
Secs. 70-53-70-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 70-78. - Through streets designated. 
    In the interest of public safety and pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.07, the following streets or portions thereof are declared to be through highways and snow emergency routes, and traffic signs or signals giving notice thereof shall be erected by the director of public works in accordance with article IV of this chapter: 
(1)  State Highway 19. 
(2)  State Highway 113. 
(3)  County Trunk Highway Q. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-11; Code 1998, § 94-41) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate, Wis. Stats. § 349.07. 
Sec. 70-79. - Heavy traffic routes. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Heavy traffic means: 
(1)  All vehicles not operating on pneumatic tires; and 
(2)  All vehicles or combinations of vehicles, other than motorbuses, designed or used for transporting property of any nature, including recreational vehicles, and having a gross weight of more than 6,000 pounds. 
(b)  Prohibited routes. Heavy traffic is prohibited from using any village street or highway not designated as a heavy traffic route. This section shall not act to prohibit heavy traffic from using a village street or highway for the purpose of obtaining orders for supplies or moving or delivering supplies or commodities to or from any place of business or residence which has an entrance on such street or highway. Furthermore, this section will not act to prohibit heavy traffic from using any village streets over which are routed state trunk highways. When being driven to the site of any construction, repair or maintenance of electric, gas or water service, vehicles owned and operated by a public utility will be exempt from this section. 
(c)  Administration. The director of public works, in cooperation with the police department, shall administer this section. Administration shall include the following: 
(1)  Posting of signs. Appropriate signs shall be posted giving notice of this section and of the heavy traffic routes established in this section. Yellow signposts may also be used to designate heavy traffic routes. 
(2)  Maps. Heavy traffic routes shall be shown on the official traffic map. 
(3)  Construction equipment. 
a.  The director of public works may grant temporary permits to allow heavy construction equipment to use village streets or highways not designated as heavy traffic routes. This permit may be granted only when use of a nondesignated route is necessary for the equipment to reach a construction site. No permit may be issued unless the person owning the equipment agrees to reimburse and hold the village harmless for any damage done to the village street by the equipment and any personal injury or property damage caused in part or in whole by the street damage. 
b.  Village-owned or -operated equipment is specifically excluded from this section. 
(d)  Liability. Any operator, corporation, owner or agent whose heavy traffic vehicle damages any village street or highway in violation of this section shall be liable and required to pay the village the cost of repair or replacement of the damaged street or highway. 
(e)  Special and seasonal weight limitations. The director of public works shall have the authority to impose special or seasonal weight limits on any highway, bridge or culvert maintained by the village to prevent injury to the roadway or for the safety of the users of such bridge or culvert and shall be responsible for erecting uniform traffic control devices giving notice thereof in accordance with article IV of this chapter. 
(f)  Heavy traffic routes designated. All streets and alleys within the village are designated class B highways subject to the weight limitations of Wis. Stats. § 346.16. However, the following streets or parts thereof within the jurisdiction of the village are designated heavy traffic routes and are excepted from the class B weight limitations: 
(1)  Main Street. 
(2)  South Division Street. 
(3)  Century Avenue (County Highway Q). 
(4)  Woodland Drive. 
(5)  Marshall Drive. 
(6)  Cooper Road. 
(7)  Nord Drive. 
(8)  South Street from Main Street to Third Street. 
(9)  Third Street from South Street east to Bacon Street. 
(10)  East Second Street to Short Street to East Third Street. 
(11)  Bacon Street from East Third Street to Main Street. 
(12)  Madison Street from Main Street to Prospect Road. 
(13)  Reeve Drive. 
(14)  Sunset Lane. 
(15)  Klein Drive from State Highway 19 to Sunset Drive. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate heavy traffic, Wis. Stats. § 349.17. 
Sec. 70-80. - Unauthorized operation of off-road vehicles. 
(a)  Findings. This section is enacted on the following findings: 
(1)  The unauthorized off-road operation of motor vehicles has resulted in serious damage to public and private lands and damage or destruction of vegetation, animal life and improvements to the lands; 
(2)  The unauthorized off-road operation of motor vehicles has resulted in the permanent scarring of land and an increase in both erosion and air pollution; 
(3)  The unauthorized off-road operation of motor vehicles has resulted in collisions and near collisions threatening the life and safety of the operators of such vehicles as well as of other persons; and 
(4)  The unauthorized off-road operation of motor vehicles has resulted in a loss of the privacy, quietude and serenity to which the owners and users of land are rightfully entitled. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled and includes but is not limited to automobiles, trucks, jeeps, vans, motorcycles, motorbikes, go-carts, motorized three-wheeled vehicles, all-terrain vehicles, mopeds, snowmobiles, dune buggies and tractors. The term "motor vehicle" shall not mean any airplane, railroad train, boat, wheelchair or bicycle. A vehicle which would otherwise be defined as a motor vehicle under this section shall not be so defined while it is being operated: 
(1)  Solely for the purpose of construction or maintenance of an improvement to land or solely for access to construction or maintenance sites, provided such operation is by persons having legitimate business on such lands or sites. 
(2)  By or at the direction of public employees or utility company employees as part of their employment duties. 
(3)  By the holder of an easement or right of access on or over the land on which operation is occurring or the holder's employees or agents. 
    Off-road means any location which is: 
(1)  Not a paved or maintained public street or alley; 
(2)  Not used or maintained by the owner or lessee of land as a driveway, parking lot or other way for motor vehicles; or 
(3)  A private trail for use only by the owner or the owner's permittees for recreational or other vehicular use. 
The term "off-road" shall not include any creekbed, riverbed or lake; provided, however, that this shall not apply to snowmobiles or other vehicles being operated on the ice covering such creekbed, riverbed or lake. 
    Operation means the physical manipulation or activation of any of the controls of a motor vehicle necessary to put it in motion. 
    Unauthorized means without the express prior consent of the owner, lessee, manager or other person authorized to give consent by the owner or lessee of land. Authorization shall not be implied from a failure to post private or public land. 
(c)  Prohibited. The unauthorized off-road operation of a motor vehicle is prohibited. Except for authorized maintenance vehicles and snowmobiles or all-terrain vehicles operating in authorized areas pursuant to sections 70-81 and 70-182, it shall be unlawful to operate any minibike, go-cart, all-terrain vehicle or any other motor-driven craft or vehicle principally manufactured for off-highway use on the village streets, alleys, parks, sidewalks, bikeways, parking lots or on any public lands or private lands or parking lots held open to the public. The operator shall at all times have the written consent of the owner before operation of such craft or vehicle on private lands. 
(d)  Use of snowmobile trails. Except as provided in the definition of motor vehicle in subsection (b) of this section, no person shall operate any motor vehicle other than a snowmobile on a snowmobile trail. 
(Code 1988, § 10-4-4; Code 1998, § 94-43) 
Sec. 70-81. - Speed limits and routes for all-terrain vehicles. 
    No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle within the village, except on an all-terrain vehicle route established by resolution of the village board. No person shall operate any all-terrain vehicle within the village at a speed in excess of ten miles per hour. No person may operate an all-terrain vehicle on the designated access route within the village at a speed in excess of five miles per hour. 
(Code 1988, § 10-4-2; Code 1998, § 94-4) 
Sec. 70-82. - Driving over curbing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be driven or backed over any curbing in the village. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-45(a); Code 1998, § 94-44) 
Sec. 70-83. - Dynamic brake device. 
(a)  Use prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle with a dynamic braking device engaged within the village limits, except for emergency situations for the purpose of avoiding a collision with another object or vehicle. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Jake brakes, Jacob brake, engine brake or compression brake means a dynamic braking device, a device primarily on trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes. 
(Code 1998, § 94-45; Ord. No. 03-13, § 1, 10-20-2003) 
Sec. 70-84. - Low-speed vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Low-speed vehicle ( means a self-propelled electric motor vehicle meeting the definition of Wis. Stats. § 340.01(27h), which is registered and licensed by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation. A slow moving vehicle sign is not required. 
(b)  Use within village boundaries. A person may operate a low-speed vehicle on any roadway within the municipal boundaries of the village that has a speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less, subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  The person operating the low-speed vehicle must hold a valid Wisconsin operator's license or a valid operator's license from another state. 
(2)  The person operating the low-speed vehicle must obey all state and local traffic regulations not inconsistent with this section. 
(c)  Enforcement. Use of a low-speed vehicle within the village limits, which is contrary to or not in compliance with this section, shall be subject to the assessment of forfeiture for each violation, plus court costs as outlined in the approved municipal court bond schedule. In addition, the operation of an low-speed vehicle within the village limits, in a manner contrary to village ordinance or state law regulating the use of streets or highways by motor vehicle shall be subject to such sanctions as are provided thereunder. 
(Code 1998, § 94-46; Ord. No. 09-08, 7-20-2009) 
State Law reference- Authority to allow low-speed electric vehicles, Wis. Stats. § 349.26. 
Sec. 70-85. - Traffic and parking on school district grounds. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 118.105, the following shall apply to the grounds of the Waunakee School District located within the village: 
(1)  Parking. All parking on any grounds of the Waunakee School District from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. shall be restricted to areas designated for parking by the school board. When signs are erected by the school board giving notice of such restrictions, all persons shall park only in areas designated and signed for visitor parking. All parking on grounds of the Waunakee School District from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. shall be by permit only and shall be restricted to areas designated for parking by the district board. When signs are erected by the school board giving notice of such restrictions, no person shall park a motor vehicle in an area other than one for which such person shall have been issued a permit, and no person shall park a vehicle without displaying a valid permit. There shall be no parking on the grounds between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless school functions extend past 11:00 p.m.; on such nights there shall be no parking one hour after the function has concluded. 
(2)  Speed limits. No person shall at any time operate a motor vehicle upon any Waunakee School District grounds at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour. 
(3)  Vehicles prohibited at specified times. No person shall at any time operate a motor vehicle, other than a school bus or emergency vehicle, in or upon any drive designed for buses only by sign, during the hours of 7:00 am. to 9:00 a.m. and during the hours of 3:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. on any weekday during the months school is in session. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-29; Code 1998, § 94-85) 
Secs. 70-86-70-113. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing and parking, Wis. Stats. § 346.50 et seq.; authority to regulate stopping, standing and parking, Wis. Stats. § 349.13. 

Sec. 70-114. - Removal of illegally parked vehicles. 
(a)  Hazard to public safety. Any vehicle parked, stopped or standing upon a highway or public parking lot or ramp in violation of any section of this article is declared to be a hazard to traffic and public safety. 
(b)  Removal by operator. Such vehicle shall be removed by the operator in charge, upon request of any traffic officer, to a position where parking is permitted or to a private or public parking or storage premises. 
(c)  Removal by traffic officer. Any traffic officer, after issuing a citation for illegal parking, stopping or standing of an unattended vehicle in violation of this article, is authorized to remove such vehicle to a position where parking is permitted. 
(d)  Removal by private service. The officer may order a motor carrier holding a permit to perform vehicle towing services, a licensed motor vehicle salvage dealer or a licensed motor vehicle dealer who performs vehicle towing services to remove and store such vehicle in any public storage garage or rental parking bounds or any facility of the person providing the towing services. 
(e)  Towing and storage charges. In addition to other penalties provided in this article, the owner or operator of a vehicle so removed shall pay the actual cost of moving, towing and storage. If the vehicle is towed or stored by a private motor carrier, motor vehicle salvage dealer or licensed motor vehicle dealer, actual charges regularly paid for such services shall be paid. If the vehicle is stored in a public storage garage or rental facility, customary charges for such storage shall be paid. Upon payment, a receipt shall be issued to the owner of the vehicle for the towing or storage charge. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-32; Code 1998, § 94-88) 
Sec. 70-115. - Removal of parking citations. 
    No person other than the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall remove a village parking ticket from the motor vehicle. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-30; Code 1998, § 94-86) 
Sec. 70-116. - Posted limitations. 
(a)  The village board may designate certain streets or portions of streets as no parking or no stopping or standing zones or as zones for parking by physically handicapped persons and may limit the hours in which the restrictions apply. The village shall mark, by appropriate signs, each zone so designated in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 349.13. 
(b)  Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, no person shall stop or park a vehicle in an established no stopping or standing zone when stopping or standing is prohibited. No vehicle shall be parked in a no parking zone during hours when parking is prohibited, except physicians on emergency calls or as permitted by state law or elsewhere by this Code. 
(c)  The police chief is granted the authority, within the reasonable exercise of police power, to prohibit, limit the time or otherwise restrict the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles beyond the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 346. The director of public works shall have the authority to restrict the turning or movement of heavy traffic and to impose special weight limitations on any highway or portions thereof which, because of the weakness of the roadbed due to deterioration or climatic conditions or other special or temporary conditions, would likely be seriously damaged or destroyed in the absence of any restrictions on heavy traffic movement or special weight limitations. 
(d)  No prohibition, restriction or limitation on parking or restriction on movement or turning of heavy traffic and imposition of special weight limits is effective unless official traffic control devices have been placed or erected indicating the particular prohibition, restriction or limitation. 
(e)  After the parking limitations on any given street have expired, any change of location of not more than one stall following expiration of the parking period allowed shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-20; Code 1998, § 94-76) 
Sec. 70-117. - Temporary restrictions during snow removal or street maintenance. 
(a)  Street maintenance. Whenever it is necessary to clear or repair a village roadway or any part thereof, the director of public works or police department shall post such highways or parts thereof with signs bearing the words "no parking-street maintenance work." Such signs shall be erected at least two hours prior to the time that street maintenance work is to be commenced. No person shall park a motor vehicle in violation of such signs. 
(b)  Special events. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.13, the police chief is authorized to direct that temporary no parking signs be erected by the director of public works during parades, festivals and other authorized events that require the regulating of vehicle stopping, standing or parking on village roadways. The temporary regulation shall be limited to the time the event exists or is likely to exist. 
(c)  Snow removal. No person shall park, place or leave standing any automobile, truck or other vehicle on any street or public way after one hour from the time such area has been designated and marked with signs or barriers by the police department or the director of public works of the village indicating no parking due to snow removal. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-21; Code 1998, § 94-77) 
Sec. 70-118. - Certain specified places. 
(a)  Parking prohibited at all times. Except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading or in receiving or discharging passengers or property and while the vehicle is attended by a licensed operator so that it may be moved promptly in an emergency or to avoid obstruction of traffic, no person shall at any time park or leave standing any vehicle: 
(1)  Within an intersection. 
(2)  On a sidewalk or terrace area, except when parking in such place is clearly indicated by official traffic signs or markers or parking meters. The term "terrace or sidewalk area" means that area between the sidewalk and the nearest curbline running parallel or generally parallel thereto or, in the absence of a sidewalk, ten feet beyond the curbline. 
(3)  Alongside or opposite any highway excavation or obstruction when such stopping or standing would obstruct traffic or when pedestrian traffic would be required to travel in the roadway. 
(4)  On the roadway side of any parked vehicle, unless double parking is clearly indicated by official traffic signs or markers. 
(5)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station. 
(6)  Upon any portion of a highway where and at the time when stopping or standing is prohibited by official traffic signs indicating the prohibition of any stopping or standing. 
(7)  In any place or manner so as to obstruct, block or impede traffic. 
(8)  Upon any bridge. 
(9)  Upon any street or highway within the village limits when the vehicle faces a direction different from the direction of normal traffic flow for the lane of traffic in which the vehicle is stopped or standing. 
(10)  Upon any terrace or sidewalk in the village at any time. 
(11)  In any municipal park when the park is closed to the public. 
(b)  Parking in driveways. No person shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle in any private driveway without the permission of the owner or lessee of the property on which such driveway is located, whether or not such driveway is posted to limit or restrict parking. 
(c)  Blocking private drive, alley or fire lane. No vehicle shall, at any time, be parked so as to unreasonably restrict the normal access to any private drive, alley or fire lane. The access shall be deemed to be unreasonably restricted if any vehicle is parked within four feet of either side of the access. Upon discovery by a police officer or upon complaint by the owner of any such blocked drive, alley or fire lane, the police chief may order the vehicle towed from such position at the risk and expense of the owner of the vehicle. 
(d)  Vehicle repair or display for sale. No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any street, alley, public right-of-way or municipal parking lot for the purpose of repairing the vehicle or to display such vehicle for sale. 
(e)  Vehicles, trailers or boats for use as living quarters or residence. Except as allowed by other sections of this Code, no person shall stand or park a vehicle, boat, or trailer on any street, alley, public right-of-way, municipal parking lot, or village park while utilizing such vehicle, boat or trailer as a personal living quarters or a residence for any length of time. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-22; Code 1998, § 94-78; Ord. No. 94-18, 9-6-1994) 
Sec. 70-119. - Leaving keys in vehicle; parking vehicles with motor running. 
(a)  Leaving keys in vehicle. No person shall permit any motor vehicle to stand or remain unattended on any street, alley or other public area, except an attended parking area, unless either the starting lever, throttle, steering apparatus, gear shift or ignition of the vehicle is locked and the key for such lock is removed from the vehicle. Whenever any police officer shall find any vehicle standing with the key in the ignition in violation of this subsection, such officer is authorized to remove such key from the vehicle and deliver the key to the police department for safe custody. This subsection does not apply to motor vehicles operated by common carriers of passengers under Wis. Stats. ch. 194. 
(b)  Parking vehicles with motor or refrigerator unit running. No person shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle with the motor or refrigerator unit running for more than 30 minutes within 300 feet of any residence within the village between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-24; Code 1998, § 94-80) 
Sec. 70-120. - Unattended motorized machinery. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any construction, compaction, earth grading or farm machinery which is self-propelled and moves upon the surface of the earth and which is owned or controlled by such person to stand for any period of time unattended without locking the ignition system or otherwise rendering the machinery inoperable so as to prevent any person unauthorized by the owner or individual in control thereof from starting the machinery. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-25; Code 1998, § 94-81) 
Sec. 70-121. - Angle parking. 
(a)  Angle parking or parking diagonally is prohibited on all the streets, alleys and highways of the village except where vehicle parking markers indicate that angle parking is permissible. All vehicles shall park parallel to and within one foot of the curb, except where streets and parking lots are so marked for angle parking. 
(b)  No person shall at any time park any vehicle: 
(1)  In any direction other than the designated parking angle, where angle parking spaces are so designated and provided by appropriate markings. 
(2)  Backward into angle parking space so designated and provided by appropriate markings. 
(3)  With a trailer attached or any vehicle longer than 20 feet on any street where angle parking is so provided and allowed. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-26; Code 1998, § 94-82) 
Sec. 70-122. - Parking during certain hours. 
    When signs or parking meters are erected in any block giving notice thereof, no person shall park or leave standing any vehicle for longer than the period specified upon any of the following highways, streets or parts thereof, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers: 
(1)  Parking limitations between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. When signs are erected in any block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than the period specified in this subsection at any time between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and any legal holiday. Two-hour parking is permitted on Fish Street on either side south from Main Street to the alley, and south on South Street from Main Street to the alley. 
(2)  All-night parking. No person shall park any vehicle for a period of time longer than 30 minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. every day, except a physician on an emergency call, on Main Street between Cooper Road on the east and Highway Q on the west. 
(3)  Alternate parking. Commencing November 1 and ending April 1, no person shall park or leave standing any vehicle between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the even-numbered side of the street on the odd-numbered calendar days and on the odd-numbered side of the street on the even-numbered calendar days, except as posted otherwise. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-27; Code 1998, § 94-83) 
Sec. 70-123. - Large vehicle parking. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Large vehicle means a truck, trailer, boat, snowmobile trailer, truck power unit, tractor, bus, recreational vehicle or any other vehicle or combination thereof that meets any of the following criteria: 
(1)  Has a weight of more than 12,000 pounds; or 
(2)  Has a length of greater than 21 feet; or 
(3)  Has an enclosed area with a height of more than eight feet from the surface upon which it is located. 
    Park or parking means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers. 
    Residential zoning district includes the R-1 Single-Family Residential District, R-2 Single-Family Residential District, R-3 Two-Family Residential District, R-4 Limited Multifamily Residential District, and R-5 Multifamily Residential District, as identified in Chapter 133 of this Code. 
(b)  Street parking. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(2) or (c) of this section, no person owning or having control of a large vehicle shall park such large vehicle: 
a.  Upon any street, avenue or public way located in a residential zoning district between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
b.  On Main Street from Madison Street to Division Street. 
c.  Upon the following streets between the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.: Raemisch Road, Lillian Street, Frank H. Street, Uniek Street, Moravian Valley Road, Marshall Drive, Bethel Circle, and Foundation Circle. 
d.  For more than one hour between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. in the following locations: 
1.  Upon any street, avenue or public way located in a residential zoning district. 
2.  On Raemisch Road, Lillian Street, Frank H. Street, Uniek Street, Moravian Valley Road, Marshall Drive, Bethel Circle, and Foundation Circle. 
(2)  The village board may designate specific truck parking zones. 
(c)  Parking and storage on private property. In residential zoning districts, it is permissible to park or store on private property a large vehicle under the following conditions: 
(1)  Inside any enclosed structure, which structure otherwise conforms to the zoning requirements of the particular zoning district where located. 
(2)  On a driveway, provided the large vehicle is not greater than 25 feet in length. 
(3)  No more than one large vehicle may be parked or stored on a property. 
(4)  No part of the large vehicle may extend into or over the public sidewalk or public right-of-way. 
(5)  Parking is permitted only for parking or storage purposes. Large vehicles shall not be: 
a.  Used for dwelling purposes. 
b.  Permanently connected to wastewater or sanitary lines, water lines, or electricity. A large vehicle may be connected to electricity temporarily for charging batteries. 
c.  Used for storage of goods, materials or equipment, other than those items considered to be part of the large vehicle or essential for its immediate use. 
(6)  The large vehicle shall be owned by the resident who is occupying the property on which the large vehicle is parked for storage. Alternatively, the large vehicle shall be operated by the resident, who is occupying the property on which the large vehicle is parked, for reasons related to the resident's employment. 
(d)  Removal. Any large vehicle unlawfully parked or stored under this section may be removed from the street or private property by order of a law enforcement officer, pursuant to section 70-114, and the expense of moving and storing such large vehicle shall be paid by the operator or owner of the large vehicle as a forfeiture, in addition to the penalties prescribed in this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-28; Code 1998, § 94-84; Ord. No. 03-08, § 1, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 07-13, § 1, 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 70-124. - Operation of motor vehicles in public parking lots and ramps. 
(a)  Unlicensed operators prohibited. No person who does not hold a valid operator's license shall operate a vehicle in any public parking lot or ramp or in any private parking lot or ramp held out for the use of parking for the general public. 
(b)  Applicability of traffic regulations. Section 70-2 and all provisions of the state statutes and laws incorporated in this chapter by reference shall be applicable on any public parking lot or ramp and on any private parking lot, road or ramp held out for use for the general public for parking or vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-31; Code 1998, § 94-87) 
Secs. 70-125-70-146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ABANDONED AND JUNKED VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoned vehicles, Wis. Stats. §§ 342.40, 346.94(13). 

Sec. 70-147. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Street means any public highway or alley and means the entire width between the boundary lines of any public way where any part thereof is open to the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
    Unattended means unmoved from its location with no obvious sign of continuous human use. 
    Vehicle means a motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or mobile home, whether or not such vehicle is registered under state law. 
(Code 1988, § 10-5-1(b); Code 1998, § 94-146) 
Sec. 70-148. - Abandonment prohibited. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall leave unattended any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or mobile home on any public street or highway or private or public property for such time and under such circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear to have been abandoned. Whenever any such vehicle has been left unattended on any street or highway or upon private or public property without the permission of the property owner or other person charged with the lawful jurisdiction thereof for more than 48 hours, the vehicle shall be deemed abandoned and constitutes a public nuisance. 
(b)  Presumptions. For purposes of this section, the following irrebuttable presumptions shall apply: 
(1)  A vehicle shall be presumed unattended if it is found in the same position 48 hours after issuance of a traffic ticket or citation and if such traffic ticket or citation remains placed upon the windshield during the 48 hours. 
(2)  Any vehicle left unattended for more than 48 hours on any public street or public ground or left unattended for more than 48 hours on private property without the consent of the property owner is deemed abandoned and constitutes a nuisance. However, the vehicle shall not be deemed abandoned under this subsection if it is left unattended on private property outside of public view and if it is enclosed within a building or if it is designated as not abandoned by the police chief. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to a vehicle in an enclosed building or to a vehicle stored on a premises licensed for storage of junk or junked vehicles and fully in compliance with chapter 133, zoning, or to a vehicle parked in a paid parking lot or space where the required fee has been paid. 
(Code 1988, § 10-5-1(a), (c), (d); Code 1998, § 94-147) 
Sec. 70-149. - Removal and impoundment. 
    Any vehicle in violation of this article shall be removed and impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of as provided in section 70-150. 
(Code 1988, § 10-5-2; Code 1998, § 94-148) 
Sec. 70-150. - Removal, storage, notice or reclamation of abandoned vehicles. 
(a)  Applicability. This section shall apply to the removal, storage, notice, reclamation or disposal of abandoned vehicles. 
(b)  Removal. 
(1)  Any police officer who discovers any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or mobile home on any public street or highway or private or public property which has been abandoned shall cause the vehicle to be removed to a suitable place of impoundment. 
(2)  Upon removal of the vehicle, the police officer shall notify the police chief of the abandonment and of the location of the impounded vehicle. 
(c)  Storage and reclamation. Any abandoned vehicle determined by the police chief to be abandoned shall be retained in storage for a period of 14 days after certified mail notice, as provided in subsection (d) of this section, has been sent to the titled owner in this state or the secured party of record with the state motor vehicle division. However, if the police chief determines an abandoned vehicle to have a value of less than $100.00 or that the cost of towing and storage charges for impoundment will exceed the value of the vehicle, it may be junked or sold by direct sale to a licensed salvage dealer after having been retained in storage for a period of seven days and after certified mail notice, as provided in this subsection, has been sent to the titled owner in this state or the secured party of record with the state motor vehicle division, provided that it is first determined that the vehicle is not reported stolen or wanted for evidence or other reason. All substantially complete vehicles in excess of 19 model years of age shall be deemed as having a value in excess of $100.00. Any such vehicle which may be lawfully reclaimed may be released upon the payment of all accrued charges, including towing, storage and notice charges and presentation of the vehicle title or other satisfactory evidence to the police chief to prove an ownership or secured-party interest in the vehicle. 
(d)  Notice to owner or secured party. Certified mail notice, as referred to in this section, shall notify the owner of the title in this state of the abandoned vehicle, if any, or the secured party of record with the state motor vehicle division, if any, of the following: 
(1)  The vehicle has been deemed abandoned and impounded by the village; 
(2)  The determined value of the abandoned vehicle; 
(3)  If the cost of towing and storage costs will exceed the determined value of the vehicle; 
(4)  If the vehicle is not wanted for evidence or other reason, the vehicle may be reclaimed upon the payment of all accrued charges, including towing, storage and notice charges, within 14 days of the date of notice, unless the vehicle has been determined to have a value less than $100.00 or that the cost of towing and storage charges for impoundment will exceed the value of the vehicle, in which case the vehicle may be reclaimed within seven days upon the payment of such charges; and 
(5)  The owner or secured party may, upon request, be granted a hearing relating to the determinations made with respect to the vehicle within the period that such vehicle may be reclaimed. 
(Code 1988, § 10-5-3; Code 1998, § 94-149) 
Sec. 70-151. - Sale of abandoned vehicles. 
    Any abandoned vehicle impounded by the village that has not been reclaimed or junked or sold by direct sale to a licensed salvage dealer pursuant to this article may be sold by public auction sale or public sale calling for the receipt of sealed bids. A class 1 notice, including the description of the vehicle; the name and address of the titled owner in this state and the secured party of record, if known; and the time of sale shall be published before the sale. 
(Code 1988, § 10-5-4; Code 1998, § 94-150) 
Sec. 70-152. - Report of sale or disposal. 
    Within five days after the direct sale or disposal of a vehicle, as provided in this article, the police chief shall advise the state department of transportation, division of motor vehicles, of such sale or disposal on a form supplied by the division. A copy of the form shall be given to the purchaser of the vehicle enabling the purchaser to obtain a regular certificate of title for the vehicle. The purchaser shall have ten days to remove the vehicle from the storage area, but shall pay a reasonable storage fee established by the village for each day the vehicle remains in storage after the second business day subsequent to the sale date. Ten days after the sale the purchaser shall forfeit all interest in the vehicle, and the vehicle shall be deemed to be abandoned and may be sold again. Any listing of vehicles to be sold by the village shall be made available to any interested person who or organization that makes a written request for such list to the police department. The police department may charge a reasonable fee for the list. 
(Code 1988, § 10-5-5; Code 1998, § 94-151) 
Sec. 70-153. - Owner's responsibility for impoundment and disposal costs. 
(a)  The owner of any abandoned vehicle, except a stolen vehicle, is responsible for the abandonment and all costs of impounding and disposing of the vehicle. Costs not covered from the sale of the vehicle may be recovered in a civil action by the village against the owner. 
(b)  Payment of removal and impoundment costs is not required when the vehicle has been impounded for purposes of law enforcement investigation. 
(Code 1988, § 10-5-6; Code 1998, § 94-152) 
Sec. 70-154. - Conflicts with other code provisions. 
    If any conflict occurs between this article and any other section of this Code, this article shall control. 
(Code 1988, § 10-5-7; Code 1998, § 94-153) 
Secs. 70-155-70-176. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SNOWMOBILES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Snowmobiles, Wis. Stats. ch. 350. 

Sec. 70-177. - State snowmobile laws adopted. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, the statutory provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to snowmobiles in the enumerated sections of the state statutes listed in this section are adopted by reference and made part of this article as if fully set forth. Acts required to be performed or prohibited by such statutes are required or prohibited by this article. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated by reference are intended to be made part of this Code. The state statutes adopted by reference shall be as follows: 
(1)  Wis. Stats. § 350.02-Operation of snowmobiles on or in the vicinity of highways. 
(2)  Wis. Stats. § 350.03-Right-of-way. 
(3)  Wis. Stats. § 350.04-Snowmobile races, derbies and routes. 
(4)  Wis. Stats. § 350.045-Public utility exemption. 
(5)  Wis. Stats. § 350.047-Local ordinance to be filed. 
(6)  Wis. Stats. § 350.05-Operation by youthful operators restricted. 
(7)  Wis. Stats. § 350.07-Driving animals. 
(8)  Wis. Stats. § 350.08-Owner permitting operation. 
(9)  Wis. Stats. § 350.09-Headlamps, tail lamps and brakes, etc. 
(10)  Wis. Stats. § 350.095-Noise level requirements. 
(11)  Wis. Stats. § 350.10-Miscellaneous provisions for snowmobile operation. 
(12)  Wis. Stats. § 350.101-Intoxicated snowmobiling. 
(13)  Wis. Stats. § 350.102-Preliminary breath screening test. 
(14)  Wis. Stats. § 350.1025-Application of intoxicated snowmobiling law. 
(15)  Wis. Stats. § 350.103-Implied consent. 
(16)  Wis. Stats. § 350.104-Chemical tests. 
(17)  Wis. Stats. § 350.106-Report arrest to department. 
(18)  Wis. Stats. § 350.107-Officer's action after arrest for operating a snowmobile while under influence of intoxicant. 
(19)  Wis. Stats. § 350.11-Penalties. 
(20)  Wis. Stats. § 350.12-Registration of snowmobiles. 
(21)  Wis. Stats. § 350.13-Uniform trail signs and standards. 
(22)  Wis. Stats. § 350.135-Interferences with uniform trail signs and standards prohibited. 
(23)  Wis. Stats. § 350.15-Accidents and accident reports. 
(24)  Wis. Stats. § 350.155-Coroners and medical examiners to report; require blood specimen. 
(25)  Wis. Stats. § 350.17-Enforcement. 
(26)  Wis. Stats. § 350.19-Liability of landowners. 
(27)  Wis. Stats. § 350.99-Parties to a violation. 
(Code 1988, § 10-3-1; Code 1998, § 94-181) 
Sec. 70-178. - Speed; hours of operation; equipment. 
(a)  Speed. No person shall operate a snowmobile within the village or on any trail designated in section 70-182 at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour. 
(b)  Hours of operation. Except on a designated trail, no person shall operate a snowmobile or other off-highway vehicle anywhere within the village between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except when returning home via the most direct route. 
(c)  Equipment. No snowmobile or other vehicle operating on the snowmobile route shall be allowed if it has an expansion chamber or any muffler other than the type and size provided by the manufacturer. Each snowmobile must display a lighted headlight and taillight at all times, and the lights must conform to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 350.09. 
(Code 1988, § 10-3-3; Code 1998, § 94-182) 
Sec. 70-179. - Unattended vehicles. 
    No person shall leave or allow a snowmobile owned or operated by such person to remain unattended on any public highway or public property while the motor is running or with the starting key left in the ignition. 
(Code 1988, § 10-3-4; Code 1998, § 94-183) 
Sec. 70-180. - Operation on sidewalks. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any sidewalk, pedestrian way or upon the area between the sidewalk and the curbline of any street, except as specifically authorized by section 70-181 or for the purpose of crossing to obtain immediate access to an authorized area of operation. 
(Code 1988, § 10-3-5; Code 1998, § 94-184) 
Sec. 70-181. - Operation restricted. 
(a)  Operation on private property. Except as permitted by this Code, it shall be unlawful to operate any snowmobile or any other motor-driven craft or vehicle principally manufactured for off-highway use on the village streets, alleys, parks, parking lots or on any public lands or private lands or parking lots held open to the public. The operator shall at all times have the express consent of the owner before operation of such craft or vehicle on private property not owned or controlled by the operator. 
(b)  Permitting operation by improper persons. No owner or person having charge or control of a snowmobile shall authorize or permit any person to operate such snowmobile who is not permitted under state law to operate such snowmobile or who is under the influence of any intoxicant or a dangerous narcotic drug. 
(c)  Operation in parks. No person shall drive a snowmobile in any park except upon designated snowmobile trails as shall be designated by the village board. 
(d)  Written consent of owner required. The consent required under Wis. Stats. § 350.10(6), (11), (12) and (13) and in subsection (a) of this section shall be written consent, dated and limited to the year in which the consent is given. If the property is owned or leased by more than one person, the consent of each must be obtained. 
(Code 1988, § 10-3-6; Code 1998, § 94-185) 
Sec. 70-182. - Routes and trails. 
(a)  Routes designated. Except as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 350.02 and 350.045 or for snowmobile events authorized in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 350.04, no person shall operate a snowmobile upon any public right-of-way, in any public park or on any municipal property except upon snowmobile routes and trails designated by the village board. The designated routes to be used within the village limits shall be adopted by resolution by the village board, a copy of which shall be on file with the village administrator. 
(b)  Trail markers. The director of public works is directed and authorized to procure, erect and maintain appropriate snowmobile route, trail and limit signs and markers as approved by the state department of natural resources under Wis. Stats. § 350.13. The police chief shall have the power to declare the stated snowmobile routes and trails either open or closed. 
(c)  Obedience to markers. No person shall fail to obey any route or trail sign, marker or limit erected in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1988, § 10-3-9; Code 1998, § 94-188) 
Sec. 70-183. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any section of this article shall, upon conviction, forfeit an amount as provided in section 1-32. However, no person shall forfeit an amount in excess of the maximum fine or forfeiture allowed in the state statutes for the same offense, and the penalty and forfeiture for parking violations on highways shall be the amount applicable to such violations by owners or operators of motor vehicles under section 70-1. 
(Code 1988, § 10-3-10; Code 1998, § 94-189) 
Sec. 70-184. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Uniform citation for highway violations. The uniform traffic citation promulgated under Wis. Stats. § 345.11 shall be used for violations of this article relating to highway use, except as provided in this article. 
(b)  Parking violations. The special traffic citation described and defined in this chapter shall be used for enforcement of violations of rules of the road relating to parking of vehicles adopted by reference in section 70-177. 
(c)  Other violations. All violations of this article not described in subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be enforced in accordance with Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0114 and 66.0111. Stipulations of guilt or no contest may be made as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0114(1)(b), in substantially the form provided in the uniform traffic citation, within five days of the date of the citation for such violation. Bail deposits may also be made under Wis. Stats. § 66.0114. Such deposits shall include a clerk's fee of $3.00 and costs of prosecutions. 
(d)  Acceptance of stipulations and penalties. Stipulations, forfeited penalties and deposits for obtaining release from arrest authorized under this article may be accepted at the police department offices by the police chief. The officer authorized to accept penalties and deposits shall be bonded, and such bond shall be filed with the village clerk. 
(e)  Forfeited penalties and deposits. Except as otherwise provided in Wis. Stats. § 345.26 and the deposit schedule adopted by the state board of circuit court judges thereunder, required penalties and deposits or bail not including costs or fees for violation of this article shall be as established by the schedule adopted by the village board. 
(Code 1988, § 10-3-11; Code 1998, § 94-190) 
Secs. 70-185-70-206. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS 

Sec. 70-207. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Carrier means any device attached to a bicycle designed for carrying articles. 
    Identification tag means a metal plate or sticker indicating that a bicycle is registered. 
(Code 1988, § 10-2-1; Code 1998, § 94-221) 
Sec. 70-208. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person 16 years of age or older who shall violate this article may be issued a uniform municipal ordinance citation and be subject to the penalties provided by the uniform state traffic deposit schedule. 
(b)  Any person 14 or 15 years of age who shall violate this article may be issued a citation and be subject to the penalties provided by the deposit schedule and, upon conviction thereof, may be required to forfeit not more than $25.00, together with the cost of the prosecution, and, in default of such payment, the court may suspend the child's operating privileges for not less than 30 days or more than 90 days. 
(c)  Any person under 14 years of age who shall violate this article may be issued a special bicycle violation warning notice along with the following additional actions: 
(1)  For the first offense in one year, a warning letter sent to the parent or guardian requiring the parent's or guardian's signature and return of the warning notice to the police department. 
(2)  For the second offense in the same year, a warning letter mailed to the parent or guardian. 
(3)  For the third offense in the same year, a mandatory parent-child-police conference. 
(4)  For the fourth and subsequent offense in the same year, referral to municipal court. 
(d)  Any parent or guardian of any child who authorizes or knowingly permits such child to violate this article may be subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 346.77 and 346.82(1). 
(Code 1988, § 10-2-9; Code 1998, § 94-225) 
Sec. 70-209. - Parking of bicycle. 
    No person shall leave a bicycle at such a place or in such a way as to create a hazard to pedestrians, automobile operators or to anyone else. Bicycles shall be parked either upon the roadway against the curb, in bicycle racks or, if on the sidewalk, in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic, and not in such a manner as to obstruct the ingress and egress to buildings used by the public. If there is no bicycle rack or other facility intended to be used for the parking of bicycles in the vicinity, the operator may park a bicycle on the sidewalk in an upright position parallel to and within 24 inches of the curb. 
(Code 1988, § 10-2-4; Code 1998, § 94-222) 
Sec. 70-210. - Skateboard operation in business district. 
    No person shall operate a skateboard on the sidewalk in a business district. A business district, for the purposes of this section, is defined as any area containing primarily commercially zoned uses which generate heavy pedestrian traffic during the business hours. The business district shall have a minimum street frontage of 100 feet. Skateboarding on sidewalks is permitted, except as prohibited in this section and otherwise regulated. 
(Code 1988, § 10-2-7; Code 1998, § 94-223) 
Sec. 70-211. - Registration of bicycles. 
(a)  Required. No person having a bicycle customarily kept within the village shall operate such bicycle without first having registered the bicycle by filing with the police department, upon a form provided for such purpose, a complete description of the bicycle, including the brand name and identification number. Such registration shall be serially numbered and kept on file by the police chief as a public record. 
(b)  License. After the filing of the form required in subsection (a) of this section and payment of the license fee as required in subsection (c) of this section, the police chief or person designated by the village board shall issue a bicycle license, provided the bicycle is found, upon inspection, to be in safe operating condition and in compliance with all other applicable sections of this Code. The license shall be immediately affixed to the bicycle in such a way as to be easily readable. 
(c)  Fee. The fee to be paid to the village shall be as established by resolution. The expiration date shall be June 30 of the year stamped on the license. 
(d)  Condition of bicycles. No bicycle shall be registered which is in an unsafe mechanical condition. Police officers shall have authority to suspend the registration of and remove the identification tag from any bicycle or to impound any bicycle operated contrary to any state law or village ordinance or that is operated in an unsafe mechanical condition. Such suspension and removal or impounding shall continue for a period not to exceed ten days, but the registration shall not be reinstated or such identification tag replaced while such bicycle is in an unsafe condition. Such suspension and removal shall be in addition to other penalties provided in this article. 
(e)  Change of ownership. Within ten days after any bicycle registered under this section shall have changed ownership or shall been dismantled and taken out of operation, such information shall be reported to the police department by the person in whose name the bicycle has been registered. 
(Code 1988, § 10-2-8; Code 1998, § 94-224) 
Secs. 70-212-70-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PEDESTRIANS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Pedestrians, Wis. Stats. § 346.23 et seq. 

Sec. 70-231. - Crossing at crosswalks. 
    No pedestrian shall cross at a crosswalk except on the right half thereof whenever practicable. Where sidewalks are provided, no pedestrian shall walk along and upon an adjacent roadway unless the sidewalk is visibly unsafe, obstructed or closed to public travel. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-42(a)(2); Code 1998, § 94-257) 
Sec. 70-232. - Prohibited crossings. 
    No pedestrian shall cross between adjacent intersections, unless such crossing is permitted by official traffic control devices. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-42(b); Code 1998, § 94-258) 
Sec. 70-233. - Motor vehicles on pedestrian ways and overpasses. 
    No person shall operate or park any motor vehicle, except a municipal or county maintenance vehicle, on any pedestrian way or pedestrian overpass. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-43; Code 1998, § 94-259) 
Chapter 74 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Public utilities, Wis. Stats. § 66.0801 et seq.; water and sewage, Wis. Stats. ch. 281. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1-74-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 74-21-74-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WAUNAKEE UTILITIES COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Public utilities commission, Wis. Stats. § 66.0805. 

Sec. 74-44. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Findings of fact. The village board finds that the ownership and operation of water, electric and wastewater utilities is in the public interest. By this section, the village board affirms that the Waunakee Utilities Commission shall have all of the powers conferred upon a utility commission as set forth in Wis. Stats. ch. 66, subch. VIII (Wis. Stats. § 66.0801 et seq.), including, but not limited to, the powers set forth in Wis. Stats. § 66.0805. 
(b)  Successor status. The Waunakee Utilities Commission reconfirmed in this division is a successor to the village's existing public utilities commission. It possesses all the rights, duties and powers which the existing commission has, whether granted under statute, ordinance or in any other way. 
(Code 1998, § 98-81; Ord. No. 99-1, § 1, 1-18-1999) 
Sec. 74-45. - Creation, membership and appointments of Waunakee Utilities Commission. 
(a)  Creation. There is hereby created an independent and nonpartisan public utilities commission, known as the Waunakee Utilities Commission, to manage and operate the electric, water and sewer utility of the village. 
(b)  Membership; terms. The Waunakee Utilities Commission shall consist of seven commissioners. Two of the commissioners shall be trustees, who shall serve on the Waunakee Utilities Commission and whose terms shall be for one year beginning in April of each year. The remaining five commissioners shall be residents of the village, each of whom shall serve a five-year term. These terms shall be staggered so that no more than one citizen commissioner's term shall expire each year. 
(c)  Appointments. The village board shall elect the citizen commissioners to succeed commissioners whose terms have expired at its first regular meeting in September for terms to commence on the October 1 following appointment. The village board shall elect the trustee commissioners at its organizational meeting in April of each year. In the case of a vacancy on the Waunakee Utilities Commission, the village board may appoint a commissioner to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the term. 
(Code 1998, § 98-82; Ord. No. 99-1, § 1, 1-18-1999; Ord. No. 04-07, § 2, 4-19-2004) 
Sec. 74-46. - Eligibility for appointment. 
    No person shall be eligible for appointment to the Waunakee Utilities Commission or any office or position in the department if the person, directly or indirectly, has any pecuniary interest in any contract for furnishing utility services or other public services to or for the village or if the person is a stockholder in any corporation which has such a contract with the village. 
(Code 1998, § 98-83; Ord. No. 99-1, § 1, 1-18-1999) 
Sec. 74-47. - Organization. 
    The commissioners shall choose from among their number a president and secretary, and shall appoint a utility clerk who shall perform the duties of a bonded cashier, shall keep accurate books and accounts of utility revenues and expenses, and shall perform such other duties as the Waunakee Utilities Commission shall from time to time direct. The utility clerk, before taking office, shall give a bond to the village for the faithful performance of the duties of his office in such amount as the Waunakee Utilities Commission shall direct. The bond shall be approved by the village and filed with the village clerk. 
(Code 1998, § 98-84; Ord. No. 99-1, § 1, 1-18-1999) 
Sec. 74-48. - Meetings. 
    Regular monthly meetings of the Waunakee Utilities Commission shall normally be held on the fourth Monday of the month. Special meetings may be held at any time upon a call by any member of the Waunakee Utilities Commission, such member giving reasonable notice of the time and place of such meeting to the other commissioners. 
(Code 1998, § 98-85; Ord. No. 99-1, § 1, 1-18-1999) 
Sec. 74-49. - Powers of Waunakee Utilities Commission. 
(a)  Charge and management. The Waunakee Utilities Commission shall take entire charge and management of the village's public utility. The Waunakee Utilities Commission shall have full authority to supervise the operation of the utility under the general control and supervision of the village board. 
(b)  Manager. The Waunakee Utilities Commission shall appoint a utility manager, fix his compensation and duties and provide for the authority of the manager to act on behalf of the Waunakee Utilities Commission. 
(c)  Other employees; consultants. The Waunakee Utilities Commission may employ and fix the compensation of such other employees as the Waunakee Utilities Commission deems necessary or convenient for the management and operation of the village's utilities. The Waunakee Utilities Commission also may employ the services and fix the compensation of such other agents or consultants as the Waunakee Utilities Commission deems necessary or convenient for the operation and management of the utilities. The Waunakee Utilities Commission may also command the services of the village engineer. 
(d)  Rates, rules and regulations. The Waunakee Utilities Commission shall have authority to fix rates and establish rules and regulations for the governance, management and operation of the utility, subject to the jurisdiction of the public service commission of the state where applicable, and establish rules for the governance of its own proceedings. 
(e)  Contract. The Waunakee Utilities Commission shall have full authority to let bids and enter into contracts in the name of the village, provided that such contracts are necessary or convenient to the management and operation of the utilities. 
(f)  Other powers. The Waunakee Utilities Commission shall have such other powers as are necessary or convenient to the management and operation of the village public utilities, and the village intends that the Waunakee Utilities Commission shall have full authority respecting the utilities unless that authority is specifically withheld by statute. Actual construction work shall be under the immediate supervision of the director of public works. 
(Code 1998, § 98-86; Ord. No. 99-1, § 1, 1-18-1999) 
Sec. 74-50. - Utility expenses. 
    Utility expenses shall be audited by the Waunakee Utilities Commission at its regular monthly meeting, and if approved by its president and secretary, shall be paid pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0607(4). The Waunakee Utilities Commission may authorize the payment of labor, salaries and such other regular expenses as the Waunakee Utilities Commission may determine, including, but not limited to, power and fuel bills, to be paid as they become due, if approved by the president and secretary. 
(Code 1998, § 98-87; Ord. No. 99-1, § 1, 1-18-1999) 
Sec. 74-51. - Receipts. 
    Utility funds shall be separately accounted for by the specific utility service and shall be subject to disposition as the Waunakee Utilities Commission shall direct. 
(Code 1998, § 98-88; Ord. No. 99-1, § 1, 1-18-1999) 
Sec. 74-52. - Construction; definition. 
    This division shall be liberally construed to effect its purpose. As used herein, the terms "management and control" or "management and operation" shall be construed broadly and shall include, without limitation by enumeration, all authority related to the utility properties of the village, and all authority related to purchasing, acquiring, leasing, constructing, adding to, improving, conducting, controlling, operating, or managing the village's public utilities, except as specifically withheld by statute. 
(Code 1998, § 98-89; Ord. No. 99-1, § 1, 1-18-1999) 
Secs. 74-53-74-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRIC UTILITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Public utilities, Wis. Stats. § 66.0801 et seq. 

Sec. 74-76. - Rules adopted. 
    The electric utility has filed with the state public service commission its electric rules, which have been approved and authorized by the public service commission. The rules, as amended from time to time, and the Electric Operating Rules, PSC 113, are adopted and approved by the village board and are incorporated in this section by reference. Subject to prior authorization and approval from the public service commission, the utility may change or modify from time to time the rules, provided such change or modification is also approved by the village board. In such event, no further action of the village board is required. All persons may obtain copies of the current rules from the electric utility office. 
(Code 1988, § 9-3-1; Code 1998, § 98-116) 
Sec. 74-77. - Rates. 
    The rates for electrical service provided to customers of the electric utility shall be as set forth in the tariffs filed and approved from time to time by the state public service commission, and PSC Rule 113 (Wis. Admin. Code ch. PSC 113), and the rates shall be paid as and when and in the manner provided for in such filings. 
(Code 1988, §§ 9-3-2, 9-3-20; Code 1998, § 98-117) 
Sec. 74-78. - Late charges and other penalties. 
    A late payment charge shall be applied to the electric bill as set forth in the tariffs filed and approved from time to time by the state public service commission and Wis. Admin. Code ch. PSC 113. This charge is applicable to all customers. The utility customer may be given a written notice no sooner than 20 days after the bill is issued and, unless payment or satisfactory arrangement for payment is made within the next ten days, service may be disconnected pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code ch. PSC 113. Customer bills unpaid as of November 15 shall be placed on the tax roll and collected as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0809(3). 
(Code 1988, §§ 9-3-3, 9-3-30; Code 1998, § 98-118; Ord. No. 01-15, §§ 1, 2, 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 02-12, § 1, 11-11-2002) 
Secs. 74-79-74-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER UTILITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Public utilities, Wis. Stats. § 66.0801 et seq.; water and sewage, Wis. Stats. ch. 281. 

Sec. 74-100. - Compliance with article and adopted rules. 
(a)  PSC 185 . In addition to the terms and conditions of this article IV, the water utility shall operate under the standards for water public utility service as contained in chapter PSC 185 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Compliance with rules and regulations . Every person receiving water service from the village or who may make application for such service, or who otherwise receives such service, shall be considered as having agreed to be bound by all of the terms of this article IV, as amended from time to time, and the rules and regulations as filed with the Public Service Commission of Wisconsin, including Chapter PSC 185, and such agreement is a condition precedent to the provision of such water service. 
(c)  Enforcement . The Waunakee Utilities Commission shall have all powers necessary to enforce this article IV, including, but not limited to, pursuing enforcement actions and issuing citations under section 1-32 of the village code. Any person who violates this article IV is subject to the penalties contained in section 1-32. 
(Ord. No. 17-3, § 1, 7-24-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-3, § 1, adopted July 24, 2017, repealed § 74-100 and enacted a new section as set out herein. Former § 74-100 pertained to PSC rule 185 adopted and derived from Code 1998, § 98-150) 
Sec. 74-101. - Cross connection control. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a program for protecting the public water system from contamination due to backflow of contaminants through the water service connection into the public water system. This section is intended to implement the requirements set forth in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 810.15 and to implement other requirements necessary to protect public health, safety, or welfare. 
(b)  Definition of cross connection. A cross connection is defined as any physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable water from the village public water system, and the other of which contains water from a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases, or chemicals, whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other, with the direction of flow depending on the pressure differential between the two systems. 
(c)  Unprotected cross connections prohibited. No person, firm, or corporation may establish or maintain, or permit to be established or maintained, any unprotected cross connection. Cross connections shall be protected as required in Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 382. 
(d)  Inspection. The utility manager, or his designee, may inspect, or arrange for an inspection of, property served by the public water system for cross connections. Any unprotected cross connections identified by the inspection shall be immediately corrected. Failure to immediately correct an unprotected cross connection shall be sufficient cause for the utility manager to order the discontinuation of water service to the property, as provided under subsection (g) of this section. Costs incurred by the utility to conduct inspections shall be recovered in water rates. However, the utility manager, in his reasonable discretion, may require a specific property owner to pay all costs, or a portion of the costs, associated with the inspection of the owner's property if the inspection: 
(1)  Requires more connections to be inspected than on a typical property; or 
(2)  For other reasons the inspection results in a greater cost to the utility than the inspection of a typical property. 
(e)  Right of entry. The utility manager, or his designee, shall have the right to request entry, at any reasonable time, to property served by a connection to the public water system for the purpose of inspecting the property for cross connections. Refusing entry to such utility representative shall be sufficient cause for the utility manager to order the discontinuation of water service to the property, as provided under subsection (g) of this section. If entry is refused, a special inspection warrant under Wis. Stats. § 66.0119 may be obtained. 
(f)  Provision of requested information. The utility manager, or his designee, may request an owner, lessee, or occupant of property served by a connection to the public water system to furnish the utility with pertinent information regarding the piping systems on the property. Refusing to provide requested information shall be sufficient cause for the utility manager to order the discontinuation of water service to the property, as provided under subsection (g) of this section. 
(g)  Discontinuation of water for violation. The utility manager may order the discontinuation of water service to any property in violation of this section, and may take other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water system. Except as provided in subsection (h) of this section or if the property owner violates subsections (d) through (f) of this section, the utility manager shall provide two calendar days' notice to a property owner before discontinuing water service. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the unprotected cross connection has been eliminated. A property owner may appeal the utility manager's decision to discontinue water service under this section to the Waunakee Utilities Commission. The appeal shall be heard at the Waunakee Utilities Commission's next scheduled regular meeting or at a special meeting held prior to the next scheduled meeting. 
(h)  Emergency discontinuance. If it is determined by the utility manager that an unprotected cross connection or emergency endangers public health, safety, or welfare, and requires immediate action, water service may be immediately discontinued. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the unprotected cross connection has been eliminated. A property owner may appeal the utility manager's decision to discontinue water service under this section to the Waunakee Utilities Commission. The appeal shall be heard at the Waunakee Utilities Commission's next scheduled regular meeting or at a special meeting held prior to the next scheduled meeting. 
(i)  Effect of state plumbing code and village plumbing ordinances. This section does not supersede the state plumbing code or any section of this Code pertaining to plumbing, but is supplementary to them. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-49; Code 1998, § 98-151; Ord. No. 13-7, 4-15-2013) 
Sec. 74-102. - Water main extension rule. 
    Water mains shall be extended for new customers pursuant to the service rules for the Waunakee Utilities, including, but not limited to, the water main extension rule contained in Schedule No. X-2. 
Sec. 74-103. - Water main installations in platted subdivisions. 
(a)  Application for installation of water mains in regularly platted real estate development subdivisions shall be filed with the village administrator and shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name of the subdivision. 
(2)  The legal description. 
(3)  A map showing streets, lots and sizes of proposed mains and hydrants and street laterals. 
(4)  The date of approval of the subdivision plan by the state department of development. 
(5)  The date of approval of proposed mains by the state department of natural resources. 
(6)  The number of houses presently under construction. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the application, the water utility will prepare detailed estimates of the cost of extending sewer mains of the size deemed necessary in the subdivision and shall submit the estimates to the village board for approval of the extension. The applicant for water service to be supplied to a subdivision shall be required to advance to the utility, prior to the beginning of the construction, the total estimated cost of the extension. If the final costs exceed estimated costs, an additional billing will be made for the balance of the cost due, with the balance to be paid within 30 days. If final costs are less than estimated, a refund of the overpayment will be made by the utility. If the developer or a contractor employed by the developer is to install the sewer mains, with the approval of the utility, the developer shall be responsible for the total cost of construction. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-51; Code 1998, § 98-153) 
Sec. 74-104. - Private well abandonment. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prevent unused and improperly constructed wells from serving as a passage for contaminated surface or near-surface waters or other materials to reach the usable groundwater. These wells must be properly filled and sealed. Certain wells may be operated, upon the issuance of a well operation permit, subject to conditions of maintenance and operation. 
(b)  Filling required. Every private well located on any premises which is served by the public water system of the village shall be properly filled. Only a well for which a well operation permit has been granted by the village administrator may be exempted from this subsection, subject to conditions of maintenance and operation. 
(c)  Well operation permits. A permit may be granted to a well owner to operate a well for a period not to exceed three years if the requirements of this subsection are met. A permit may be renewed after the three-year period, provided water is tested and a safe water sample has been obtained from the well annually. The results of such tests shall be submitted annually to the village or as requested by the village engineer. Application shall be made on forms provided by the village administrator. The requirements are as follows: 
(1)  The well and pump installation meet the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 112 and a well constructor's report is on file with the department of natural resources, or certification of the acceptability of the well has been granted by the private water supply section of the department of natural resources. 
(2)  The well has a history of producing safe water and presently produces bacteriologically safe water as evidenced by three samplings two weeks apart. 
(3)  The proposed use of the well can be justified as being necessary in addition to water provided by the public water system. 
(4)  No physical connection shall exist between the piping of the public water system and the private well. 
(d)  Methods of filling. Wells to be abandoned shall be filled according to the procedures outlined in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 112. The pump and piping must be removed and the well checked for obstructions prior to plugging. Any obstruction or liner must be removed. 
(e)  Reports and inspection. A well abandonment report must be submitted by the well owner to the department of natural resources on forms provided by that agency, available at the office of the village administrator. The report shall be submitted immediately upon completion of the filling of the well. The filling must be observed by a representative of the village. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-52; Code 1998, § 98-154) 
Sec. 74-105. - Rates. 
    The rates for water service provided to customers of the water utility shall be as set forth in the tariffs filed and approved from time to time by the state public service commission, and the rates shall be paid as and when and in the manner provided for such filings. 
(Code 1998, § 98-155) 
Sec. 74-106. - Late charges and other penalties. 
(a)  A charge as established by the tariffs for Waunakee Utilities will be added to water bills not paid within 20 days from the date of issuance. 
(b)  The late payment charge shall be applied only to the current month's bill after all current payments, credits and refunds have been applied and shall not be applied to unpaid late payment charges. Where joint utility billing is used, the late payment charge shall be applied to the combined utilities total current bill. 
(Code 1998, § 98-156) 
Sec. 74-107. - Water emergencies. 
(a)  Water watch declaration and criteria. 
(1)  The utility general manager, following discussion with the village president and utilities commission president, may impose a water watch under the criteria set forth in this subsection (a). A water watch shall continue until the utility general manager determines that it is no longer necessary. Under a water watch, the utility urges all customers to implement voluntary lawn watering restrictions. Voluntary lawn watering restrictions may apply to all customers or customers on alternate sides of the street, and the restrictions may be for all day or for specified times each day. Notice of a water watch shall be given to village board and utilities commission members, the village clerk, and the village's official newspaper. 
(2)  A water watch shall be declared when necessary to maintain pumpage below a preset daily total amount, or to maintain demand on the system below a preset level, or to comply with an electrical utility request for voluntary cutback in peak load electrical usage. 
(b)  Water warning declaration and criteria. 
(1)  The utility general manager, following discussion with the village president and utilities commission president, may impose a water warning under the criteria set forth in this subsection (b). A water watch need not be declared before the declaration of a water warning. A water warning shall continue until the utility general manager determines that it is no longer necessary. Under a water warning, the utility general manager shall implement mandatory lawn watering restrictions. Mandatory lawn watering restrictions may apply to all customers or customers on alternate sides of the street, and the restrictions may be for all day or for specified times each day. Mandatory restrictions may also prohibit the establishment of new lawns, either sodded or seeded. Notice of a water warning shall be given to village board and utilities commission members, the village clerk, and the village's official newspaper. 
(2)  A water warning shall be declared when it is necessary to: 
a.  Avoid sustained low pressure; 
b.  Maintain water storage levels above preset fire reserve limits as determined by the utility general manager if a water watch is not effective; 
c.  Compensate for a loss of one or more wells or towers; or 
d.  Maintain a sustainable aquifer. 
(c)  Water emergency declaration and criteria. The utility general manager, following discussion with the village president and Waunakee Utilities Commission president, may impose a water emergency if it is determined that the imposition of a water emergency is necessary to maintain the health and safety of the public. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the utility general manager may impose a water emergency without consulting with the village president or Waunakee Utilities Commission president so long as the utility general manager has made a reasonable attempt to get in contact with the village president and Waunakee Utilities Commission president. A water watch or water warning need not be declared before the declaration of a water emergency. A water emergency shall continue until the utility general manager determines that the health and safety of the public will not be compromised by cancelling the water emergency. Under a water emergency, the utility general manager shall implement mandatory restrictions on any water uses of one or more classes of water users, wholly or in part. Under a water emergency, nothing shall limit the ability of the utility general manager to terminate the supply of water to any or all customers upon the determination of the utility general manager that an emergency termination of water service is required to protect the health and safety of the public. Notice of a water emergency shall be given to the village president, Waunakee Utilities Commission president, village board and Waunakee Utilities Commission members, and the village's official newspaper. 
(d)  Exceptions; appeals process. 
(1)  A request for an exception to this section may be made by a party who claims that health or safety reasons require that a water warning or emergency not be applied to the party's use of water. The utility general manager, in his sole discretion, shall determine whether health or safety reasons require that a water warning or emergency not be applied to the party's use of water. 
(2)  If the utility general manager denies a party's request under subsection (d)(1) of this section, the party may appeal the utility general manager's decision to the Waunakee Utilities Commission. The appeal shall be heard at the Waunakee Utilities Commission's next scheduled regular meeting or at a special meeting held prior to the next scheduled meeting. When ruling on the appeal, the Waunakee Utilities Commission members shall consider the criteria for the issuance of the water warning or emergency (whichever is being challenged) and whether health or safety reasons asserted by the appealing party warrant an exception to the water warning or emergency. 
(e)  Penalties. 
(1)  First offense. Any person who violates any mandatory restriction on water usage issued pursuant to this section or fails to comply with any of this section's requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 or more than $200.00, together with the costs of prosecution. 
(2)  Second and subsequent offenses. Any person who violates any mandatory restriction on water usage issued pursuant to this section or fails to comply with any of this section's requirements, and who has previously been convicted of a violation of this section, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution. 
(3)  Separate offenses. Each occurrence of violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1998, § 98-157; Ord. No. 13-6, 4-15-2013) 
Secs. 74-108-74-123. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEWERS AND SEWER USE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Public utilities, Wis. Stats. § 66.0801 et seq.; water and sewage, Wis. Stats. ch. 281. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-124. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approving authority of the commission means the light, water and sewerage superintendent or the superintendent's duly authorized representative. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building or structure and conveys it to the building sewer. 
    Building sewer means the pipe extension beginning at the outside of the inner face of the building wall, to a point of connection with the public sewer. 
    Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD) means the quantity of oxygen used in the biochemical degradation of organic material in five days at 20 degrees Celsius when the oxidation of reduced forms of nitrogen is prevented by the addition of an inhibitor. This analytical procedure shall be performed in accordance with standard methods. 
    Commission means the public utilities commission. 
    Compatible pollutant means a Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, total Kjeldahl nitrogen, plus additional pollutants identified in the WPDES permit for the publicly owned treatment works receiving the pollutant if such works were designed to treat such pollutants to a substantial degree. 
    Floatable oil means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater or septage shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection or treatment system. 
    Garbage means the residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage, and sale of food products and produce. 
    Ground garbage means the residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles will be no larger than one-half inch in any dimension and will be carried freely in suspension under normal flow conditions in sewers. 
    Incompatible pollutants or wastewater means a wastewater or septage with pollutants of such strength that will adversely affect or disrupt the wastewater treatment processes or effluent quality or sludge quality if discharged to the sewerage system facility. 
    Industrial waste means the wastewater from an industrial process, trade, or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage, including cooling water and the discharge from sewage pretreatment facilities. 
    MMSD ordinance means the sewer use ordinance of the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District (MMSD) adopted in September, 1984, and any amendments thereto or restatements thereof. 
    Municipality wastewater means the wastewater of a municipality, including that of the village. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residential, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may have inadvertently entered the sewerage system of the municipality. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Parts per million means a weight-to-weight ratio; the parts per million value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
    Person means any and all persons, including any individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise, government agency or other entity. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen ion concentration of 107. 
    Public sewer means a sewer owned or provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the village, the commission or any other municipality. 
    Sanitary sewage means a combination of liquid and water-carried wastes discharged from toilets or sanitary plumbing facilities, together with such groundwaters, surface waters, and stormwaters as may have inadvertently entered the sewerage system. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with small quantities of groundwaters, stormwaters, and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
    Septage means the wastewater or contents of septic or holding tanks, dosing chambers, grease interceptors, seepage beds, seepage pits, seepage trenches, privies or portable restrooms. 
    Sewer service charge means a service charge levied on users of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities for payment of use-related capital expenses as well as the operation and maintenance costs, including replacement costs, of such facilities. 
    Sewer system means the public sanitary sewers within a sewerage system. The facilities that convey wastewater from individual structures, from private property to the public sanitary sewer, or its equivalent are specifically excluded from the definition of sewer system; except that pumping units and pressurized lines for individual structures or groups of structures may be included as part of a sewer system when such units are cost effective and are owned and maintained by the village or commission. For example, a building sewer is not part of the sewer system. 
    Sewerage system means all structures, conduits and pipes, by which sewage is collected, treated, and disposed of, except plumbing inside and in connection with buildings served, and service pipes, from building to street main (i.e., a building sewer). 
    Slug load means any substance released at a discharge rate or concentration that causes interference to the wastewater treatment processes or plugging or surcharging of the sewer system. 
    Standard methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage, and Industrial Wastes, published jointly by the American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation, and is in compliance with federal regulations 40 CFR 136, Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants, all as amended from time to time. 
    Storm drain or storm sewer means a drain or sewer for conveying surface water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source. 
    Stormwater runoff means that portion of the rainfall that is collected and drained into the storm sewers. 
    Suspended solids (SS) means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, wastewater, septage, or other liquids and that are removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in standard methods and are referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
    Total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) means the quantity of organic nitrogen and ammonia as determined in accordance with standard methods. 
    Total phosphorus (TP) means the quantity of total phosphorus as determined in accordance with standard methods. 
    Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, store, and treat domestic and industrial waste and septage and dispose of the effluent and sludge. 
    Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, septage, industrial waste, and sludge; sometimes synonymous with the term "waste treatment." 
    Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-2; Code 1998, § 98-185; Ord. No. 95-10, 12-18-1995) 
Sec. 74-125. - Violations, abatement procedures and penalties. 
(a)  Violations constituting public nuisance. A violation, other than the failure to pay sewer service charges or other fees or costs due under this article, of any section of this article or any other rule or order of the public utilities commission or the village is declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  Damage to village property. No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure or equipment which is a part of the village sewerage system. Any person violating this subsection shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of disorderly conduct. 
(c)  Enforcement. The Waunakee Utilities Commission and the village board shall have the right to enforce this article and shall make periodic inspections and inspections upon complaint to ensure that this article is not violated. No action shall be taken under this article to abate a public nuisance unless the Waunakee Utilities Commission shall have inspected or caused to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and shall have satisfied itself that a nuisance does in fact exist. 
(d)  Summary abatement. If the Waunakee Utilities Commission determines that a public nuisance exists within the village and that there is great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, the Waunakee Utilities Commission may cause the nuisance to be abated and charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant, or person causing, permitting, or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be. 
(e)  Abatement after notice. If the Waunakee Utilities Commission determines that a public nuisance exists on the private premises, but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to present great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, the Waunakee Utilities Commission shall serve notice to the person causing or maintaining the nuisance to remove the nuisance within ten days. If such nuisance is not removed within ten days, the Waunakee Utilities Commission shall cause the nuisances to be removed as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)  Other methods not excluded. Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the Waunakee Utilities Commission or the village or its officials in accordance with state laws. 
(g)  Court order. Except when necessary under subsection (d) of this section, the Waunakee Utilities Commission and the village shall not use force to obtain access to private property to abate a public nuisance, but shall request permission to enter upon private property if such premises are occupied, and, if such permission is denied, shall apply to any court having jurisdiction for an order assisting the abatement of public nuisance. 
(h)  Cost of abatement. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this article for the erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the Waunakee Utilities Commission or the village shall be considered as a debt and shall be collected from the owner, occupant, or person causing, permitting, or maintaining the nuisance. Such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge. For purposes of this subsection, costs shall include but not be limited to actual attorney's fees and court costs. 
(i)  Continued violations. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the notice time limit provided in this section shall be subject to the penalty in section 1-32. 
(j)  Liability to village for losses. Any person violating this article shall become liable to the village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned because of such violation which the village may suffer as a result thereof. If any violations affect the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District wastewater collection and treatment facilities as well as the village's sanitary sewer system, Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District may penalize the violator independently and concurrently with the village according to the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District ordinance. 
(k)  Accidental discharge. Any person found to be responsible for accidentally allowing a deleterious discharge into the sewerage system which causes damage to the sewerage system or a receiving body of water (e.g., lake, river, stream, etc.,) shall, in addition to a fine, pay the amount to cover all damages, both of which will be determined by the village or other governmental authority having appropriate jurisdiction. 
(l)  Accidental discharge reporting. Any person responsible for an accidental discharge that may have a detrimental impact on the sewerage system shall immediately report the nature and amount of the discharge to the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District. 
(m)  Liability to village for losses. Any person violating this article shall become liable to the village for any expense, attorney's fees, costs, engineering fees, loss or damage occasioned because of such violation which the village may suffer as a result thereof. Without intent to limit the generality of the foregoing, the village board shall have the right of recovery from all such persons any expense incurred by the village for the repair or replacement of any part of the public sewerage system damaged in any manner by any person by the performance of any work under its control or by any negligent acts. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-13; Code 1998, § 98-186) 
Sec. 74-126. - Scope. 
    This article regulates the use of public and private sewers and drains, connections to the public sewerage system, discharge of septage into the public sewerage system, and the discharge of waters and wastes into the public sewerage systems within the village. It also provides for and explains the method used for levying and collecting wastewater treatment services charges, sets uniform requirements for discharges into the wastewater collection and treatment systems and enables the village to comply with administrative provisions and other discharge criteria which are required or authorized by the laws of the state or the United States. The intent of this article is to derive the maximum public benefit by regulating the characteristics of wastewater discharged into the sewerage system. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-1(a); Code 1998, § 98-181) 
Sec. 74-127. - Applicability. 
    This article provides a means for regulating the use of the public sewers; effectuating connections thereto; determining wastewater volumes, constituents and characteristics; the setting of charges and fees; and the issuing of permits to certain users. Revenues derived from the application of this article shall be used to defray the costs of operating and maintaining the wastewater collection and treatment systems and to provide sufficient funds for capital outlay, debt service costs and capital improvements. The charges and fees in this article have been established pursuant to the requirements of the state statutes. This article shall supersede any chapter, ordinance, rule or regulation of the village relating to the subject matter of this article and shall repeal all parts thereof that may be inconsistent with this article. If there is any conflict between this article and any applicable state statute, the state statute shall control. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-1(b); Code 1998, § 98-182) 
Sec. 74-128. - Legal authority. 
    This article is enacted pursuant to the power and authority conferred by Wis. Stats. ch. 61 and constitutes the ordinances of the village with respect to the subject matter of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-1(c); Code 1998, § 98-183) 
Secs. 74-129-74-156. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 74-157. - Management, operation and control. 
(a)  Management. The management, operation, and control of the sewer system of the village shall be vested in the Waunakee Utilities Commission. All records, minutes and all written proceedings thereof shall be kept by the secretary thereof, in accordance with section 2-327 and division 2 of article II of this chapter. 
(b)  Construction authority. The Waunakee Utilities Commission shall have the power to construct sewer lines for public use; shall have the power to lay sewer pipes in and through the public alleys, streets, and public grounds located within the village; and, generally, shall have the power to do all such work as may be found necessary or convenient in the management of the sewer system. The village shall have power by itself, its officers, agents, servants, and the Waunakee Utilities Commission to enter upon any land in the village for the purpose of making examination or to supervise in the performance of their duties under this article, without liability therefor. The village shall have power to purchase and acquire for the village all real and personal property which may be necessary for construction of the sewer system or for any repair, remodeling, or additions thereto. 
(c)  Owner's maintenance of building sewer. The owner of property abutting a public sewer shall maintain sewer service from the public sewer main to the structure or building on the owner's property, including all controls between such, without expense to the village, except when they are damaged as a result of negligence or carelessness on the part of the village. Without intending to limit the generality of the foregoing, the owner has the sole responsibility for the repair and maintenance of all building sewers, and the ownership thereof shall at all times be vested in such property owner. All sewer services must be maintained free of defective conditions, by and at the expense of the owner or occupant of the property. When any sewer service is to be relaid and there are two or more buildings on such service, each building shall be disconnected from such service and a new sewer service shall be installed for each building. If any obstruction of, damage to or repair of a building sewer occurs, the obstruction, damage and repair shall be the responsibility of the property owner, except as provided for in section 74-158(g) or as otherwise provided for in this article. 
(d)  Title to real estate and personal property. All property, real, personal, and mixed, including, but not limited to easements, acquired for the construction of the village's sewer system and all plans, specifications, diagrams, papers, books and records connected therewith and all buildings, equipment, machinery, and fixtures pertaining thereto shall be the property of and titled in the name of the village. 
(e)  Authority. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as limiting the power and authority of the Waunakee Utilities Commission or the village as provided by applicable state law, and the Waunakee Utilities Commission and the village shall have all rights and authority as provided for by law. 
(f)  Annexation to village. Territory may be added to the village in the manner provided for by law. If any such addition occurs, the village may condition the provision of sewer service to such territory upon the owner thereof making such contributions, dedications and payments as the Waunakee Utilities Commission or the village board may reasonably require in order to provide such sewer service. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-3; Code 1998, § 98-216) 
Sec. 74-158. - Administrative rules and regulations. 
(a)  Adopted. The rules and regulations for the government of licensed plumbers, sewer users, property owners, and others, are adopted and established in this section. 
(b)  General provisions. General requirements for the rules and regulations adopted in subsection (a) of this section are as follows: 
(1)  Agreement to rules and regulations. Every person receiving sewerage service from the village or who may make application for such service or who otherwise receives such service shall be considered as having agreed to be bound by all of the terms of this article, as amended from time to time, and such agreement is a condition precedent to the provision of such sewerage service. 
(2)  Application for service. Every person desiring to connect property, buildings or structures to public sewers shall make application in writing to the Waunakee Utilities Commission, on such forms as are prescribed for that purpose, prior to commencing use of such service. The application must describe fully and truthfully all the wastes which are anticipated to be discharged. If the applicant is not the fee simple owner of the property, the written consent of the owner must accompany the application. The term "users" means persons connected to the public sewers of the village. By submitting such an application, all users are deemed to have agreed to be bound by this article, as amended from time to time. If it appears that the service applied for will not provide adequate service for the contemplated use, the Waunakee Utilities Commission may reject the application. If the Waunakee Utilities Commission approves the application, it shall issue a connection permit as shown on the application. No service shall be provided or application approved without prior payment of all applicable fees. 
(3)  Application fee. Where the application for service is for a connection to the village's public sewers, the application shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount to be determined from time to time by the village board. Such fee shall cover the cost of processing the application and inspection of the connection. Application fees may vary in amount between residential users and commercial/industrial users. The payment of this fee shall be in addition to any connection fees that may be charged to or on account of new users by the village or by the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District. 
(4)  Inspections. Any connection to the public sewers within the village shall be subject to the prior inspection and approval of the work by an authorized representative of the Waunakee Utilities Commission. No trench or other excavation shall be filled or any connection completed without such prior inspection. The applicant requesting the connection shall reimburse the village upon request for all inspection costs incurred, if not previously paid as part of the application fee. 
(5)  Disconnection and refusal of service. Sewer service may be disconnected or refused for any of the following reasons: 
a.  Violation of this article, as amended from time to time. 
b.  Violation of the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District ordinance, as amended from time to time. 
c.  Failure to pay the application fee, any connection fee or delinquent account of the user. 
(6)  Disconnection for delinquent accounts. A bill for service is delinquent if unpaid after the due date shown on the bill. The village may direct the Waunakee Utilities Commission to disconnect service for a delinquent bill by giving the user, at least eight calendar days prior to the disconnection, a written disconnect notice which may be included in the bill for service. For purposes of this subsection, the due date shall not be less than 20 days after issuance of the bill. The Waunakee Utilities Commission may disconnect without notice where a dangerous condition exists for as long as the condition exists. Service may be denied to any user for failure to comply with the applicable requirements of these rules and regulations or if a dangerous or unsafe condition exists on the user's property. 
(7)  Subsequent amendments. The village board reserves the right to subsequently amend, modify, repeal and modify, any and all sections of this article. 
(c)  Plumbers. No plumber, pipefitter, or other person will be permitted to do any plumbing or pipefitting work in connection with the sewer system without first receiving a license from the state and obtaining permission from the village in which the work is to be performed. All service connections to the sewer main shall comply with the state plumbing code, as amended. 
(d)  Mandatory connections. 
(1)  Within the village, the owner of each parcel of land adjacent to a public sewer main on which there exists a building used or usable for human habitation or in a block through which such system is extended shall connect to the sewer system within 120 days of notice in writing from the Waunakee Utilities Commission. Upon failure to do so, the Waunakee Utilities Commission may cause such connection to be made and bill the property owner for all such costs. If such costs are not paid within 30 days, such costs shall constitute a special tax lien against the property, in the manner provided for by law. However, the owner may, within 30 days after the completion of the work, file a written election with the village stating that the owner cannot pay such amount in one sum and ask that the sum be levied in five or fewer equal annual installments. The amount shall be so collected with interest at a rate not to exceed 15 percent per annum from the date of completion of the work, all as determined by the village. The unpaid balance shall constitute a special tax lien, all pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 281.45. 
(2)  In lieu of subsection (d)(1) of this section, the Waunakee Utilities Commission, at its option, may impose a penalty for the period that the violation continues after ten days' written notice to any owner failing to make a connection to the sewer system. The penalty shall be in the amount of $100.00 per day. Upon failure to make such payment, the penalty shall be assessed as a special tax lien against the property, all pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 281.45. 
(3)  This article ordains that any such failure to connect to the sewer system is contrary to the minimum health standards of the village and fails to ensure preservation of public health, welfare, comfort, and safety and that such failure constitutes a public nuisance under Wis. Stats. § 823.02, subject to abatement as provided for therein. 
(e)  Building sewer connection expense. A person attaching to a public sewer shall have the building sewer or lateral installed at such person's own cost and expense. 
(f)  Tap permits. After sewer connections have been introduced into any building or upon any premises, no plumber shall make any alterations, extensions, or attachments, unless the party ordering such tapping or other work exhibits the proper permit for the work from the village. 
(g)  Obstruction of building sewers in public rights-of-way. If any blockage, damage or break in any building sewer occurs within a public street, alley, highway, or other public right-of-way, the village shall have the exclusive right and option to repair the building sewer within such street, alley, highway or right-of-way. In such event, the owner of the building sewer shall promptly reimburse the village for all costs so incurred. If not so reimbursed, the costs shall be added to the owner's sewer service charges and collected in the same manner as such charges are so collected. 
(h)  Backflow preventer. All floor drains shall have a backflow prevention valve installed at the owner's expense, whenever the village determines such installation to be necessary or appropriate. 
(i)  User use only. No user shall allow other persons or other services to connect to the sewer system through such user's lateral or building sewer. 
(j)  Discontinuance of service. Whenever any person desires to discontinue sewer service from the system, the Waunakee Utilities Commission must first be notified in writing prior to such disconnection. Such discontinuance of service may be handled in the same manner as discontinuance of water service by a user. 
(k)  Inspections. Every user shall permit the village or its duly authorized agent, at all reasonable times, to enter the user's premises or building to examine the pipes and fixtures and the manner in which the drains and sewer connections operate, and the user must at all times, frankly and without concealment, answer all questions put to such user relative to its use, all in accordance with this article and Wis. Stats. § 196.171, to the extent applicable. 
(l)  Village responsibility. It is expressly stipulated that no claim shall be made against the village or the Waunakee Utilities Commission or its commissioners, agents, employees and representatives because of the breaking, clogging, stoppage, or freezing of any pipes or from any damage arising from repairing mains, making connections or extensions or any other work that may be deemed necessary. The right is reserved to cut off sewer service at any time for the purpose of repairs or any other necessary purpose, any permit granted or regulations to the contrary notwithstanding. Whenever it shall become necessary to shut off the sewer within the village, the Waunakee Utilities Commission shall, if practicable, give notice to each and every user within the affected area of the time when such service will be shut off. 
(m)  Excavations. All excavations relating to the installation, repair or removal of sewerage facilities shall be subject to sections 59-186 through 59-194. 
(n)  Tapping mains. Connections to the sewer system, other than building sewer connections, shall be done only in accordance with article IV of the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District ordinance, as amended. 
(o)  Installation of building sewers. All building sewers on private property shall be installed in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 82, especially Wis. Admin. Code § SPS 82.10. All laterals shall be inspected. The building sewer and private interceptor main sewer shall be inspected upon completion of placement of the pipe and before backfilling and shall be tested before or after backfilling. 
(p)  Application of Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District ordinance. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, any connection to the public sewers shall be subject to the provisions of article IV of the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District ordinance, as amended from time to time, to the extent applicable. If any conflict occurs between the provisions of this article and article IV of the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District ordinance, the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District ordinance shall control. 
(q)  New connections. New connections to the village's sewer system will be allowed only if there is available capacity in all of the downstream wastewater collection and treatment facilities of the village and the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-4; Code 1998, § 98-217) 
Sec. 74-159. - Appeals. 
(a)  Review of administrative determinations. Any person having a substantial interest which is adversely affected by an administrative determination of the light, water and sewerage superintendent or the Waunakee Utilities Commission or any agent thereof, which determination relates to the subject matter of this article, may have such determination reviewed as provided in this section. Only administrative determinations described in Wis. Stats. § 68.02 are subject to review under this article. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, any determinations involving sewer service charges or any component thereof, application fees, connection fees, or any other fees or costs due under this article are not subject to review under this section. Further, any determinations involving the levying and assessment of special assessments or any of the determinations described in Wis. Stats. § 68.03 are not subject to review under this section. 
(b)  Procedure for review. A person satisfying the requirements of subsection (a) of this section shall first make a written request to the Waunakee Utilities Commission for a review of the administrative determination, which request shall be submitted to the Waunakee Utilities Commission within 15 days following the determination in question. The request shall be in writing, shall state the name and address of the person seeking the review, shall describe the circumstances surrounding the determination and shall state the grounds upon which such person contends that the determination should be modified or reversed. 
(c)  Hearing. Upon receipt of a request for review under subsection (b) of this section, the person seeking the review shall have a hearing before the Waunakee Utilities Commission, provided subsection (d) of this section is satisfied. The hearing shall be held at a time and place determined by the Waunakee Utilities Commission, within 30 days from the date of receipt of the request. The Waunakee Utilities Commission shall notify such person, by mail or personal service, at least ten days before such hearing of the time and place of the hearing. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 68.11(2). 
(d)  Review fee; recording expenses. Any appeal to the Waunakee Utilities Commission under subsection (b) of this section shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable review fee as established by resolution. If the person seeking review desires the hearing proceedings to be taken by a stenographer or by a recording device, the expense thereof shall be paid by the person seeking the review. 
(e)  Decision and appeal. Within 30 days of completion of the hearing under subsection (c) of this section and the filing of briefs, if any, the Waunakee Utilities Commission shall make its written determination on the request for review. Such determination shall be mailed or delivered to such person at the address set forth in the request for review. The decision of the Waunakee Utilities Commission may be subject to judicial review under Wis. Stats. § 68.13, in the manner provided for therein. 
(f)  Applicability of state statutes. Except as to those specific statutes expressly incorporated in this section, the village and the Waunakee Utilities Commission elect not to be governed by any other section of Wis. Stats. ch. 68. 
(g)  Reimbursement of costs. If the Waunakee Utilities Commission does not modify or reverse the administrative determination in question following the hearing thereon, or if the administrative determination is sustained on appeal under Wis. Stats. § 68.13, the person who has sought the review shall reimburse the village for all hearing and court costs incurred, including, but not limited to reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-14; Code 1998, § 98-218) 
Secs. 74-160-74-186. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SEWER MAIN EXTENSIONS 

Sec. 74-187. - Application and approval. 
    Subject to Wis. Admin. Code ch. PSC 187, the extension of public sewer mains to serve new customers/users is subject to the prior review and approval of the Waunakee Utilities Commission, the village board and any other governmental agency having appropriate jurisdiction thereof. Any person seeking to develop real property and requiring sewer service in connection with such development shall make application to the Waunakee Utilities Commission for a public sewer main extension, if so required in order to serve such development. Such application shall be in writing and shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name of the development and the legal description of the property involved. 
(2)  A plat map or certified survey map or other map showing the street layout and lot sizes. 
(3)  Zoning of the property. 
(4)  Proposed plans and specifications for the sewers. 
(5)  The name and address of the consulting engineer. 
(6)  The number of housing units and other units to be constructed. 
(7)  Such additional information as the Waunakee Utilities Commission may require. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-6(a); Code 1998, § 98-246) 
Sec. 74-188. - Conditions of approval. 
    The village board shall have the sole discretion to approve or disapprove the requested public sewer main extensions. In granting such approval, the village board may condition its approval upon compliance with: 
(1)  Any other applicable section of this Code or provisions of the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District. 
(2)  Any applicable statute, rule, order, or code of the state or any other governmental body having jurisdiction thereof. 
(3)  The preparation of plans and specifications for the sewer main extension subject to the approval of the Waunakee Utilities Commission and its consulting engineer. 
(4)  The applicant making and installing the public sewer main extension at such applicant's sole cost or otherwise providing a surety bond or other security to ensure that the main will be so constructed within a reasonable period of time. 
(5)  The dedication of such rights-of-way, easements and sewerage facilities as the Waunakee Utilities Commission or village board may reasonably require. 
(6)  The payment of all costs and expenses incurred or to be incurred by the village in connection with the review and approval of such sewer extension, including, but not limited to engineers' fees, attorneys' fees, inspection fees and other similar costs and expenses. 
(7)  The payment of any applicable connection fees due or to become due pursuant to section 74-258. 
(8)  Any other condition determined by the Waunakee Utilities Commission or the village board to be fair and reasonable in order to protect the interest of the village in connection with the proposed development. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-6(b); Code 1998, § 98-247) 
Sec. 74-189. - Contract for sewer improvements. 
    The Waunakee Utilities Commission may require the person filing an application pursuant to section 74-187 to enter into a written development agreement with the village, as a condition of the approval of the sewer main extension. Such agreement shall define the scope of the work, the obligations of the applicant to construct the sewer facilities, the requirement of security for performance of the applicant's obligations set forth therein, and such other matters as the Waunakee Utilities Commission may reasonably determine. The applicant shall reimburse the village for all attorney's fees incurred under this section. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-6(c); Code 1998, § 98-248) 
Sec. 74-190. - Authority of village. 
    The Waunakee Utilities Commission or the village board may, on their own, cause any public sewer main to be extended at such time and under such conditions as the Waunakee Utilities Commission or the village board deems appropriate in its sole discretion. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-6(d); Code 1998, § 98-249) 
Sec. 74-191. - Conflict with other laws. 
    Nothing contained in this division shall be constructed as obligating the village or the Waunakee Utilities Commission to approve of any sewer extension request or any development request or any land division or subdivision. In any such circumstance, all applicable sections of this Code or the state statutes shall control. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-6(e); Code 1998, § 98-250) 
Secs. 74-192-74-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 74-221. - Use of public sewer. 
(a)  Clean water discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof rain, subsurface water, drainage or collecting water to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Compliance with Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District ordinance. No person shall discharge wastes into a public sewer within the village, except in accordance with the provisions of article V of the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District ordinance, as amended from time to time. 
(c)  Special arrangements. No section contained in this article shall be construed as prohibiting any special agreement between the village and any person whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be admitted to the wastewater collection and treatment facilities, either before or after pretreatment, provided that there is no impairment of the functioning of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities because of the admission of such wastes, and no extra costs are incurred by the village without recompense from such person. 
(d)  Violation of general permit for bypassing. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any waters, wastewaters or other substances of any kind or nature that will result in or otherwise cause a violation of any general permit for bypassing issued by the state department of natural resources and held by the village. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-5; Code 1998, § 98-276) 
Sec. 74-222. - Control of industrial wastes. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the term "industrial discharge" or "industrial waste" shall have the same meaning as provided for in the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District ordinance, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Compliance. Each person discharging industrial waste into the public sewers of the village shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District ordinance in effect from time to time. No person shall discharge any industrial waste that contains substances or possesses characteristics that are detrimental to the village's sewerage collection system. In such event, the Waunakee Utilities Commission may impose any of the alternatives provided for in the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District ordinance, as amended from time to time. 
(c)  Control manholes. Control manholes shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Each person discharging industrial waste into a public sewer shall construct and maintain one or more control manholes or access points to facilitate observation, measurement, and sampling of the waste, including domestic sewage. 
(2)  Control manholes or access facilities shall be located and built at such locations and in such manner as may be acceptable to the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District. If measuring devices are to be permanently installed, they shall be of a type acceptable to the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District. 
(3)  Control manholes, access facilities, and related equipment shall be installed by the person discharging the industrial waste at such person's expense, and shall be maintained by the person discharging the waste so as to be in safe condition, accessible, and in proper operating condition at all times. Plans for installation of the control manholes or access facilities and related equipment shall be approved by the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District prior to the beginning of construction. 
(d)  Wastewater measurement, sampling and reporting. Wastewater flow measurements, sampling, and reporting shall be done in accordance with the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District ordinance, as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-8; Code 1998, § 98-277) 
Sec. 74-223. - Discharge of holding tank waste and other waste. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the terms "holding tank waste" and "licensed disposer" shall have the same meaning as provided for in the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District ordinance, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Discharge into village's public sewers. No person, including a licensed disposer, shall discharge any holding tank waste or any other similar wastes into any manhole or other opening in a public sewer owned or maintained by the village. Instead, all such discharges of holding tank wastes shall be made pursuant to the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District ordinance, as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-9; Code 1998, § 98-278) 
Secs. 74-224-74-254. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SEWER USER AND SERVICE CHARGES 

Sec. 74-255. - Sewer user charge system. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Debt service charges means all costs associated with repayment of debts incurred for the construction and rehabilitation of the wastewater collection system and treatment facility. 
    Normal domestic strength wastewater means wastewater with concentrations of CBOD, suspended solids, total Kjeldahl nitrogen, and total phosphorus no greater than 200, 250, 40, and ten milligrams per liter (mg/l), respectively. 
    Normal user means a user whose contributions to the sewerage system consist only of normal domestic strength wastewater originating from a house, apartment, flat, or other living quarters occupied by a person or a person constituting of distinct household, business or commercial enterprise. 
    Operation and maintenance costs means all costs associated with the operation and maintenance of the sewerage system, including, but not limited to administrative costs and expenses. 
    Replacement costs means all costs necessary to replace equipment as required to maintain capacity and performance during the design life of the sewerage facilities. When required by appropriate authority have jurisdiction thereof, a separate, segregated, and distinct replacement fund shall be established and used for only replacement of equipment. 
(b)  Measurement. The unit of volume measurement or wastewater or other wastes discharged into the village's sewerage system shall be 1,000 gallons, United States liquid measure. The unit for assessing costs with respect to strength wastewater parameters shall be avoirdupois pounds. 
(c)  Policy. It shall be the policy of the village to obtain sufficient revenues to pay the costs of the operation and maintenance of the sewerage system, including debt service and a replacement fund (i.e., a cash account to be used for future expenditures for obtaining or installing replacement equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance of the sewerage system during the service life for which such facilities were designed and constructed), through a system of sewer service charges as defined in this section. The system shall ensure that each user of the sewerage system pays the user's fair and proportionate share of the cost of such facilities. 
(d)  Sewer service charge generally. Sewer service charges to each user shall be based on wastewater parameters established from time to time by the Waunakee Utilities Commission and approved by the village board. The sewer service charges shall consist of the sum of the annual debt service charges, all annual operation and maintenance costs, all replacement costs, and all sewer service charges levied, assessed or charged to the village by the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District. 
(e)  Biennial review. The sewer service charges of the village shall be reviewed not less than biennially. Sewer service charges shall be adjusted, as required, to reflect the actual number and size of users and actual costs. Users will be notified annually of the portion of such sewer service charges attributable to operation and maintenance, debt service, and replacement costs. For purposes of this subsection, the Waunakee Utilities Commission or the village board may satisfy this notice requirement by including in the budget summary required to be published under Wis. Stats. § 65.90 a statement of the components of the sewer service charges, based on the results of operations for the preceding fiscal year. 
(f)  Determination of sewer service charges. A sewer service charge is imposed upon each lot, parcel of land, building, or premises served by the public sewer or otherwise discharging sewage, including industrial wastes, into the public sewerage system. Such sewer service charge shall be payable as provided in this section and in the amount determined as follows: 
(1)  Category A. Service charges shall be imposed on each user whose water use is metered and whose wastewater discharges are normal domestic strength wastewater. The category A service charge is of the following form: 
Service charge Customer charge + volume charge Customer charge A flat rate based on the size of the water meter Volume charge The volume of metered water in thousands of gallons multiplied by the volume rate Volume rate The volume unit price for sewer service expressed in dollars per thousands of gallons, as determined by the Waunakee Utilities Commission  
(2)  Category B. Service charges shall be imposed on each user whose water use is not metered and whose wastewater discharges are normal domestic strength wastewater. The category B sewer service charge shall be of the form as follows: 
Service charge Customer charge + equivalent residential unit charge Customer charge A flat rate based on the number of equivalent residential units, assigned to that customer (equivalent residential units) ERU charge The equivalent residential units multiplied by the equivalent residential unit rate (equivalent residential unit rate) ERU rate The average cost of providing wastewater service to a residential customer for one calendar quarter, exclusive of administrative and billing costs  
No user shall be assigned less than one equivalent residential unit. An equivalent residential unit shall mean a single-family residential dwelling unit that discharges normal domestic strength wastewater. The number of residential unit equivalents for nonresidential users shall be as determined by the Waunakee Utilities Commission. 
(3)  Category C. 
a.  Category C service charges shall be imposed on users whose sewer discharges are high strength wastewater having concentrations of carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD) greater than 200 milligrams per liter (mg/l), suspended solids greater than 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l), total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) greater than 40 milligrams per liter (mg/l), or total phosphorus (TP) greater than ten milligrams per liter (mg/l). The form of category C service charge is as follows: 
Service Charge = Customer Charge + Volume Charge + High Strength Surcharge 
b.  The customer charge and the volume charge are similar to those components of the category A service charge. High strength surcharge equals the excessive CBOD, suspended solids, TKN, and total phosphorus multiplied by the respective CBOD, suspended solids, TKN, and total phosphorus rates. The excessive CBOD, suspended solids, TKN, and total phosphorus are the portions of each of these constituents that are in excess of normal domestic strength wastewater. The excessive amounts of CBOD, suspended solids, TKN, and total phosphorus are expressed in pounds, and their respective rates are expressed in dollars per pound. 
(4)  Reassignment of categories of sewer users. The Waunakee Utilities Commission may reassign sewer users into appropriate sewer service charge categories if wastewater sampling programs and other related information indicate a change of categories is necessary or otherwise required. 
(g)  Rate determinations. The village board shall periodically determine the rates referred to in subsection (f) of this section, and the village board shall have the right to amend, modify, adjust or change the rates at any time and from time to time. 
(h)  Credits for water not discharged to public sewers. If any user who is required to pay category A service charges can demonstrate to the reasonable satisfaction of the Waunakee Utilities Commission that such user does not discharge significant amounts of the water consumed by such user into the public sewers, the Waunakee Utilities Commission may, by resolution, authorize a reduction of the volume of wastewater that would otherwise be assigned to such user by application of this article. 
(i)  Purchased treatment cost adjustment. The rates established pursuant to subsection (g) of this section shall be adjusted automatically to reflect any subsequent increase or decrease in the rates charged by Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District (MMSD). The adjustment will be effective for service rendered on and after the effective date of the change in rates for service provided by MMSD. The general manager shall calculate the appropriate rate adjustment to accurately reflect changes in MMSD charges based on volume and/or load. The utility shall provide notice to customers of such changes in rates resulting from application of this subsection no later than the next billing following the rate adjustment. 
(j)  General inflationary cost adjustment. The rates established pursuant to subsection (g) shall be adjusted effective for the first billing period of each year to reflect the increase or decrease in the consumer price index over the previous year. The adjustment shall apply to all utility operating costs other than MMSD charges. The general manager shall calculate the appropriate rate adjustment not later than 30 days prior to the billing date for such billing period. As used in this subsection, "consumer price index" means the revised Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers-Midwest Region, as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor (1982-1984=100) most recently reported prior to the effective change date. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-7; Code 1998, § 98-219; Ord. No. 95-10, 12-18-1995; Ord. No. 13-8, 4-15-2013) 
Sec. 74-256. - Billing and payment of sewer service charges. 
(a)  Calculation. Sewer service charges that are to be assessed to users shall be computed by the Waunakee Utilities Commission and approved by the village board according to the rates and methodology presented in section 74-255. 
(b)  Billing. Sewer service charges shall be billed to each user on a monthly basis. Such charges shall be payable to the village not later than 20 days after the date of the bill, unless the Waunakee Utilities Commission has extended the time for payment. 
(c)  Penalty for delinquent payments. A late payment charge of one percent shall be applied to the total unpaid balance for sewer bills, including unpaid late payment charges, not paid within 20 days from the date of issuance. This charge is applicable to all customers. 
(d)  Remedies for failure to make payments. If any person fails to make the payments as provided in this section, the village shall have the following remedies: 
(1)  Suit. Sewer service charges, connection fees or other charges due from any person or user shall be deemed to be a debt due to the village from that person or user. If sewer service charges, connection fees, or other charges are not paid when due, the Waunakee Utilities Commission may, on behalf of the village, commence an action in a court of competent jurisdiction and recover from such persons or user the amount of the charges or fees and damages, if any, sustained by the village as a result of such failure to pay, together with attorney's fees incurred in collecting such sums, court costs, and such other costs and expenses as may be allowed by law. 
(2)  Lien on property. As an alternative to subsection (d)(1) of this section, the village board may direct that unpaid sewer service charges, connection fees, or other charges due from any person or user shall be collected and taxed and shall be a lien upon the property served in the manner provided for in Wis. Stats. § 66.0809. 
(e)  Obligation for payment. The obligation for payment of sewer service charges, connection fees or other charges due the village shall be a joint and several obligation of the user and property owner, when the user and property owner are not the same person. To the end that there may be attempts at avoidance of payment of such charges and fees by a user who is not a property owner, and to overcome this, the Waunakee Utilities Commission may send the bill for such a user in care of the property owner. 
(f)  Remedies cumulative. All remedies provided for in this article are distinct and cumulative to any other right or remedy under this article or any other section of this Code or afforded by law or equity and may be exercised by the Waunakee Utilities Commission or the village concurrently, independently or successively. 
(g)  Disposition of revenue. The amounts received from the collection of sewer service charges authorized by this article shall be credited to the sanitary sewerage account, which shall show all receipts and expenditures of the sewerage system. Charges collected for replacement expenses shall be credited to a segregated, nonlapsing replacement account. These funds are to be used exclusively for replacement. When appropriated by the village board, the credits to the sanitary sewerage account shall be available for the payment of the requirements for operation, maintenance, repairs, and depreciation of the sewerage system consistent with 40 CFR 35.929. Any surplus outside of the purview of 40 CFR 35.929, in such account, shall be available for the payment of principal and interest of obligations issued and outstanding or which may be issued, to provide funds for the sewerage system or part thereof and all or a part of the expenses for additions and improvements and other necessary disbursements or indebtedness, and the village board may resolve to pledge such surplus or any part thereof for any such purpose. All present outstanding sewer system obligations, including refunding obligations, shall be paid from this fund as to both principal and interest, unless otherwise required by law. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-10; Code 1998, § 98-279; Ord. No. 01-15, § 3, 11-5-2001) 
Sec. 74-257. - Audit. 
    Unless otherwise required by applicable statutes, the Waunakee Utilities Commission shall conduct an annual compilation or an independent annual audit, the purpose of which shall be to maintain the proportionality between users and user classes of the sewer user charge system and to ensure that adequate revenues are available relative to increasing operation, maintenance and replacement costs and debt retirement. A summary of the findings and recommendations of the audit shall be published from time to time, as determined by the Waunakee Utilities Commission. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-11; Code 1998, § 98-280) 
Sec. 74-258. - Connection fees. 
(a)  Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District connection charges. For each connection of a building sewer to a public sewer within the village, there shall be paid to the village a connection charge as determined pursuant to the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District ordinance, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Village connection charges. For each connection of a building sewer to a public sewer within the village, there shall be paid to the village a connection charge. Such connection charge shall be assessed to the person seeking the connection and shall be paid as a condition precedent to the actual connection. The connection charge of the village shall be in such amounts and shall be paid at such time as the village board may from time to time determine. 
(c)  Connection fees. For purposes of this article, the connection charges described in subsections (a) and (b) of this section are collectively referred to as "connection fees." The failure to pay any connection fee is a violation of this article, and the Waunakee Utilities Commission and the village may pursue all rights and remedies provided for in this article. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-12; Code 1998, § 98-281) 
Secs. 74-259-74-279. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PRIVATE DISPOSAL FACILITIES 

Sec. 74-280. - Prohibited adjacent to public sewer main. 
    The maintenance and use of a septic tank or other private sewage disposal system by any owner of land located within the village, where such land is adjacent to a public sewer main, and who has failed to connect to the village's sewerage system is declared to be a public nuisance and a health hazard. Such nuisance and hazard may be abated by the village as deemed appropriate, in addition to punishment as provided in section 1-32. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-15(a); Code 1998, § 98-311) 
Sec. 74-281. - Temporary use. 
    In certain isolated locations within the boundaries of the village, it may be necessary for the owners of certain properties not served by the village's sanitary sewer system to continue the maintenance and use of a septic tank or other private sewage disposal system. Such maintenance and use shall be considered as a temporary wastewater disposal system and is subject to the review and approval of the Waunakee Utilities Commission. The review and approval will be on a case-by-case basis, with each case determined upon its particular facts and circumstances. 
(Code 1988, § 9-2-15(b); Code 1998, § 98-312) 
Chapter 78 - VEGETATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Length of lawn and grasses. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is adopted due to the unique nature of the problems associated with lawns, grasses and noxious weeds being allowed to grow to excessive length in the village. 
(b)  Public nuisance declared. The village board finds that lawns, grasses and noxious weeds on lots or parcels of land which exceed eight inches in length adversely affect the public health and safety of the public in that they tend to emit pollen and other discomforting bits of plants, constitute a fire hazard and a safety hazard in that debris can be hidden in the grass, interfere with the public convenience and adversely affect property values of other land within the village. For that reason, any lawn, grass or weed on a lot or other parcel of land that exceeds eight inches in length is declared to be a public nuisance, except for property located in a designated floodplain area or wetland area or where the lawn, grass or weed is part of a natural lawn. 
(c)  Nuisances prohibited. No person shall permit any public nuisance, as defined in subsection (b) of this section, to remain on any premises owned or controlled by such person within the village. 
(d)  Inspection. The weed commissioner shall inspect or cause to be inspected all premises and places within the village to determine whether any public nuisance, as defined in subsection (b) of this section, exists. 
(e)  Abatement of nuisance. If, during any April 1 through October 30 period, any owner, occupant or person in charge of any parcel or lot permits any lawn, grass or weed on the parcel or lot to exceed eight inches in length, the director of public works may provide written notice to the owner directing that the lawn, grass or weed be cut so as to conform with this section and with section 78-57 no later than five days following the issuance of the notice. The notice may be hand-delivered or mailed to the last-known address of the owner of the property. The notice shall state that the village may, during the remainder of the April 1 through October 30 period, and without further notice, cut any lawn, grass or weed on the lot or parcel that exceeds eight inches in length, that the cost of such work shall be charged to the parcel or lot owner, and that the cost of such work may become a charge against the parcel or lot. If the owner fails to cut the lawn, grass or weed within the time required by the notice, then the director of public works may cause the lawn, grass or weed to be cut. If a property owner has received at least one written notice pursuant to this section during an April 1 through October 30 period, and has permitted a lawn, grass or weed on a parcel or lot to exceed eight inches in height, then the director of public works may cause the lawn, grass or weed to be cut without further notice. The cost of cutting the lawn, grass or weed shall be charged to the owner, and may be assessed against the lot or parcel pursuant to law. 
(Code 1988, § 8-1-7; Code 1998, § 102-1; Ord. No. 00-14, §§ 4, 5, 12-18-2000) 
Secs. 78-2-78-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET TREES AND SHRUBS 

Sec. 78-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Boulevard or terrace areas means the land between the normal location of the street curbing and sidewalk. Where there is no sidewalk, the area four feet from the curbline shall be deemed to be a boulevard for the purpose of this article. The term "boulevard" shall have the same meaning as "terrace" as defined in section 70-118. Where there are only sidewalks, the area four feet from the curb shall be deemed boulevard areas under this article. 
    DBH means diameter at breast height; diameter of a tree measured at 4.5 feet (1.3 meters) above ground. 
    Dripline means the imaginary boundary on the soil surface defined by the branch spread of a single plant or group of plants. 
    Evergreen tree means any woody plant normally having one stem or trunk and bearing foliage in the form of needles and crowns which extend from ground level throughout its entire height. 
    Forester means the person designated by the village board authorized to carry out provisions of this article. 
    Major alteration means trimming a tree beyond necessary trimming to comply with this article. 
    Public areas means all public parks and other lands owned, controlled or leased by the village except the terrace areas. 
    Public nuisance means any tree or shrub or part thereof which, because of its condition, interferes with the use of any public area; is infected with a plant disease; is infested with injurious insects or pests; is injurious to public improvements; or endangers the life, health, safety or welfare of persons or property. 
    Public trees and shrubs means all trees and shrubs located or to be planted in or upon public areas. 
    Shrub means any woody vegetation or a woody plant having multiple stems and bearing foliage from the ground up. 
    Tree means any woody plant, normally having one stem or trunk bearing its foliage or crown well above ground level to heights of 16 feet or more. 
(Code 1988, § 6-4-2; Code 1998, § 102-27; Ord. No. 10-1, § 1, 2-15-2010) 
Sec. 78-22. - Statement of policy and applicability. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. It is the policy of the village to regulate and establish policy for the control of planting, removal, maintenance and protection of trees and shrubs in or upon all public areas and terrace areas of the village to eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions which may result in injury to persons using the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public areas; to promote and enhance the beauty and general welfare of the village; to prohibit the undesirable and unsafe planting, removal, treatment and maintenance of trees and shrubs located in public areas; and to guard all trees and shrubs both public and private within the village against the spread of disease, insects or pests. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall apply to trees and shrubs growing or planted in or upon public areas and terrace areas and also to all trees and shrubs growing or to be planted in or upon any private premises which shall threaten the life, health, safety or welfare of the public or of any public areas. 
(Code 1988, § 6-4-1; Code 1998, § 102-26) 
Sec. 78-23. - Designation and authority of village forester. 
(a)  The village board may designate a municipal employee or citizen to perform the duties of forester under Wis. Stats. ch. 27 and may authorize such forester to perform the duties and exercise the powers imposed on the village board by this article. The village forester shall annually be appointed by the village president, subject to board confirmation, at the board's organizational meetings. 
(b)  The village forester or an authorized representative may enter upon private premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of examining any tree or shrub located upon or over such premises and carrying out any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 6-4-3; Code 1998, § 102-28) 
Sec. 78-24. - Interference with village forester. 
    No person shall interfere with the village forester while the village forester is engaged in carrying out any work or activities authorized by this article. 
(Code 1988, § 6-4-4; Code 1998, § 102-29) 
Sec. 78-25. - Abatement of tree disease nuisances. 
(a)  Dutch elm and other tree diseases declared public nuisance. Whereas the village board has determined that there are many trees growing on public and private premises within the village, the loss of which would substantially depreciate the value of public and private property, impair the use and enjoyment of public and private premises and erode the tax base of the village, and that the health and life of such trees is threatened by fatal diseases such as Dutch elm disease, which is spread by the elm bark beetles, Scolytus multistriatus (Eichb.) or Hylurgopinus rufipes (Marsh.), the village board declares its intention to control and prevent the spread of such disease and the insect pests and vectors which carry such diseases and specifically declares Dutch elm disease and the elm bark beetles which carry such disease to be public nuisances. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public nuisance means: 
(1)  Fatal or deleterious tree diseases; 
(2)  Elm bark beetles, Scolytus multistriatus (Eichb.) or Hylurgopinus rufipes (Marsh.); Dutch elm disease; 
(3)  Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected with the Dutch elm disease fungus or in a weakened condition which harbors any of the elm bark beetles, Scolytus multistriatus (Eichb.) or Hylurgopinus rufipes (Marsh.); 
(4)  Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle destroying concentrate; 
(5)  Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected with the oak wilt disease fungus; 
(6)  Any dead oak tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other oak material from which the bark has not been removed; 
(7)  Any living or standing tree or part thereof infested with destructive insects including, but not limited to the Emerald Ash Borer (agrilus planipennis) or the Asian long-horned beetle (Anopliphora glabripennis); 
(8)  Any other deleterious or fatal tree disease; 
(9)  Any tree or part thereof which, because of its condition and location, is hazardous or dangerous to persons using, and persons and property upon, any public street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public or private place, including the terrace strip between curb and lot line; 
(10)  Any tree or part thereof which is infested by the eastern tent caterpillar or other defoliating larvae. 
    Public property means property owned or controlled by the village, including without limitation because of enumeration public sites, parks, playgrounds, streets, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards, and the terrace strip between the lot line and the curb or improved portion of any public way. 
(c)  Inspection. 
(1)  The village forester shall inspect or cause to be inspected all premises and places within the village to determine whether any public nuisance exists thereon. The village forester shall also inspect or cause the inspection of any elm tree reported or suspected to be infested with the Dutch elm disease or any elm bark bearing materials reported or suspected to be infested with elm bark beetles; 
(2)  Whenever necessary to determine the existence of Dutch elm disease or elm bark beetles in any tree, the person inspecting such tree shall remove or cut specimens from the tree in such manner as to avoid fatal injury thereto and deliver such specimens to the forester who shall forward them to the state department of agriculture at Madison for analysis to determine the presence of such nuisances; 
(3)  The forester shall have authority to enter upon private premises at reasonable times for the purpose of carrying out this section. 
(d)  Abatement of nuisances; duty of forester. 
(1)  The forester shall order, direct, supervise and control the abatement of public nuisances by spraying, removal, burning or other means which the forester determines to be necessary to prevent as fully as possible the spread of Dutch elm disease fungus, other deleterious tree diseases or the insect pests or vectors known to carry such diseases; 
(2)  Whenever the forester after inspection or examination shall determine that a public nuisance exists on public property in the village, the forester shall immediately abate or cause the abatement of such nuisance in such manner as to destroy or prevent as fully as possible the spread of Dutch elm disease, other deleterious tree diseases, or the insect pests or vectors known to carry such disease fungus. 
(3)  Hearings. 
a.  When the forester shall determine with reasonable certainty that a public nuisance exists upon private premises, the forester shall immediately serve or cause to be served personally or by registered mail upon the owner of such property, if such owner can be found, or upon the occupant thereof, a written notice of the existence of such nuisance and of a time and place for a hearing, not less than 14 days after service of such notice, on the abatement action to be taken. Such notice shall describe the nuisance and shall recommend procedures for its abatement, and shall further state that, unless the owner shall abate the nuisance in the manner specified in the notice or shall appear at the hearing to show that such nuisance does not exist or does not endanger the health of trees in the village, the forester shall cause the abatement thereof at the expense of the property served. If the owner cannot be found, such notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the village; 
b.  If, after the hearing held pursuant to subsection (d)(3)(a) of this section, it shall be determined by the village board that a public nuisance exists, it shall forthwith order the immediate abatement thereof. Unless the property owner abates the nuisance as directed within five days after such hearing, the forester shall proceed to abate the nuisance and cause the cost thereof to be assessed against the property in accordance with the procedures provided in this section. The forester may extend the time allowed the property owner for abatement work, but not to exceed ten additional days. 
(e)  Spraying. 
(1)  Whenever the forester shall determine that any tree or part thereof is infected with a deleterious or fatal tree disease or is in a weakened condition or harbors elm bark beetles, the forester may cause all trees within a 1,000-foot radius thereto to be sprayed with an effective disease destroying concentrate or other insecticide; 
(2)  In order to facilitate the work and minimize the inconvenience to the public of any spraying operations conducted under this section, the forester shall cause to be given advance public notice of such operations by newspaper, radio, television, public service announcements or other effective means and shall also cause the posting of appropriate warning notices in the areas and along the streets where trees are to be sprayed at least 24 hours in advance of spraying. When any residue or concentrate from village spraying operations can be expected to be deposited on any public street, the forester shall also notify the police chief, who shall take all necessary steps to make and enforce temporary parking and traffic regulations on such streets as conditions require. Temporary no parking notices shall be posted in each block of any affected street at least 24 hours in advance of spraying operations; 
(3)  When appropriate warning notices and temporary no parking notices have been given and posted in accordance with subsection (e)(2) of this section, the village shall not be liable for any claim for damages to any vehicle caused by such spraying operations; 
(4)  When trees on private property are to be sprayed, the forester shall notify the owner of such property and proceed in accordance with the requirements of subsection (d)(3) of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 6-4-5; Code 1998, § 102-30; Ord. No. 10-1, § 2, 2-15-2010) 
Sec. 78-26. - Assessment of costs of abatement. 
(a)  The entire cost of abating any public nuisance or spraying trees as provided in this article shall be charged to and assessed against the parcel or lot abutting on the street, alley, terrace, boulevard or parkway upon or in which such tree is located or the parcel or lot upon which such tree stands. The cost of abating any such nuisance or part thereof which is located in or upon any park shall be borne by the village. 
(b)  The cost of abating a public nuisance or spraying elm trees or elm wood located on private premises when done at the direction and under the supervision of the forester shall be assessed to the property on which such nuisance, tree or wood is located as follows: 
(1)  The forester shall keep a strict account of the cost of such work or spraying and the amount chargeable to each lot or parcel and shall report such work, charges, description of lands to which charged and names and addresses of the owners of such lands to the village board on or before October 15 of each year; 
(2)  Upon receiving the forester's report, the board shall hold a public hearing on such proposed charges, giving at least 14 days' advance notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing to interested persons by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the village and by mail to the owner of each property proposed to be charged. Each property owner shall be notified of the amount proposed to be assessed against the property owner's premises and the work for which such charge is being made; 
(3)  After such hearing, the village board shall affirm, modify and affirm or disapprove such assessments by resolution and shall cause a copy thereof to be published. Upon adoption and publication of such resolution, assessments made thereby shall be deemed final; 
(4)  The village administrator shall mail notice of the amount of such final assessment to each owner of property assessed at the owner's last known address, stating that, unless paid within 30 days of the date of the notice, such assessment will be entered on the tax roll as a tax against the property, and all proceedings in relation to the collection, return and sale of property for delinquent real estate taxes shall apply to such assessment; 
(5)  The village declares that, in making assessments under this section, it is acting under its police power, and no damages shall be awarded to any owner for the destruction of any diseased or infested tree or wood or part thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 6-4-6; Code 1998, § 102-31) 
Sec. 78-27. - Permit for planting, maintenance and removal. 
(a)  Required. No person, except upon order of the village forester, shall plant or remove or perform major alterations as determined by the forester on a tree or shrub in the public right-of-way terrace area or cause such act to be done by others without first obtaining a written permit for such work from the village forester as provided in this section. The applicant shall comply with the planting standards of section 74-28. 
(b)  Exemptions. No permit shall be required to cultivate, fertilize or water trees or shrubs or for work by village personnel on park properties. No permit is necessary to plant trees inside the property line. 
(c)  Conditions. The forester shall issue a permit to the applicant, if the village forester determines that the proposed work or planting described in an application for a permit is necessary and in accord with the purposes of this article, taking into account the safety, health and welfare of the public; location of utilities, public sidewalk, driveways and streetlights; general character of the area in which the tree or shrub is located or proposed to be located; type of soil; and characteristics and physiological need of the genus, species and variety of tree or shrub. Trees may be planted in the terrace area, but any damage to streets and sidewalks caused by such trees shall be at the cost of the adjacent property owner. 
(d)  Form; expiration; inspection. Every permit shall be issued by the village forester on a standard form and shall include a description of the work to be done and shall specify the genus, species and variety, size, nursery grade and location of trees or shrubs to be planted. Any work under such permit must be performed in strict accordance with the terms thereof and with this article. Permits issued under this section shall expire six months after the date of issuance. There will be no charge for this permit. 
(e)  Issuance to public utilities. 
(1)  Whenever a permit is issued under this section to a public utility to remove, trim, prune, cut, disturb, alter or perform surgery on any public tree or shrub, the village forester shall limit the work to be done to the actual necessities of the utility and may assign an inspector to supervise the work done under the provisions of the permit. The expense of such inspection or supervision shall be charged to the utility at the usual village rate. 
(2)  A public utility may secure an annual working agreement with the village forester's office which gives the village forester the authorization to supervise and direct work associated with trees and shrubs. 
(Code 1988, § 6-4-7; Code 1998, § 102-32) 
Sec. 78-28. - Planting procedures. 
(a)  Purpose. The village board hereby states its determination that the planting, care and protection of the trees within the village is desirable for the purposes of beauty, shade, comfort, noise abatement and economic betterment, and encourages all persons to assist in a program of tree planting, care and protection. 
(b)  Tree planting program. The village board shall designate the types of trees to be planted. On newly opened streets, the village board may designate the size, type of trees, shrubs or bushes and the manner in which they shall be planted. The village board shall also prepare a list of trees forbidden to be planted pursuant to this section. These lists shall become part of this section upon adoption of a resolution by the board approving these lists. The village board shall also encourage the planting, care and protection of trees and shrubs on private premises within the village. 
(c)  Planting. 
(1)  The size and genus, species and variety of trees and shrubs to be planted in public areas and boulevards and the manner of planting shall be submitted to the village forester for approval before commencement of such work. 
(2)  All new street trees must be selected from a list of approved trees compiled by the village forester. No other species may be planted without the written approval of the village forester. New trees must be single stemmed with a minimum diameter of 11/4 inches measured at six inches above ground level. 
a.  The tree shall be planted in a well-prepared hole at the same depth as it was originally growing. All trees less than 12 feet high shall be staked. All trees 12 feet or more in height shall be supported by guy wires in such a way as not to injure the bark. The support shall be removed after a year. 
b.  The tree shall be kept well-watered and mulched or cultivated in a two-foot diameter around its base to conserve moisture and as a protection from lawn mower damage. 
c.  The good health of all trees planted under this section shall be guaranteed for one year by the applicant, after which time such trees shall become the property of the village. 
(3)  Curbs and sidewalks must be installed prior to street tree planting. The distance between the face of the curb and the outer edge of the sidewalk must be at least five feet. Trees must be planted halfway between the sidewalk and curb unless underground utilities prevent such planting. No tree shall be planted closer than two feet from the curb. 
(4)  Trees may not be planted closer than: 
a.  Twenty feet to a utility or street lighting pole. 
b.  Fifteen feet to a driveway or alley. 
c.  Six feet to a fire hydrant, water stop box or gas shutoff. If possible, allow more distance than six feet. 
d.  Twenty-five feet to the intersection of two streets from either corner, measured on the property line. 
e.  Twenty-five feet to another tree. If the other tree is an elm or other species which is damaged, injured or diseased and likely to be removed in the future, a 35-foot distance to the next nearest healthy tree will prevail. 
(5)  New street trees shall not be planted over an existing tree stump within two years of removal unless the stump is removed to a depth of four feet. 
(6)  The property owner has the responsibility to locate underground utilities before digging. 
(7)  Only village-approved, low growing trees may be planted where there are overhead utility wires. 
(8)  Evergreen trees shall not be planted in a terrace area. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful to plant or maintain shrubbery, ground cover or other plants not considered to be deciduous leaf trees within terrace areas whose growth is in excess of eight inches in height above the top of the nearest curb. 
(d)  Unlawfully planted trees. Trees, plants or shrubs planted within any terrace or planting easement without the authorization and approval of the forester may be removed. The forester shall notify the abutting owner in writing, listing the unlawfully planted trees, plants or shrubs; ordering their removal; and establishing a reasonable time within which such removal shall be accomplished. If removal is not accomplished within the time specified, the village may remove such trees, plants or shrubs and assess the costs thereof to the owner. 
(e)  Frames. Any person, adjacent to whose land any shade or ornamental tree or shrub is growing in any street, may, for the purpose of protecting such tree or shrub, surround the tree or shrub with a suitable box or frame for protection, but all such work shall be performed under the supervision and direction of the village forester. 
(f)  Approved street trees. The village forester shall prepare and maintain lists of tree species desirable for planting as well as trees that are prohibited. 
(g)  Prohibited street trees. The following trees are forbidden for planting within village terraces: 
(1)  Box elder; 
(2)  Cottonwood; 
(3)  Poplar; 
(4)  Silver maple; 
(5)  Willows; and 
(6)  Birch. 
(Code 1998, § 102-33; Ord. No. 10-1, § 3, 2-15-2010) 
Sec. 78-29. - Trimming. 
(a)  Trees and shrubs standing in or upon any boulevard, public area or upon any private premises adjacent to any public right-of-way or public areas shall be kept trimmed by the village so that the lowest branches projecting over the public street or alley provide a clearance of not less than 14 feet. The village forester may waive this section for newly planted trees if the village forester determines that they do not interfere with public travel, obstruct the light of any streetlight or endanger public safety. 
(b)  The necessity of the pruning may be determined by the village forester. 
(c)  Clearance from sidewalk to lower branches shall not be less than ten feet. All trees standing upon private property in the village, the branches of which extend over the line of the street, shall be trimmed so that no branch shall grow or hang over the line of the sidewalk lower than ten feet above the level of the sidewalk. No tree shall be permitted to grow in such a manner as to obstruct the proper diffusion of light from any public lamp. 
(d)  Trimming or pruning of more than 25 percent of the crown shall be considered to be a major alteration and shall require a permit from the village forester. 
(e)  No person, firm or corporation shall remove, trim or prune any oak or elm tree, or portion thereof, from April 1 to October 1 without first securing the written permission of the village forester. 
(Code 1988, § 6-4-9; Code 1998, § 102-34; Ord. No. 10-1, §§ 4, 5, 2-15-2010) 
Sec. 78-30. - Obstructing view at intersection or view of traffic signs. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other section of this article, no person shall maintain, plant or permit to remain on any private or public premises situated at the intersection of two or more streets or alleys in the village any hedge, tree, shrub or other growth which may obstruct the view of the operator of any motor vehicle or pedestrian approaching such intersection. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to plant, cause to grow, allow to grow or maintain any tree, bush, shrubbery or vegetation of any kind which is an obstruction to the clear and complete vision of any traffic sign or driveway approach to a street in the village. It shall be the duty of every owner of such tree, bush, shrubbery or vegetation to remove such obstruction. 
(c)  Any shrub, tree or other plant which obstructs the view at an intersection or the view of a traffic sign shall be deemed to be dangerous to public travel, and the village forester may order, by written notice, the owner or occupant of any private place or premises on which there stands a tree or shrub which unreasonably interferes with or encroaches upon the street or sidewalk to take such steps as are necessary to remove such interference. If such owner or occupant fails, within ten days of receipt of notice, to take such necessary steps, the village forester or public works department employees shall order the village employees to remove the interference. The cost of removing the interference shall be levied and collected as a special tax upon the property upon which or in front of which such tree or shrub stands. 
(d)  Any person who is an owner or occupant or firm or corporation failing to obey the written notice of the village forester as specified in subsection (c) of this section shall, upon conviction be subject to a forfeiture as established in section 1-32. 
(Code 1988, § 6-4-10; Code 1998, § 102-35) 
Sec. 78-31. - Removal of trees and stumps. 
(a)  Dangerous, obstructive and infected trees. Any tree or part thereof, whether alive or dead, which the village forester shall find to be infected, hazardous or a nuisance so as to endanger the public or other trees, plants or shrubs growing within the village or to be injurious to sewers, sidewalks or other public improvements, whether growing upon public or private premises, shall be removed, trimmed or treated by the owner of the property upon or adjacent to which such tree or part thereof is located. The village forester shall give written notice to the owner to remedy the situation, which shall be served personally or posted upon the affected tree. Such notice shall specifically state the period of time within which the action must be taken, which shall be within not less than 24 hours or more than 14 days, as determined by the village forester on the basis of the seriousness of the condition of the tree or danger to the public. If the owner shall fail to remove, treat or trim the tree within the time limited, the village forester shall cause the tree to be removed, treated or trimmed and shall report the full cost thereof to the village administrator, who shall thereupon enter such cost as a special charge against the property. 
(b)  Removal standards. In cutting down trees located in public and terrace areas, the tree must be removed with the root stump grubbed out or ground out to a depth of at least nine inches below grade measured in a straight line with the normal grade of the sidewalk to the top of nine inches below grade measured as a straight line, with normal grade of sidewalk to top of curb. All wood and debris must be removed from the street prior to the end of each working day, and all holes shall be filled to normal grade level with topsoil as soon as practicable. 
(c)  Private removal. No person shall plant, injure, trim, remove or destroy any tree or shrub located in or upon any public place, until a permit shall have been issued by the village forester. Such permit shall be issued only when the removal, trimming or cutting of the tree or shrub is necessary, as determined by the village forester, because of disease, damage, hazardous condition, or location or its location is such that substantial detriment is done to the property upon which the tree or shrub stands or the property abutting the tree or shrub. Such permit shall expressly state the premises upon which the tree stands and the location of the tree thereon. The village forester may require submission of evidence of adequate liability insurance coverage. 
(Code 1988, § 6-4-11; Code 1998, § 102-36) 
Sec. 78-32. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  Damage to public trees. No person shall, without the consent of the owner of a private tree or shrub or without a written permit from the village forester for a terrace-area tree, public tree or shrub, perform or cause to be performed by others any of the following acts: 
(1)  Secure, fasten or run any rope, wire, sign, unprotected electrical installation or other device or material to, around or through a tree or shrub. 
(2)  Break, injure, mutilate, deface, kill or destroy any tree or shrub or permit any fire to burn where it will injure any tree or shrub. 
(3)  Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, oil or other injurious substance to seep, drain or be emptied upon or about any tree or shrub or place cement or other solid substance around the base of the tree or shrub. 
(4)  Remove any guard, stake or other device or material intended for the protection of a public tree or shrub. 
(5)  Close or obstruct any open space about the base of a public tree or shrub designed to permit access of air, water and fertilizer. 
(6)  Attach any sign, poster, notice or other object on any tree or fasten any guy wire, cable, rope, nail, screw or other device to any tree, except that the village may tie temporary no parking signs to trees when necessary in conjunction with street improvement work, tree maintenance work or parades. 
(7)  Cause or encourage any fire or burning near or around any tree. 
(b)  Excavations. Where the excavation or construction of a building, structure, street or utility project occurs within the dripline of a tree located on any parkway or other publicly owned property, the tree shall be sufficiently guarded and protected by those responsible for such work as to prevent any injury to the tree. The following rules shall apply to such excavation or construction: 
(1)  Protection barrier. A protection barrier (tree protection zone) shall be installed around the tree or trees to be preserved. The barrier shall be constructed of durable fencing material, such as plastic construction fencing, snow fence, or chain link fencing. The barrier shall be placed as far from the base of the tree as possible, preferably at the dripline, and, at a minimum, placement of barrier shall comply with the chart below. The fencing shall be maintained in good repair throughout the duration of the excavation or construction project, and shall not be removed, relocated, or encroached upon without permission of the village forester. 
Guidelines for Tree Protection Zones Species Tolerance 
to Impacts Tree Age Distance From Trunk* 
(feet per inch of trunk diameter) Tolerant Young < 1/4 life expectancy 0.5 feet Middle aged 1/4 - 3/4 life expectancy 0.75 feet Mature > 3/4 life expectancy 1.0 feet Intermediate Young 0.75 feet Middle aged 1.0 feet Mature 1.25 feet Sensitive Young 1.0 feet Middle aged 1.25 feet Mature 1.5 feet  
*These distances are based on a tree's tolerance to root pruning and soil disturbance and may not be adequate to protect branches of young trees or other trees with low branches. Because severe pruning would destroy the form of such trees, fencing at the dripline shall be installed around young trees or other trees with low branches. 
(2)  Boring and trenching. To preserve viable root systems and maintain structural stability, boring or tunneling beneath root systems of public trees is required. Open-cut excavating is allowed only up to the distance from various sized trees listed below. The boring or tunneling from trench to trench shall be below the minimum depth indicated for tree size. The surface area and subsoil directly adjacent to public trees shall not be disturbed as follows: 
Tree Size 
(diameter in inches) Min. Undisturbed Radius 
(measured from face of trunk) Min. Depth of Tunnel/Bore less than 3" 3 feet 3 feet 3" through 8" 6 feet 3 feet 8+" through 14" 8 feet 4 feet Larger than 14" 10 feet 4 feet  
(3)  Grade changes. Any grade changes proposed within the tree protection zone shall be approved by the village forester prior to any work taking place. Precautions shall be taken to mitigate potential injuries. 
(4)  Exceptions. Upon written request, the village forester, in his discretion, may allow the requesting party to deviate from the regulations set forth in subsection 78-32(b) of this section when compliance with such regulations is impractical. Projects performed by the village are exempt from subsection 78-32(b) of this section. 
(c)  Interference with forester. No person shall: 
(1)  Interfere with or prevent any acts of the forester while the forester is engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this section. 
(2)  Refuse to permit the forester to enter upon such person's premises at reasonable times to exercise the duties imposed by this section. 
(d)  Refusal to abate nuisance. No person shall permit any public nuisance to remain on any premises owned or controlled by such person's when ordered by the forester to abate such nuisance. 
(Code 1988, § 6-4-12; Code 1998, § 102-37; Ord. No. 10-1, § 6, 2-15-2010) 
Sec. 78-33. - Appeal from determinations or orders. 
    Any person who receives a determination or order under this article from the village forester and objects to all or any part thereof shall have the right to appeal such determination or order, subject to Wis. Stats. §§ 68.01-68.14, to the village board within seven days of receipt of the order. The village board shall hear such appeal within 30 days of receipt of written notice of the appeal. After such hearing the village board may reverse, affirm or modify the order or determination appealed from, and the grounds for its decision shall be stated in writing. The village board shall, by letter, notify the party appealing the order or determination of its decision within ten days after the hearing has been concluded. The board shall file its written decision with the village administrator. 
(Code 1988, § 6-4-13; Code 1998, § 102-38) 
Sec. 78-34. - Adoption of state statutes. 
    The provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 27.09 and 86.03 are adopted and incorporated in this article by reference. 
(Code 1988, § 6-4-14; Code 1998, § 102-39) 
Secs. 78-35-78-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WEEDS AND GRASSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Noxious weeds, Wis. Stats. § 66.0407. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-57. - Destruction of noxious weeds. 
(a)  The village administrator shall annually, on or before May 15, publish as required by state law a notice that every person is required by law to destroy all noxious weeds on lands in the village that such person owns, occupies or controls. A joint notice with other towns or municipalities may be utilized. 
(b)  If any owner, occupant, or person in charge of any parcel or lot fails to destroy noxious weeds as required under Wis. Stats. § 66.0407(3), the weed commissioner shall provide written notice to the owner, occupant, or person in charge, directing that person to destroy the noxious weeds no later than five days following the issuance of the notice. The notice shall be hand-delivered or mailed by regular mail to the last known address of the owner, occupant, or person in charge. The notice shall direct the owner, occupant or person in charge to destroy the noxious weeds, state that if the person does not destroy the noxious weeds the weed commissioner may destroy the noxious weeds, and state that the weed commissioner may, during the remainder of the growing season, and without further notice, cause additional growths of noxious weeds to be destroyed, and state that the cost of such work may be assessed as a tax against such parcel or lot pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0517(3). If the person receiving such notice fails to destroy the noxious weeds within the time required in the notice, the weed commissioner may cause the noxious weeds to be destroyed pursuant to Wis. Stats. 66.0517(3). If an owner, occupant, or person in charge of a lot or parcel receives one written notice pursuant to this section, the weed commissioner may cause additional growths of noxious weeds to be destroyed at any time during the remainder of the growing season without further notice. The cost of destroying noxious weeds may be charged against the lot or parcel pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0517(3)(b). Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-32. Each 24-hour period that a violation of this period occurs shall constitute a separate offense under this section for enforcement purposes. 
(c)  As provided for in Wis. Stats. § 66.0407, the village shall require that all noxious weeds shall be destroyed prior to the time in which such plants would mature to the bloom or flower state. The growth of noxious weeds in excess of eight inches in height from the ground surface shall be prohibited within the village corporate limits. Noxious weeds shall include any weed, grass or similar plant growth which, if allowed to pollinate, would cause or produce hay fever in human beings or would cause a skin rash through contact with the skin. Noxious weeds, as defined in this section and in section 78-1, shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Cirsium arvense (Canada thistle). 
(2)  Ambrosia artemisiifolia (common ragweed). 
(3)  Ambrosia trifida (great ragweed). 
(4)  Euphorbia esula (leafy spurge). 
(5)  Convolvulus arvensis (creeping jenny) (field bind weed). 
(6)  Tragopogon dubius (goat's beard). 
(7)  Rhus radicans (poison ivy). 
(8)  Cirsium vulgaries (bull thistle). 
(9)  Pastinaca sativa (wild parsnip). 
(10)  Arctium minus (burdock). 
(11)  Xanthium strumarium (cocklebur). 
(12)  Amaranthus retroflexus (pigweed). 
(13)  Chenopodium album (common lambsquarter). 
(14)  Rumex crispus (curled dock). 
(15)  Cannabis sativa (hemp). 
(16)  Plantago lancellata (English plantain). 
(d)  Noxious grasses, as defined in this section and in section 78-1, shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Agrostia alba (redtop). 
(2)  Dactylis glomerata (orchard). 
(3)  Phleum pratensis (timothy). 
(4)  Poa pratensis (Kentucky blue). 
(5)  Sorghum halepense (Johnson). 
(6)  Setaria (foxtail). 
(e)  Noxious weeds are also the following plants and other rank growth: 
(1)  Ragweed. 
(2)  Thistles. 
(3)  Smartweed. 
(4)  Dandelions over eight inches in height. 
(5)  Milkweed over eight inches in height. 
(Code 1988, § 8-1-5; Code 1998, § 102-66; Ord. No. 00-14, § 6, 12-18-2000) 
State Law reference- Noxious weeds, Wis. Stats. § 66.0407. 
Secs. 78-58-78-87. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEED COMMISSIONER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Weed commissioner, Wis. Stats. § 66.0517. 

Sec. 78-88. - Appointment and term of office. 
    The village president may appoint one or more commissioners of noxious weeds on or before May 15 in each year. A weed commissioner shall take the official oath and the oath shall be filed in the office of the village clerk. A weed commissioner shall hold office for one year and until a successor has qualified or the village president determines not to appoint a weed commissioner. If more than one commissioner is appointed, the village shall be divided into districts by the village president and each commissioner shall be assigned to a different district. The village president may appoint a resident of any district to serve as weed commissioner in any other district of the village. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-7; Code 1998, §§ 102-9, 102-98) 
Sec. 78-89. - Oath. 
    The weed commissioner shall take the official oath, which oath shall be filed in the office of the village clerk. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-7; Code 1998, § 102-98) 
Sec. 78-90. - Duties. 
    The weed commissioner shall hold office pursuant to and shall fulfill the duties set out in state law. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-7; Code 1998, § 102-99) 
PART II - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCES 
Chapter 101 - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 101-1. - Applicability of chapter 1. 
    The provisions of chapter 1 of this Code apply to this part. 
Sec. 101-2. - Joint planning committee. 
(a)  Establishment. A joint planning committee (JPC) shall be appointed in accordance with the Boundary Stipulation and Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement between the Village of Waunakee and the Town of Westport dated September 19, 1996, and as that agreement may hereafter be amended. A copy of the agreement and all amendments thereto shall be available for inspection at the village hall. 
(b)  Composition. The joint planning committee shall consist of six members, three of whom shall be appointed by the Village of Waunakee and three of whom shall be appointed by the Town of Westport. The three members appointed by the village shall be citizen members of the village plan commission, and shall be appointed by the village president, subject to the approval of the village board. The initial village members shall be appointed for staggered terms of one, two and three years, with staggered three-year terms thereafter. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The joint planning committee shall have the power and duty to take all actions required of it pursuant to the Boundary Stipulation and Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement between the Village of Waunakee and the Town of Westport dated September 19, 1996, and as that agreement may hereafter be amended, and as required by law for an extraterritorial zoning joint committee. The joint planning committee may be delegated powers or duties of the town and the village so long as such delegations do not violate any law, rule or regulation and are necessary to effectuate the purposes of the above-mentioned agreement. 
(d)  Meetings and rules. Public notice of all regular and special meetings of the joint planning committee shall be given to the public and news media as required by the law. The rules of procedure of the joint planning committee shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised (1984), as modified for small bodies. 
(1)  Meetings to be open. 
a.  During the holding of any open session, such room and such meeting shall at all times be open and remain open to all citizens. Joint planning committee members may participate in a meeting by telephone conference (or by other similar electronic means such as Skype) so long as the public is provided an effective means to monitor the telephone conference (or other similar electronic means). This may be accomplished by broadcasting the telephone conference through speakers located at the meeting sites open to the public. 
b.  It is the Village Board's intent to permit a joint planning committee member to participate in a meeting by telephone conference (or by other similar electronic means such as Skype) in special and rare circumstances only. Joint planning committee members shall continue to attend all meetings in person, whenever feasible. 
(2)  Closed meetings. This Code does not prohibit the joint planning committee from having a closed meeting which is legally convened and legally held in a room in such building other than the official meeting room or in some other building in the village. 
(e)  Temporary alternate. Whenever a quorum is unavailable for a scheduled meeting because one of the village appointees is unable to attend, the village president may appoint a citizen member of the village plan commission who is not already a member of the joint planning committee to act as an alternate member of the joint planning committee at such meeting. An alternate member shall have the same duties and responsibilities as a regular member with regard to any meetings in which the alternate member is involved. 
(Code 1998, § 2-364; Ord. No. 98-2, § 2, 3-30-1998; Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 2-3-2014; Ord. No. 14-11, § 1, 10-6-2014) 
Secs. 101-3-101-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLAN COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Planning, Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35, 62.23. 

Sec. 101-23. - Composition. 
    The village plan commission shall consist of the village president, two trustees, and four citizens. The village president shall be the commission's presiding officer. The director of public works shall serve in an ex officio capacity. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-4(a); Code 1998, § 74-26; Ord. No. 95-3, 3-6-1995; Ord. No. 97-5, § 6, 5-5-1997; Ord. No. 00-4, § 1, 2-21-2000) 
Sec. 101-24. - Appointment. 
(a)  Trustee members. The trustee members of the plan commission shall be annually appointed by the village president, subject to a two-thirds vote at the organizational meeting of the village board. 
(b)  Citizen members. The regular citizen members of the commission shall be appointed at the organizational meeting of the village board as provided in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(1). The citizen members are appointed for terms as provided in such statute. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-4(b); Code 1998, § 74-27) 
Sec. 101-25. - Records. 
    The plan commission shall keep records as provided in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(1). 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-4(c); Code 1998, § 74-28) 
Sec. 101-26. - Duties. 
    The plan commission shall have the duties provided by law, including, but not limited to, Wis. Stats. § 62.23. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-4(d); Code 1998, § 74-29; Ord. No. 95-3, 3-6-1995; Ord. No. 97-5, § 6, 5-5-1997) 
Secs. 101-27-101-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Board of appeals, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e). 

Sec. 101-56. - Appointment; composition; terms; compensation; removal; chairperson. 
(a)  A zoning board of appeals shall be appointed and governed by the state zoning enabling law as contained in Wis. Stats. § 62.23, any zoning ordinances and this article. The laws of the state or village and local ordinances shall prevail in that order. 
(b)  The zoning board of appeals shall consist of such number of members as is provided in Wis. Stats. § 62.232(7)(e)2. Terms of office shall be as provided in such statute. 
(c)  The members shall serve with compensation as determined by the village board. 
(d)  The members shall be removable by the village board for cause upon written charges and upon public hearing. 
(e)  The village president shall designate one of the members as chairperson. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-3(a); Code 1998, § 74-56) 
Sec. 101-57. - Powers. 
(a)  The zoning board of appeals shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of any ordinance adopted under Wis. Stats. ch. 91, pertaining to farmland preservation. 
(b)  The grounds of every determination shall be stated and recorded. No order of the zoning board of appeals granting a variance shall be valid for a period longer than six months from the date of such order unless the land use permit is obtained within such period and the erection or alteration of a building is started or the use is commenced within such period. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-3(b); Code 1998, § 74-57) 
Sec. 101-58. - Meetings and rules. 
(a)  The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.232(7)(e)2 apply to meetings of the zoning board of appeals. 
(b)  No board member shall participate in the decision of or vote upon any case in which the member is financially interested, directly or indirectly, but the chairperson shall direct an alternate member to act instead. Disqualification of a member for interest shall not decrease the number of votes required for acting upon any matter, but such member may be counted in determining whether a quorum is present for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-3(c); Code 1998, § 74-58) 
Sec. 101-59. - Offices. 
    The village board shall provide suitable offices to the zoning board of appeals for holding hearings and the presentation of records, documents, and accounts. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-3(d); Code 1998, § 74-59) 
Chapter 105 - BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 105-1. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  Scope. Any building or structure erected, enlarged, altered or repaired or any use established in violation of articles III through VI of this chapter (the village building code, electrical code, plumbing code and heating, ventilating and air conditioning code, all included within the definition of "this article" for purposes of this section), shall be deemed an unlawful building, structure or use. 
(b)  Penalties. The building inspector shall promptly report all such violations to the village board and village attorney who shall bring an action to enjoin the erection, enlargement, alteration, repair or moving of such building or structure or the establishment of such use of buildings in violation of this article or to cause such building, structure or use to be removed and any person in violation may also be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-32. Any person who fails to obtain a building permit before starting construction shall be charged double the regular rate for this late filing violation. In any such action, the fact that a permit was issued shall not constitute a defense, nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of the building inspector or other village officials constitute a defense. Compliance with this article may also be enforced by injunction order at the suit of the owner of any real estate within the jurisdiction of this article. 
(c)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Notice to correct. If an inspection reveals a noncompliance with this article or the uniform dwelling code, the building inspector shall notify the applicant and the owner, in writing, of the violation to be corrected. All cited violations shall be corrected within 30 days after written notification unless an extension of time is granted. 
(2)  Stop work order. If, after written notification, the violation is not corrected within 30 days, a stop work order may be served on the owner or the owner's representative and a copy thereof shall be posted at the construction site. Such stop work order shall not be removed except by written notice of the building inspector after satisfactory evidence has been supplied that the cited violation has been corrected. 
(3)  Separate violations; other remedies. Each day each violation continues after the 30-day written notice period has run shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this article shall preclude the village from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this article or the uniform dwelling code. 
(4)  Double fees. If any construction or work governed by this article or the uniform dwelling code is commenced prior to the issuance of a permit, double fees shall be charged. 
(d)  Appeals. Any person feeling aggrieved by an order or a determination of the building inspector may appeal from such order or determination to the board of appeals. Those procedures customarily used to effectuate an appeal to the board of appeals shall apply. 
(e)  Village liability. Except as may otherwise be provided by state statute or this Code, no officer, agent or employee of the village charged with the enforcement of this article shall be held personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of their duties under this article. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the village as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of their duties under this article shall be defended by the legal representative of the village until the final determination of the proceedings therein. 
(Code 1988, § 15-1-18; Code 1998, § 18-107) 
Secs. 105-2-105-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 105-21. - Development review agreement. 
    The village board hereby authorizes the zoning administrator to execute administratively a development application agreement on behalf of the village, which agreement addresses generally the recovery of costs incurred by the village to review and act on development applications proposed in the village, including, but not limited to, the following activities: site plan, conditional use permit, rezone, variance, and other development activities. Any fees or costs identified in the agreement shall be in addition to, and are not intended to replace, other fees or costs identified in this Code, or in other resolutions adopted by the village board. The preparation and, if necessary, modification of a development application agreement shall be considered part of the administrative duties of the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 5-10, § 2-7, 5-18-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 15-10, adopted May 18, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as § 2-7 of ch. 18. Inasmuch as ch. 18 has been recodified at ch. 105, said provisions have been redesignated as § 105-21, at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 105-22-105-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INSPECTORS 

Sec. 105-44. - Positions created. 
(a)  There are created the positions of building inspector; electrical inspector; heating, ventilating and air conditioning (HVAC) inspector; and plumbing inspector. 
(b)  All positions provided for in this section may be filled by one person. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-13(a)(1); Code 1998, § 18-56) 
Sec. 105-45. - Qualifications. 
    Each inspector whose position is created in this division shall: 
(1)  Be of good moral character. 
(2)  Possess such executive ability as is requisite for the performance of such inspector's duties and shall have a thorough knowledge of the standard materials and methods used in the installation of equipment in such inspector's area of responsibility. 
(3)  Be well versed in approved methods of construction for safety to persons and property, the state statutes relating to work in such inspector's area of responsibility, and any orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof. 
(4)  Have sufficient experience in the installation of equipment to enable the understanding and usage of the appropriate codes adopted by the village. 
(5)  Obtain certification as follows: 
a.  Each inspector shall be certified by the state in such inspector's area of responsibility. 
b.  The building inspector shall be certified by the state department of industry, labor and human relations to administer and enforce all the provisions of the state uniform dwelling code. 
c.  The electrical inspector and the electrical inspector's assistant inspectors shall be certified by the state as electrical inspectors. 
d.  All required certification fees and certification training as authorized by the village board shall be paid for by the village and shall be included in each inspector's budget as a separate item. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-13(a)(2), (3); Code 1998, § 18-57) 
Sec. 105-46. - Appointment and general powers. 
(a)  The village president shall appoint for a period of two years a plumbing inspector, an electrical inspector, a heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector and a building inspector, subject to confirmation by a majority of the members of the village board. 
(b)  Each inspector shall enforce the sections of this Code and all other ordinances and laws and orders of the state which relate to building construction, plumbing, heating, ventilating and air conditioning and electrical installations, subject to the respective authority of each inspector as set forth in this division and other sections of this Code. 
(c)  For the purposes described in subsection (b) of this section each inspector may, at all reasonable times, enter buildings and premises. Inspectors may pass upon any questions arising under this Code relating to their areas of responsibility. No person shall interfere with an inspector while in the performance of such inspector's official duties. 
(d)  Any person feeling aggrieved by any order or ruling of an inspector may, within 30 days thereafter, appeal from such order or ruling to the board of appeals, as established in chapter 133, such an appeal to be in writing. 
(e)  Each inspector shall be subject to removal from office during the term of office for cause after a hearing by the village board. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-13(b); Code 1998, § 18-58) 
Sec. 105-47. - Employment of additional assistants. 
    Each inspector appointed pursuant to this division may employ, subject to approval of the village board, any assistant inspectors and clerical assistants necessary for the proper conduct of such office and the inspection of installations in the area of responsibility. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-13(d); Code 1998, § 18-59) 
Sec. 105-48. - Financial concern in electrical business by electrical inspector or assistants. 
    The electrical inspector and the assistant inspectors shall not engage in the sale, installation or maintenance of electrical equipment, either directly or indirectly, and they shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in such business in the village at any time while holding such office as provided in this division. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-13(e); Code 1998, § 18-60) 
Sec. 105-49. - Authority to enter premises. 
(a)  In the discharge of their respective duties, each inspector under this division or the inspector's authorized agent may enter any building, upon presentation of the proper credentials, during reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection and may require the production of any permit or license required under this chapter. No person shall interfere with the inspector or the inspector's authorized agent while in the performance of the inspector's duties, and any person so interfering shall be in violation of this section and subject to a penalty as provided by section 1-32. 
(b)  If consent to entry to personal or real properties which are not public buildings or to portions of public buildings which are not open to the public for inspection purposes has been denied, the inspector shall obtain a special inspection warrant under Wis. Stats. § 66.0119. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-13(f); Code 1998, § 18-61) 
Sec. 105-50. - Duties and authority. 
(a)  Building inspector. The building inspector shall have such duties as are prescribed in this section and article III of this chapter. 
(b)  Electrical inspector. In addition to such duties as are prescribed in article IV of this chapter, the electrical inspector may, during reasonable hours, enter any building or premises in the discharge of the electrical inspector's official duties or for the purpose of making any inspection, reinspection or test of the electrical equipment contained therein or its installation. When any electrical equipment is found by the electrical inspector to be dangerous to persons or property because it is defective or defectively installed, the person responsible for the electrical equipment shall be notified in writing and shall make any changes to place such equipment in a safe condition. If such work is not started as soon as possible and not completed within 15 days or any longer period that may be specified by the electrical inspector in such notice, the electrical inspector may disconnect or order the discontinuance of electrical service to such electrical equipment. In an emergency where necessary for safety to persons or property or where electrical equipment may interfere with the work of the fire department, the electrical inspector may disconnect or cause the immediate disconnection of any electrical equipment. 
(c)  Heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector. In addition to such duties as are prescribed in article V of this chapter, the heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector shall enforce all state and village provisions relating to the construction, installation, alteration and repair of all heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment and facilities within the village and shall make such inspections, perform such tests and issue such orders as may be necessary for such enforcement. 
(d)  Plumbing inspector. In addition to such duties as are prescribed in article VI of this chapter, the plumbing inspector shall enforce all state and village provisions relating to the construction, installation, alteration and repair of all plumbing within the village and shall make such inspections, perform such tests and issue such orders as may be necessary for such enforcement. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-13(g); Code 1998, § 18-62) 
Sec. 105-51. - Records. 
(a)  Inspectors appointed pursuant to this division shall keep a record of all applications for permits and shall regularly number each permit in the order of issuance. They shall keep a record showing the number, description and size of all buildings erected during their terms of office, indicating the kind of materials used, the cost of each project and the aggregate cost of all buildings and the various classes. They shall keep a record of all inspections made and a record of all fees collected by them showing the date of their receipt and transfer to the village administrator. 
(b)  The plumbing inspector shall make such reports to the state as are required under Wis. Stats. § 145.04(3). 
(c)  The plumbing inspector shall keep a record of all sewer and water connections and shall make maps showing the locations of the connections and the positions of all house drains, connections, junctions and other data necessary for the efficient operation of the plumbing inspector's office. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-13(h); Code 1998, § 18-63) 
Sec. 105-52. - Stop work orders and revocations. 
    Each inspector appointed pursuant to this division may order construction, installation, alteration or repair work stopped when such work is being done in violation of this Code. Work so stopped shall not be resumed without the written permission of the inspector. However, if the stop work order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written order within a reasonable period of time. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-13(i); Code 1998, § 18-64) 
Secs. 105-53-105-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING CODES 

Sec. 105-78. - Title; purpose; scope; exclusions. 
(a)  Title. This article shall be known as the building code of the village and may be referred to in this article as "this code" or "this article." 
(b)  Purpose. This article provides certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe and stable design, methods of construction and uses of materials in buildings and structures erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, converted to other uses or demolished and regulates the equipment, maintenance, use and occupancy of all such buildings and structures. The purpose of this article is to protect and foster the health, safety and well-being of persons occupying or using such buildings and the general public. 
(c)  Scope. New buildings erected in or any building moved within or into the village shall conform to all the requirements of this article, except as they are specifically exempted from part, or all, of this article. Any alteration, enlargement or demolition of an existing building and any installation therein of electrical, gas, heating, plumbing or ventilating equipment which affects the health or safety of the users thereof or any other persons is a new building to the extent of such change. Any existing building shall be considered a new building for the purposes of this article whenever it is used for dwelling, commercial or industrial purposes, unless it was being used for such purpose on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. This article supplements the state laws pertaining to construction and use and chapter 133 pertaining to zoning and amendments thereto on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives, and this article in no way supersedes or nullifies such state laws and chapter 133. 
(d)  Exclusions. This article does not pertain to and no permit is required for all construction relating to agricultural outbuildings, such as, but not limited to, barns, sheds and corn cribs, with the exception that outdoor privies are governed by this article. 
(Code 1988, § 15-1-1; Code 1998, § 18-91) 
Sec. 105-79. - State uniform dwelling code. 
(a)  Adopted. The administrative code provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to one- and two-family dwellings in Wis. Admin. Code chs. SPS 320-325 are adopted and by reference made a part of this article as if fully set forth in this section. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by an administrative code provision incorporated by reference in this subsection is required or prohibited by this article. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the administrative code provisions as incorporated in this subsection are intended to be made part of this article to secure uniform statewide regulation of one- and two-family dwellings in this village. A copy of these administrative code provisions and any future amendments shall be kept on file in the village administrator's office. 
(b)  Existing buildings. The state uniform dwelling code shall also apply to buildings and conditions where: 
(1)  An existing building is to be occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling, which building was not previously so occupied. 
(2)  An existing structure that is to be altered or repaired, when the cost of such alteration or repair during the life of the structure exceeds 50 percent of the equalized value of the structure, such value to be determined by the village assessor. 
(3)  Additions and alterations, regardless of cost, made to an existing building when deemed necessary in the opinion of the building inspector shall comply with the requirements of this article for new buildings. Section 105-81 shall also apply. 
(4)  Whenever more than 25 percent of the roof covering of a building is replaced in any 12-month period, all roof covering shall be in conformity with applicable sections of this article. 
(5)  Any addition or alteration, regardless of cost, made to a building shall be made in conformity with applicable sections of this article. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Addition means new construction performed on a dwelling which increases the outside dimensions of the dwelling. 
    Alteration means a substantial change or modification other than an addition or minor repair to a dwelling or to systems involved within a dwelling. 
    Department means the department of industry, labor and human relations. 
    Dwelling means : 
(1)  Any building, the initial construction of which is commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives which contains one or two dwelling units; or 
(2)  An existing structure or that part of an existing structure which is used or intended to be used as a one-family or two-family dwelling. 
    Minor repair means repair performed for maintenance or replacement purposes on any existing one-family or two-family dwelling which does not affect room arrangement, light and ventilation, access to or efficiency of any exit stairways or exits, fire protection or exterior aesthetic appearance and which does not increase a given occupancy and use. No building permit is required for work to be performed which is deemed minor repair. 
    One-family or two-family dwelling means a building structure which contains one or separate households intended to be used as a home, residence or sleeping place by an individual or by two or more individuals maintaining a common household to the exclusion of all others. 
    Uniform dwelling code means those administrative code provisions and any future amendments, revisions or modifications thereto, contained in the following: 
(1)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 320-Administrative and Enforcement. 
(2)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 321-Construction Standards. 
(3)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 322-Energy Conservation Standards. 
(4)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 323-Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning. 
(5)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 324-Electrical Standards. 
(6)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 325-Plumbing and Potable Water Standards. 
(d)  Method of enforcement. 
(1)  Certified inspector to enforce. The building inspector is authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of the uniform dwelling code. The building inspector shall be certified for inspection purposes by the department in each of the categories specified under Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 305.63. 
(2)  Subordinates. The building inspector may appoint, as necessary, subordinates as authorized by the village board. 
(3)  Duties. The building inspector shall administer and enforce all sections of this article and the uniform dwelling code. 
(4)  Inspection powers. The building inspector may at all reasonable hours enter upon any public or private premises for inspection purposes and may require the production of the permit for any building, plumbing, electrical or heating work. No person shall interfere with or refuse to permit access to any such premises to the building inspector while in performance of such duties. 
(5)  Records. The building inspector shall perform all administrative tasks required by the department under the uniform dwelling code. In addition, the inspector shall keep a record of all applications for building permits in a book for such purpose and shall regularly number each permit in the order of its issue. Also, a record showing the number, description and size of all buildings erected indicating the kind of materials used and the cost of each building and aggregate cost of all one-family and two-family dwellings shall be kept. 
(Code 1988, § 15-1-3; Code 1998, § 18-93) 
State Law reference- One- and two-family dwelling code, Wis. Stats. § 101.60 et seq. 
Sec. 105-80. - Commercial construction standards adopted. 
(a)  The village adopts Wis. Admin. Code § SPS 361.41. Any future amendments, revisions, and modifications of such chapters incorporated in this section are intended to be made a part of this Code. A copy of such chapters and amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector. 
(b)  The village hereby applies to the state to become a certified municipality and assume the responsibility for plan examination and building inspection. 
(c)  The village shall employ a certified building inspector to perform plan examination and building inspections in the enforcement of Wis. Admin. Code chs. SPS 361-366. 
(Code 1988, § 15-1-4; Code 1998, § 18-94) 
State Law reference- Commercial building code council, Wis. Stats. § 101.023. 
Sec. 105-81. - Building permits and inspections. 
(a)  Permit required. No building of any kind shall be moved within or into the village and no new building or structure or any part thereof shall be erected or ground broken for such or enlarged, altered, moved, demolished, razed or used within the village, except as provided in this article, until a permit shall first have been obtained by the owner or the owner's authorized agent from the building inspector. 
(b)  Alterations and repairs. The following shall apply to buildings altered or repaired: 
(1)  Alterations. When not in conflict with any regulations, alterations to any existing building or structure accommodating a legal occupancy and use but of substandard type of construction, which involves either beams, girders, columns, bearing or other walls, rooms, heating and air conditioning systems, arrangement, light and ventilation, changes in location of exit stairways or exits, or any or all of such, the existing construction shall be made to conform to the minimum requirements of this article applicable to such occupancy and use and given type of construction. 
(2)  Repairs. Repairs for purposes of maintenance or replacements in any existing building or structure which do not involve the structural portions of the building or structure or which do not affect room arrangement, light and ventilation, access to or efficiency of any exit stairways or exits, fire protection, or exterior aesthetic appearance and which do not increase a given occupancy or use shall be deemed minor repairs. 
(3)  Alterations prohibited. When any existing building or structure, which for any reason whatsoever does not conform to this article, has deteriorated from any cause whatsoever to an extent greater than 50 percent of the equalized value of the building or structure, no alterations or moving of such building or structure shall be permitted. Any such building or structure shall be considered a menace to public safety and welfare and shall be ordered vacated and thereafter demolished and the debris removed from the premises. 
(4)  Alterations and repairs required. When any of the structural members of any building or structure have deteriorated from any cause whatsoever to less than their required strength, the owner of such a building or structure shall cause such structural members to be restored to their required strength; failing in which the building or structure shall be considered a menace to public safety and shall be vacated, and thereafter no further occupancy or use of the building or structure shall be permitted without compliance with this article. 
(5)  Extent of deterioration. The amount and extent of deterioration of any existing building or structure shall be determined by the building inspector. 
(c)  Application for permit. Application for a building permit shall be made in writing upon a form furnished by the building inspector and shall state the name and address of the owner of the land and also the owner of the building if different, the legal description of the land upon which the building is to be located, the name and address of the designer, the use to which such building is to be put and such other information as the building inspector may require. 
(d)  Site plan approval. 
(1)  Required. 
a.  All applications for building permits for any construction, reconstruction, expansion or conversion of a structure or building shall require site plan approval by the plan commission in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
b.  The following construction, reconstruction, expansion or conversion activities are exempted from the site plan review process: 
1.  Constructing, altering or locating a single-family or two-family dwelling in a residential district for a single-family or two-family residential use; 
2.  Constructing, altering or locating an accessory structure or building, excluding wind energy systems, in a single-family or two-family residential district for an accessory residential use; 
3.  Constructing, altering or locating any permitted sign equal to or less than 25 square feet; and 
4.  Altering or repairing a building or structure so long as the alteration or repair does not increase the occupancy area or size or change the exterior architectural appearance. 
(2)  Administration. The building inspector shall make a preliminary review of the application and plans and refer them along with a report of the building inspector's findings to the plan commission. The plan commission shall review the application and may refer the application and plans to one or more expert consultants selected by the village board to advise whether the application and plans meet all the requirements applicable thereto in this article. Within 30 days of its receipt of the application, the village board shall authorize the building inspector to issue or refuse a building permit. 
(3)  Requirements. In acting on any site plan, the plan commission shall consider the following: 
a.  The appropriateness of the site plan and buildings in relation to the physical character of the site and the usage of adjoining land areas. 
b.  The layout of the site with regard to entrances and exits to public streets; the arrangement and improvement of interior roadways; the location, adequacy and improvement of areas for parking and for loading and unloading; and shall, in this connection, satisfy itself that the traffic pattern generated by the proposed construction or use shall be developed in a manner consistent with the safety of residents and the community, and the applicant shall so design the construction or use as to minimize any traffic hazard created thereby. 
c.  The adequacy of the proposed water supply, drainage facilities and sanitary and waste disposal. 
d.  The landscaping and appearance of the completed site. The plan commission may require that those portions of all front, rear and side yards not used for off-street parking shall be attractively planted with trees, shrubs, plants or grass lawns, and that the site be effectively screened so as not to impair the value of adjacent properties nor impair the intent of purposes of this section. 
(4)  Effect on municipal services. Before granting any site approval, the plan commission may, besides obtaining advice from consultants, secure such advice as may be deemed necessary from the building inspector or other village officials, with special attention to the effect of such approval upon existing village services and utilities. If additional facilities are needed, the plan commission shall not issue the final approval until the village has entered into an agreement with the applicant regarding the development of such facilities. 
(5)  Appeal. Denials of building permits contingent upon site plan approval may be appealed to the zoning board of appeals by filing a notice of appeal with the village administrator within ten days of the denial. 
(e)  Dedicated street and approved subdivision required. No building permit shall be issued unless the property on which the building is proposed to be built abuts a street that has been dedicated for street purposes. No building permit shall be issued until the land division and required improvements are accepted by the village board, upon the recommendation of the plan commission. 
(f)  Utilities required. 
(1)  Residential buildings. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any residential building until sewer, water, grading and graveling are installed in the streets necessary to service the property for which the permit is required. 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building other than residential until contracts have been let for the installation of sewer, water, grading and graveling in the streets necessary to service the property for which the permit is requested. 
(3)  Occupancy. No person shall occupy any building until sewer, water, grading and graveling are installed in the streets necessary to service the property, and a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until such utilities are available to service the property. 
(4)  Unavailability of village utility service. If village sewer and water are not available, no building permit or occupancy permit will be issued until plans are provided for a private domestic sewage treatment and disposal system and an approved well system. The installation of these systems must be approved by the village plumbing inspector and the county agency in charge of issuing the applicable state permits. 
(g)  Plans. With such application, there shall be submitted two complete sets of plans and specifications, including a plot plan showing the location and dimensions of all buildings and improvements on the lot, both existing and proposed; the dimensions of the lot; the dimensions showing all setbacks of all buildings on the lot; the proposed grade of the proposed structure, to village datum; the grade of the lot and of the street abutting the lot; the grade and setback of adjacent buildings (if the adjacent lot is vacant, submit the elevation of the nearest buildings on the same side of the street); the type of monuments at each corner of the lot; watercourses or existing drainage ditches; easements or other restrictions affecting such property; the seal and signature of the surveyor or a certificate signed by the applicant and a construction erosion control plan setting forth proposed information and procedures needed for control of soil erosion, surface water runoff and sediment disposition at the building site. Plans, specifications and plot plans shall be drawn to a minimum scale of one-quarter inch to one foot; fireplace details shall have a minimum scale of three-fourths inch to one foot. One set of plans shall be returned after approval as provided in this article. The second set shall be filed in the office of the building inspector. Plans for buildings involving the state building code shall bear the stamp of approval of the state department of industry, labor and human relations. One plan shall be submitted which shall remain on file in the office of the building inspector. All plans and specifications shall be signed by the designer. Plans for all new one-family and two-family dwellings shall comply with Wis. Admin. Code SPS 320.09(4). There shall be a plan review fee in the amount established by resolution for all plans submitted under this section. The fee due the state for the state uniform building permit shall be paid out of the plan review fee. 
(h)  Waiver of plans; minor repairs. 
(1)  Waiver. If the building inspector finds that the character of the work is sufficiently described in the application, the building inspector may waive the filing of plans for alterations, repairs or moving, provided the cost of such work does not exceed $2,000.00. 
(2)  Minor repairs. The building inspector may authorize minor repairs or maintenance work on any structure or to heating, ventilating or air conditioning systems installed therein valued at less than $300.00, as determined by the building inspector, which do not change the occupancy area, exterior aesthetic appearance, structural strength, fire protection, exits, light or ventilation of the building or structure without issuance of a building permit. 
(i)  Approval of plans. 
(1)  If the building inspector determines that the building will comply in every respect with all village ordinances and orders and all applicable state laws and orders, the building inspector shall issue a building permit which shall state the use to which the building is to be put, which shall be kept and displayed at the site of the proposed building. After being approved, the plans and specifications shall not be altered in any respect which involves any of the village ordinances or state laws or orders or which involves the safety of the building or the occupants, without the written consent of the building inspector. 
(2)  If adequate plans are presented for part of the building only, a permit for that part of the building may be issued at the discretion of the building inspector before receiving the plans and specifications for the entire building. No work is to be started unless a proper grade has been established by the village engineer. This would include sidewalks, curb and gutter, driveways and general construction. 
(j)  Inspection of work. The owner or the owner's agent shall have all lot corners and bends visibly staked prior to requesting an inspection. The owner or agent shall contact the building inspector to check stakes before digging commences. The builder shall notify the building inspector, and the building inspector shall inspect all buildings upon the completion of the foundation forms or before the foundation is laid and again when ready for lath and plaster or before paneling is applied. After completion, the building inspector shall make a final inspection of all new buildings, alterations and existing buildings put to new uses. If the building inspector finds that the work conforms to this article, the building inspector shall issue a certificate of compliance which shall contain the date and an outline of the result of such inspection and a statement of the use contemplated, a duplicate of which shall be filed by location in the office of the building inspector. The issuance of a certificate of compliance shall not authorize a use of the building different from that stated therein unless the building is adaptable to such use under this article. 
(k)  Permit lapses. A building permit shall lapse and be void unless building operations are commenced within six months or if construction has not been completed within 24 months from the date of issuance thereof. 
(l)  Certificate of compliance required. No building of any kind moved within or into the village and no new building or structure or part thereof erected or ground broken for the building or structure or no building or structure enlarged, altered, moved, demolished or razed pursuant to an authorized building permit shall be occupied or used until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the zoning administrator and the building inspector. 
(m)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  The building, plumbing, electrical or heating, ventilating and air conditioning (HVAC) inspector may revoke any building, plumbing, heating, ventilating and air conditioning or electrical permit, certificate of occupancy, or approval issued under this article and may stop construction or use of approved new materials, equipment, methods of construction, devices or appliances for any of the following reasons: 
a.  The inspector finds at any time that applicable ordinances, laws, or orders, plans and specifications are not being complied with and that the holder of the permit refused to conform after written warning has been issued to the holder of the permit. 
b.  The continuance of any construction becomes dangerous to life or property. 
c.  There is any violation of any condition or provision of the application for the permit or of the permit. 
d.  In the opinion of the inspector, there is inadequate supervision provided on the job site. 
e.  Any false statement or misrepresentation has been made in the application for the permit, plans, drawings, data specifications or certified lot or plot plan on which the issuance of the permit or approval was based. 
f.  There is a violation of any of the conditions of an approval or occupancy given by the inspector for the use of all new materials, equipment, methods or construction devices or appliances. 
(2)  The notice revoking a building, plumbing or electrical certificate of occupancy or approval shall be in writing and may be served upon the applicant of the permit, upon the owner of the premises and the owner's agent, if any, and upon the person having charge of construction. 
(3)  A revocation placard shall also be posted upon the building, structure, equipment or premises in question by the inspector. 
(4)  After the notice is served upon such persons and posted, it shall be unlawful for any person to proceed thereafter with any construction operation whatsoever on the premises, and the permit which has been so revoked shall be null and void. Before any construction or operation is again resumed, a new permit, as required by this article, shall be procured and fees paid therefor, and thereafter the resumption of any construction or operation shall be in compliance with this article. However, such work as the inspector may order as a condition precedent to the reissuance of the building permit may be performed or such work as the inspector may require for the preservation of life and safety shall be performed. 
(n)  Report of violations. Village officers shall report at once to the building inspector any building which is being carried on without a permit as required by this article. 
(o)  Display of permit. Building permits shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises where the authorized building or work is in progress at all times during construction or work thereon. 
(p)  Payment of claims and taxes. The village shall not issue or renew any building permit: 
(1)  For any purposes for which taxes, assessments or other claims of the village are delinquent and unpaid. 
(2)  For any person who is delinquent in payment of: 
a.  Any taxes, assessments or other claims owed the village; or 
b.  Any forfeiture resulting from a violation of any village ordinance. 
This denial may be appealed to the board of appeals. 
(q)  Portable restrooms at construction sites. 
(1)  Generally. Except as provided in subsection (q)(2) of this section, every general contractor or other person in charge of construction at a site for which a building permit is required under subsection (a) of this section shall provide a portable restroom as defined in Wis. Admin. Code SPS 391.03(7), which shall be available for unrestricted use by all contractors, subcontractors, material suppliers, inspectors, architects, engineers, surveyors, the employees of any of the foregoing, and any other persons lawfully on the site when any construction-related activity is taking place. At least one portable restroom shall be provided for each 20 persons, or any fraction thereof, described in the preceding sentence who are present, or are expected to be present, at any one time. Such portable restroom shall meet the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code §§ SPS 362.2900(1)(a)3 and 391.13. 
(2)  Exceptions. Subsection (q)(1) of this section shall not apply to any of the following: 
a.  Any site which has fully operational toilet facilities attached to a permanent sanitary waste pipe which are available for the unrestricted use by the persons described in subsection (q)(1) of this section during all construction-related activities. 
b.  Any site located on the same block as, or if the site is not part of an approved plat then within 600 feet of, another site where a portable restroom is provided by the same contractor or person in charge of construction, provided that at least one portable restroom shall be provided for each 20 persons, or any fraction thereof, described in subsection (q)(1) of this section who are present, or are expected to be present, on all such sites at any one time. 
c.  Any site, the construction on which consists solely of a residential remodeling project which does not render the permanent toilet facilities on that site temporarily unavailable for more than 24 hours, provided that adequate access to alternative facilities is available at all times to all persons described in subsection (q)(1) of this section. 
d.  Any site served by other toilet facilities if determined by the building inspector to be sufficient to meet the sanitation needs of all persons described in subsection (q)(1) of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 15-1-2; Code 1998, § 18-92; Ord. No. 94-9, § 2, 3-21-1994; Ord. No. 94-10, § 1, 3-21-1994; Ord. No. 07-06, 7-18-2007) 
Sec. 105-82. - Permit fees. 
    Before issuing a building permit, the owner or designated agent shall pay to the building inspector the permit and inspection fees established by resolution. 
(Code 1988, § 15-1-16; Code 1998, § 18-106; Res. No. 95-4, 9-18-1995; Ord. No. 99-21, §§ 1-5, 11-15-1999; Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-2007) 
Sec. 105-83. - Disclaimer on inspections. 
    The purpose of the inspections under this article is to improve the quality of housing in the village. The inspections and the reports and findings issued after the inspections are not intended as nor are they to be construed as a guarantee. In order to so advise owners and other interested persons, a disclaimer shall be included in each inspection report as follows: 
"These findings of inspection contained herein are intended to report conditions of noncompliance with code standards that are readily apparent at the time of inspection. The inspection does not involve a detailed examination of the mechanical systems or the closed structural and nonstructural elements of the building and premises. No warranty of the operation, use or durability of equipment and materials not specifically cited herein is expressed or implied." 
(Code 1988, § 15-1-9; Code 1998, § 18-99) 
Sec. 105-84. - New methods and materials. 
(a)  All new materials, methods of construction and devices designed for use in buildings or structures covered by this article and not specifically mentioned in or permitted by this article shall not be so used until approved in writing by the state department of safety and professional services for use in buildings or structures covered by the state building code, except sanitary appliances, which shall be approved in accordance with the state plumbing code. 
(b)  Such materials, methods of construction and devices, when approved, must be installed or used in strict compliance with the manufacturer's specifications and any rules or conditions of use established by the state department of safety and professional services. The data, test and other evidence necessary to prove the merits of such material, method of construction or device shall be determined by the state department of safety and professional services. 
(Code 1988, § 15-1-5; Code 1998, § 18-95) 
Sec. 105-85. - Additional requirements. 
(a)  Basement bedrooms. Every sleeping room in a basement shall be provided with natural light by means of glazed openings of at least eight percent of the net floor area. The outside windows in every basement bedroom shall have an openable area large enough and located as to permit a child or adult to safely exit to the exterior of the building. 
(b)  Accumulation of rubbish, etc. Every building shall be kept clean and shall also be kept free from any accumulation of dirt, filth, rubbish, garbage or other matter in or on the building or in the yards, courts, passages, areas or alleys connected with or belonging to the building. 
(c)  Canopies and hoods. No permanent hood or canopy shall be constructed except as follows: 
(1)  Permit required. No canopy or hood shall be erected, located, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or structurally altered without a permit being first secured from the building inspector. 
(2)  Bond, liability insurance. All canopies and hoods that extend over the village right-of-way shall require a liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state and indicating that signs and projections are covered is required. The insurance policy shall name the village as coinsured and shall be approved by the village attorney or, as an alternative, a public liability bond shall be required with sureties in an amount equal to $300.00 per square foot, based on the area of the underside of such canopy or hood. In no case shall any bond be less than $60,000.00 or more than $100,000.00. The form and type of bond shall be approved by the village attorney. 
(3)  Clearance. There shall be not less than 8.5 feet between the grade of the sidewalk at any point and the lowest point of any appendage or projection of any canopy or hood extending from any building into a public right-of-way. 
(4)  Projection toward street. The projection of permanent canopies or hoods shall not extend over any street or alley or be nearer than two feet from the outside face of the curb. 
(5)  Height. Canopies and hoods constructed along a block on a street shall not be constructed in such a manner as to restrict the viewing of signs and other ornaments constructed along such block, including the obstructing of signs on adjoining properties. 
(6)  Accessories to installations. Any necessary appurtenances or signs of a temporary or permanent installation shall be rigidly attached to the hood or canopy in a manner satisfactory to the building inspector or any inspector of the safety and buildings division of the state department of industry, labor and human relations. No swinging signs on accessories shall be permitted. 
(7)  Signs erected above canopies or hoods. Where signs are erected above canopies or hoods, they shall be hung independently of the canopy or hood. 
(8)  Drainage. Where canopies or hoods that extend over or are adjacent to any village right-of-way are erected, provision shall be made so that snow, ice or icicles shall not accumulate on the canopies, hoods or sidewalk beneath so as to endanger persons or property. 
(9)  Design and material requirements. Canopies and hoods shall be constructed with the design and material in accordance with the state and village building codes. 
(10)  Suspension from building. Canopies and hoods shall be suspended from the building with no supports bearing upon the sidewalk or public street. 
(11)  Approval required. Building plans, as required by Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 361 and approved by the safety and building division of the state department of industry, labor and human relations will be required for all canopies and hoods erected. 
(12)  Awnings. Any awning erected, located, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or structurally altered that projects over any village right-of-way shall require a permit and shall be constructed on an adjustable metal frame, firmly secured in place and covered with canvas or other suitable material. Such frame shall be at least eight feet in height above the highest point of the sidewalk directly beneath it, and the lowest point of the flap or fringe of such awning shall not be less than seven feet above the sidewalk immediately beneath it. 
(Code 1988, § 15-1-6; Code 1998, § 18-96) 
Sec. 105-86. - Garages. 
    Private garages shall be built in accordance with the general construction standards established in the state uniform dwelling code. Whenever a garage is constructed as part of any building, the ceiling and the walls or the wall separating the garage from other portions of the building shall be of not less than 45-minute fire restrictive construction as specified in the Wisconsin Administrative Code. 
(Code 1988, § 15-1-10; Code 1998, § 18-100) 
Sec. 105-87. - Smoke alarms or heat detectors in dwelling units. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Residential building means any public building which is used for sleeping or lodging purposes and includes any apartment house, roominghouse, hotel, children's home, community-based residential facility or dormitory but does not include a hospital or nursing home. 
    Sleeping area means the area of the unit in which the bedrooms or sleeping rooms are located. Bedrooms or sleeping rooms separated by another use area such as a kitchen or living room are separate sleeping areas but bedrooms or sleeping rooms separated by a bathroom are not separate sleeping areas. 
    Smoke detector means a device which detects particles or products of combustion other than heat. 
    Unit means a residential building or that part of a residential building which is intended to be used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one person or by two or more persons maintaining a common household, to the exclusion of all others. 
(b)  Approval. A smoke detector required under this section shall bear an Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., listing mark or similar mark from an independent product safety certification organization. 
(c)  Installation and maintenance. 
(1)  The owner of a residential building shall install any smoke detector required under this section according to the directions and specifications of the manufacturer of the smoke detector. 
(2)  The owner of a residential building shall maintain any such smoke detector that is located in a common area of that residential building. 
(3)  The occupant of a unit in a residential building shall maintain any smoke detector in that unit, except that if an occupant who is not an owner, or a state, county, city, village or town officer, agent or employee charged under statute or ordinance with powers or duties involving inspection of real or personal property, gives written notice to the owner that a smoke detector in the unit is not functional the owner shall provide, within five days after receipt of that notice, any maintenance necessary to make that smoke detector functional. 
(d)  Requirement. 
(1)  The owner of a residential building the initial construction of which is commenced before, on or after May 23, 1978, shall install and maintain a functional smoke detector in the basement and at the head of any stairway on each floor level of the building and shall install a functional smoke detector either in each sleeping area of each unit or elsewhere in the unit within six feet of each sleeping area and not in a kitchen. 
(2)  The owner of a dwelling shall install a functional smoke detector in the basement of the dwelling and on each floor level except the attic or storage area of each dwelling unit. The occupant of such a dwelling unit shall maintain any smoke detector in that unit, except that if any occupant who is not the owner, or any state, county, city, village or town officer, agent or employee charged under statute or municipal ordinance with powers or duties involving inspection of real or personal property, gives written notice to the owner that the smoke detector is not functional the owner shall provide, within five days after receipt of that notice, any maintenance necessary to make that smoke detector functional. 
(e)  Inspection and orders. 
(1)  The village may inspect all residential buildings, except the interior of private dwellings, as may be necessary to ensure compliance with this section. The village may inspect the interior of private dwellings at the request of the owner or renter as may be necessary to ensure compliance with this section. The village may issue orders as may be necessary to ensure compliance with this section. 
(2)  The village may inspect new dwellings, may inspect the common areas of dwellings and, at the request of the owner or renter, may inspect the interior of a dwelling unit in a dwelling to ensure compliance with this section. 
(f)  Penalty. Whoever violates this section shall forfeit to the state not more than $50.00 for each day of violation. 
(Code 1988, § 15-1-12; Code 1998, § 18-102) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. §§ 101.145, 101.645. 
Sec. 105-88. - Unsafe buildings. 
(a)  Whenever the building inspector and village board find any building or part thereof to be, in their judgment, so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human occupancy or use and so that it would be unreasonable to repair the building or part thereof, they shall order the owner to raze and remove such building or part thereof or, if it can be made safe by repairs, to repair and make it safe and sanitary or to raze and remove it at the owner's option. Such order and proceedings shall be as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0413. 
(b)  Where the public safety requires immediate action, the building inspector shall enter upon the premises with such assistance as may be necessary and cause the building or structure to be made safe or to be removed, and the expenses of such work may be recovered by the village in an action against the owner or tenant. 
(Code 1988, § 15-1-8; Code 1998, § 18-98) 
Sec. 105-89. - Razing buildings. 
(a)  No building within the village shall be razed without a permit from the building inspector. A snow fence or other approved barricade shall be provided as soon as any portion of the building is removed and shall remain during razing operations. After all razing operations have been completed, the foundation shall be filled at least one foot above the adjacent grade, the property raked clean, and all debris hauled away. Razing permits shall lapse and be void unless the work authorized thereby is commenced within six months from the date thereof or completed within 30 days from the date of commencement of the work. Any unfinished portion of work remaining beyond the required 30 days must have special approval from the building inspector. 
(b)  All debris must be hauled away at the end of each day for the work that was done on that day. No combustible material shall be used for backfill, but shall be hauled away. There shall not be any burning of materials on the site of the razed building (the only exception for burning is for a fire department practice burn of a standing building from where the materials that are illegal to burn have already been removed). If any razing or removal operation under this section results in, or would likely result in, an excessive amount of dust particles in the air creating a nuisance in the vicinity thereof, the permittee shall take all necessary steps, by use of water spraying or other appropriate means, to eliminate such nuisance. The permittee shall take all necessary steps, prior to the razing of a building, through the employment of a qualified person in the field of pest control or by other appropriate means, to treat the building to prevent the spread and migration of rodents and insects therefrom during and after the razing operations. 
(Code 1988, § 15-1-11; Code 1998, § 18-101; Ord. No. 17-4, § 2, 7-24-2017) 
State Law reference- Razing building, Wis. Stats. § 66.0413. 
Sec. 105-90. - Abandoned premises and protection of property; fill dirt. 
(a)  Abandoned excavations. Subflooring shall be constructed over basements within 30 days of the start of basement construction. Any excavation which exists for 30 days or more where construction has not commenced shall be considered abandoned and shall be refilled and leveled to grade by the owner of such lot or parcel of land within ten days after receiving a written notice from the building inspector of such requirement. Upon the failure of such owner to comply with such requirement within the stated period, the work may be done by the village or its agent, and the expense thereof shall be assessed against such lot or parcel of land as a special charge, to be collected in the same manner as are other real estate taxes. 
(b)  Vacant buildings. Whenever any building or structure is vacant and the doors and windows or any part thereof have been removed or opened, leaving the interior of such building or structure exposed to the elements and accessible to trespassers, such building or structure shall be deemed to be dangerous, unsafe and a menace to public safety. The building inspector shall give the owner thereof written notice to secure the building or structure and to comply with village Code requirements within 30 days of the date of such notice. Failure to comply with the written notice shall be sufficient grounds for the building inspector to condemn and raze the building or structure in accordance with the applicable provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0413. 
(c)  Protection of adjoining property. When the owner of any lot or plot of land or the village, in making improvements, is about to excavate or cause an excavation to be made, which excavation in any way affects any building or structure on any adjoining lot, a notice shall be given to all owners of adjoining lots at least ten days prior to commencing the excavation in order to give the adjoining owners a reasonable opportunity to protect their property at their own expense according to law. Such notice shall describe the extent and character of the excavation work about to be done. 
(d)  Permit for transfer of solid fill. No person shall transfer to, dump or place upon lands, public or private, solid fill within the village without first obtaining a permit as follows: 
(1)  Application. Application for a permit to transfer, place or dump solid fill within the village shall be made by the owner of the lands to be filled or the owner's designated agent in writing to the building inspector upon an application furnished by the village. A separate permit shall be obtained for each truck or vehicle hauling the fill material. The applicant shall set forth upon the application form the following information: 
a.  The location of the filling operation. 
b.  The proposed route for hauling fill. 
c.  The number, type, size and license numbers of trucks to be used. 
d.  The proposed trucking schedule, the number of days and the time of day. 
e.  Other equipment involved in the fill operation. 
f.  Descriptions and sources of fill material. 
g.  A grading plan indicating the final limits and the finished grade of the fill area. 
(2)  Fee. A fee in the amount established by resolution shall accompany the application for the permit, which shall be retained if the permit is not issued; in addition, a fee per truck in the amount established by resolution shall be paid for each truck hauling to the fill area. 
(3)  Fill material. Fill material shall be clean, inert material; free from organic material, brush, garbage and material subject to organic decomposition. Where necessary to avoid dust or similar litter, all material shall be wetted down before transporting. Fill containing items such as hollow containers, appliances and equipment subject to subsequent collapse or settlement is prohibited. Generally, material such as earth and broken concrete of a size approved by the building inspector will be classified as acceptable fill subject to other permit requirements. 
(4)  Issuance; term. The building inspector is authorized to issue a filling permit to each applicant when satisfied that the fill material meets the requirements in subsection (d)(3) of this section and that the filling operation will not create noise, traffic or other problems detrimental to the residents of the area or the community in which such filling is taking place. The building inspector shall not authorize any filling between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays, or at any time on Saturday, Sunday or on a statutory holiday. The building inspector shall further restrict the hours of filling or the number of trucks involved based upon the location of the filling operation and the traffic conditions of the area where the fill is being placed. The permit shall be for a period not to exceed three consecutive months in a calendar year. Permit applications for subsequent years, when filling operations span a period of several years, will be subject to conditions and fees governing initial applications. 
(5)  Applicability of other regulations. Filling operations also shall be subject to all applicable county, state or federal license or permit regulations. Filling operations shall not block a natural drainage course. 
(6)  Exceptions. The provisions of this subsection relating to the transfer of solid fill shall not apply to customary top dressing or fertilizing of lawns and gardens nor shall they apply to the construction of block or concrete patios, driveways or platforms permitted under this Code. Filling involved in an operation requiring a building permit or a wrecking permit is exempt from this subsection. 
(7)  Appeal. Any person who is denied a filling permit or whose filling operation is restricted due to noise, traffic or other conditions may appeal to the board of appeals by filing written notice of appeal as required by the village board. 
(Code 1988, § 15-1-13; Code 1998, § 18-103) 
Sec. 105-91. - Discharge of clear water. 
(a)  Nuisance. The discharge into a sanitary sewer from any roof drain, surface drain, subsoil drain, drain from any mechanical device, gutter, ditch, pipe, conduit, sump pump or any other object or thing used for the purposes of collecting, conducting, transporting, diverting, draining or discharging clear water from any part of any private premises is declared to be a public nuisance and a hazard to the health, safety and well-being of the residents of the village and to the protection of the property. 
(b)  Groundwater. Where deemed necessary by the building inspector, every house shall have a sump pump installed for the purpose of discharging clear waters from foundation drains and ground infiltration and where the building is not serviced by a storm sewer, the clear waters shall either discharge into an underground conduit leading to a drainage ditch, gutter or dry well or shall discharge onto the ground surface in such other manner as will not constitute a nuisance as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Stormwater. All roof drains, surface drains, drains from any mechanical device, gutters, pipes, conduits or any other objects or things used for the purpose of collecting, conducting, transporting, diverting, draining or discharging stormwaters shall be discharged either to a storm sewer, a well, an underground conduit leading to a drainage ditch or onto the ground surface in such other manner as will not constitute a nuisance as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Storm sewer lateral. Where municipal storm sewers are provided and it is deemed necessary by the property owner or the village to discharge clear waters from a parcel of land, a storm sewer lateral shall be installed and connected to the storm sewer main at the expense of the owner. 
(e)  Tests for illegal discharge. If the building inspector suspects an illegal clear water discharge, as defined by this subsection or by any other applicable provision of the Wisconsin Administrative Code as it may, from time to time, be amended, the building inspector may, upon reasonable notice and at reasonable times, enter the private premises where such illegal clear water discharge is suspected and conduct appropriate tests to determine whether such suspected illegal clear water discharge actually exists. 
(Code 1988, § 15-1-14; Code 1998, § 18-104) 
Sec. 105-92. - Moving of buildings. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall move any building or structure upon any of the public ways of the village without first obtaining a permit from the building inspector and payment of the required fee. Every such permit issued by the building inspector for the moving of a building shall designate the route to be taken, the conditions to be complied with and shall limit the time during which the moving operations shall be continued. 
(b)  Damage to trees. A report shall be made by village employees with regard to possible damage to trees. The estimated cost of trimming, removal and replacement of public trees, as determined by the village, shall be paid to the village administrator prior to issuance of the moving permit. 
(c)  Approval of route. Issuance of the moving permit shall further be conditioned on approval of the moving route by the police chief. 
(d)  Continuous movement. The movement of buildings shall be a continuous operation during all the hours of the day and at night, until such movement is fully completed. All such operations shall be performed with the least possible obstruction to thoroughfares. No building shall be allowed to remain overnight upon any street crossing or intersection or so near thereto as to prevent easy access to any fire hydrant or any other public facility. Lights shall be kept in conspicuous places at each end of the building during the night. 
(e)  Street repair. Every person receiving a permit to move a building shall, within one day after the building reaches its destination, report that fact to the building inspector, shall inspect the streets, highways and curbs and gutters over which the building has been moved and shall ascertain their condition. If the removal of the building has caused any damage to any street or highway, the person to whom the permit was issued shall forthwith place them in as good repair as they were before the permit was granted. On the failure of the permittee to do so within ten days thereafter to the satisfaction of the village board, the village shall repair the damage done to such streets and shall hold the person obtaining such permit and the sureties on such person's bond responsible for the payment of the repairs. 
(f)  Conformance with article. No permit shall be issued to move a building within or into the village and to establish it upon a location within the village until the building inspector has made an investigation of such building at the location from which it is to be moved and is satisfied from such investigation that the building is in a sound and stable condition and of such construction that it will meet the requirements of this article in all respects. A complete plan of all further repairs, improvements and remodeling with reference to such building shall be submitted to the building inspector, and the building inspector shall make a finding of fact to the effect that all such repairs, improvements and remodeling are in conformity with the requirements of this article and that, when such are completed, the building as such will comply with this article. If a building is to be moved from the village to some point outside the boundaries thereof, the provisions of this section with respect to the furnishing of plans and specifications for proposed alterations to such building may be disregarded. 
(g)  Bond. 
(1)  Before a permit to move any building is granted by the building inspector, the person applying therefor shall give a bond in the sum of $15,000.00 with good and sufficient sureties, to be approved by the village attorney, conditioned, among other things, that the person will save and indemnify judgments, costs and expenses which may, in any way, accrue against the village and that the person will save the village harmless against all liabilities, judgments, costs and expense in consequence of granting of such permit. 
(2)  Unless the building inspector, upon investigation, shall find it to be a fact that the excavation exposed by the removal of such building from its foundation shall not be so close to a public thoroughfare as to permit the accidental falling therein of travelers or the location, nature and physical characteristics of the premises and the exposed excavation is such as to make intrusion upon the premises and the falling into such excavation of children under 12 years of age unlikely, the bond required by subsection (g)(1) of this section shall be further conditioned upon the permittee erecting adequate barriers and, within 48 hours, filling in such excavation or adopting and employing such other means, devices or methods approved by the building inspector and reasonably adopted or calculated to prevent the occurrences set forth in this subsection. 
(h)  Insurance. The building inspector shall require, in addition to the bond indicated in subsection (g)(1) of this section, public liability insurance in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 single limit, or such other coverage as deemed necessary. 
(Code 1988, § 15-1-15; Code 1998, § 18-105) 
Secs. 105-93-105-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICAL CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Electrical wiring, Wis. Stats. § 101.80 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 105-113. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any section of this article shall be subject to the penalty provided in section 1-32. This section shall not preclude the village from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of this article. 
(Code 1998, § 18-162; Ord. No. 95-8, § 15-4-27, 10-16-1995) 
Sec. 105-114. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to safeguard life and property by regulating and providing for the inspection of the installation and condition of electrical wiring, equipment and devices; providing for the licensing of persons undertaking electrical work; and fixing a penalty for violations of this article. 
(Code 1998, § 18-137; Ord. No. 95-8, § 15-4-2, 10-16-1995) 
Sec. 105-115. - State electrical code. 
    The Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 316 and all amendments thereto are adopted by reference and made a part of this article. The village takes the responsibilities of electrical inspections of public buildings and places of employment pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 316, subch. II (Wis. Admin. Code § SPS 316.009 et seq.). The village shall employ a state certified commercial electrical inspector (COMEL). Except as otherwise regulated by this article, all installations of electrical equipment and electrical wiring shall conform to and comply with the state electrical code; with the state statutes and any orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof; and with approved electrical standards for safety to persons and property. 
(Code 1998, §§ 18-138, 18-159; Ord. No. 95-8, §§ 15-4-3, 15-4-24, 10-16-1995) 
Sec. 105-116. - Interpretation of article. 
    All requests for information pertaining to and involving an interpretation of this article shall be submitted in detail to the electrical inspector. The electrical inspector shall not design or lay out any electrical installation or act in the capacity of a consulting engineer or designer. 
(Code 1998, § 18-146; Ord. No. 95-8, § 15-4-11, 10-16-1995) 
Sec. 105-117. - Liability of village. 
    This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any person supplying electricity to or selling, renting, leasing, owing, using, operating, controlling, installing, altering, repairing, removing, replacing, disturbing, connecting, disconnecting, or maintaining any electrical wiring, device or equipment, for damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein or therefrom, nor shall the village be held as assuming any such responsibility or liability because of the issuance or revocation of any license, permit or certificate or the inspection or reinspection authorized by this article or because of the approval or disapproval of any electrical equipment, sales, rentals, drawings, plans, specifications, materials, samples, test reports, literature, information or schedules authorized in this article. The village shall not be held liable for any damages resulting from the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1998, § 18-147; Ord. No. 95-8, § 15-4-12, 10-16-1995) 
Sec. 105-118. - Unsafe equipment. 
    No person shall keep, offer for sale or sell, within the village, any appliances, equipment or fixtures designed for or intended to be used for the production, transmission or utilization of electric current or power unless such appliances, equipment, or fixtures are approved by the electrical inspector in accordance with the requirements set forth in the state electrical code. 
(Code 1998, § 18-158; Ord. No. 95-8, § 15-4-23, 10-16-1995) 
Secs. 105-119-105-149. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 105-150. - Inspection office. 
(a)  There is created under the general supervision of the village administrator the office of electrical inspection. The office shall be under the direct supervision of the electrical inspector. The electrical inspector shall have the general authority and control of all matters pertaining to electrical inspections and shall enforce all state laws and sections of this Code relating thereto. 
(b)  The village electrical inspector shall not engage in the business of electrical wiring and construction either directly or indirectly in the village and shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in such business in the village. The electrical inspector may, however, do work at the request of the village or outside of the village. 
(c)  In all respects, the village electrical inspector shall comply with Wis. Admin. Code § SPS 305.62. 
(Code 1998, § 18-139; Ord. No. 95-8, § 15-4-4, 10-16-1995) 
Sec. 105-151. - Inspector certification. 
    The electrical inspector shall be certified for UDC electric and COMEL for commercial electric inspections. The electrical inspector shall be appointed by the village administrator and approved by the village board. The electrical inspector shall inspect or cause to be inspected all electrical work as outlined in this article within the village. 
(Code 1998, § 18-140; Ord. No. 95-8, § 15-4-5, 10-16-1995) 
Sec. 105-152. - Authority to enter premises. 
    The electrical inspector may enter any building or premises in the discharge of official duties for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the electrical wires, equipment or devices contained therein. The electrical inspector shall be given access to any premises upon request made to the owner or person in immediate charge of the premises. 
(Code 1998, § 18-141; Ord. No. 95-8, § 15-4-6, 10-16-1995) 
Sec. 105-153. - Records. 
    There shall be kept in the electrical inspection office a complete record of all applications and permits regularly numbered in the order of their issue, of all inspections made and other official work performed under this article, so arranged to promptly afford information concerning electrical installation. The electrical inspector shall prepare a monthly report summarizing the number of permits issued and the activities of the office and shall file copies of such report with the village administrator. 
(Code 1998, § 18-142; Ord. No. 95-8, § 15-4-7, 10-16-1995) 
Sec. 105-154. - Inspections. 
(a)  The electrical inspector shall periodically make thorough examinations of all the electrical wires and appliances installed within the village and, when such wires or appliances are found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the inspector shall notify the person owning, using, operating or installing such to place them in a safe condition. Any person failing or refusing to make the necessary repairs or changes shall be further subject to the penal provisions as set forth under section 105-113. The electrical inspector may ask for electrical plans if the electrical inspector deems it is needed. 
(b)  Upon the completion of the wiring on any building or before any wiring is to be hidden from view, it shall be the duty of the person doing the wiring to notify the electrical inspector, who shall inspect the installation within 48 hours of the time such notice is received. If, upon inspection, it is found that such installation is fully in compliance with this article and does not constitute a hazard to life or property, the inspector shall approve the installation and authorize concealment of such wiring or connection for electrical service. If the installation is incomplete or not strictly in accordance with this article, the inspector shall issue orders to the person installing the installation to remove all hazards and make the necessary changes or additions. Concealment of electrical work before inspection or failure to comply with the order of the electrical inspector shall constitute an offense punishable in accordance with section 105-113. 
(c)  Current shall not be turned on for any electrical installation until a certificate of inspection has been issued by the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1998, § 18-143; Ord. No. 95-8, § 15-4-8, 10-16-1995) 
Sec. 105-155. - Power to stop electrical work. 
    Whenever any electrical work is being done contrary to this article, the electrical inspector may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any person engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the electrical inspector to commence and proceed with the work. 
(Code 1998, § 18-144; Ord. No. 95-8, § 15-4-9, 10-16-1995) 
Sec. 105-156. - Authority to discontinue electrical system. 
    The electrical inspector may order the cutting off of all electrical current from any electrical system which is found to be in an unsafe condition and order the cutting off of electrical current in any emergency and where such electrical currents are dangerous to property or may interfere with the work of the fire department. No person shall reconnect any equipment thus cut off until permission is given by the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1998, § 18-145; Ord. No. 95-8, § 15-4-10, 10-16-1995) 
Sec. 105-157. - Certified electricians. 
    Under this article, every person, except an owner-occupant of a single-family residence doing electrical work on the residence, shall be state certified as a master electrician, journeyman or beginning electrician. 
(Code 1998, § 18-153; Ord. No. 95-8, § 15-4-18, 10-16-1995) 
Secs. 105-158-105-182. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Permits 

Sec. 105-183. - Issuance standards; exceptions; fees. 
(a)  The electrical inspector shall issue a permit for the erection of electrical installations for light, heat and power, as covered within the scope of the state electrical code, volume II, upon the filing of a proper application, which shall be made on forms furnished by the electrical inspector and shall prescribe the nature of the work as well as such other information as may be required for inspection. In no case shall any such electrical work be done unless a permit has been obtained. 
(b)  Exceptions to subsection (a) of this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any person manufacturing or repairing electrical apparatus and equipment and employing a competent electrician shall not be required to have a permit for the person's testing equipment; 
(2)  No permit shall be required for minor repair work such as repairing drop cords, repairing flush and snap switches, replacing fuses or changing lamp sockets; 
(3)  No permit shall be required for portable devices such as grinders, drills, washing machines, vacuum cleaners, radios, electric refrigerators and similar devices not permanently wired but intended to be connected to the circuit by a flexible cord and plug. However, proper approved wiring is to be installed together with an approved receptacle and plug; 
(4)  No permit shall be required for the installation, alteration or repair of electrical generation, transmission or distribution equipment owned and operated by an electrical utility company or the village; 
(5)  No permit shall be required for the installation, alteration or repair of signal or communication equipment where such equipment is owned and operated by a public utility company or the village. 
(c)  Permit fees are to be set by resolution and shall be reviewed annually. 
(d)  An annual permit for the installation and alteration of electrical equipment and wiring to existing structures of factories, large buildings, schools and like structures can be obtained. The application for this permit shall be made in writing to the electrical inspector and shall contain the description of the premises on which the electrical work is to be done. The person doing the electrical work must have a maintenance license or contractor's license. This does not include new work or additions to the existing buildings of the permit holder. This will allow the permit holder to do electrical work without having to obtain a permit each time electrical work is done. The permit holder must keep records of the electrical work done throughout the year. A minimum of once a year the permit holder shall make an appointment with the electrical inspector to inspect all electrical work done throughout the year. If a violation is found upon inspection, it is the responsibility of the permit holder to correct the violation and notify the electrical inspector. 
(e)  All permit fees shall be paid to the village treasurer and credited to the general fund, and no permit shall be issued or valid unless approved by the electrical inspector and the fee paid to the village in the amount required for such permit. The fees for permits provided by this article shall become the property of the village and shall not be refunded, even though the permit issued is not used, unless such fees exceed the sum of $50.00. In such cases only that portion of the permit fee in excess of $50.00 shall be refunded if the permit is not used. 
(f)  If the licensee shall fail to obtain a permit before an electrical installation has been started, except in an emergency, the total fees for such permit shall be double the regular fee. 
(g)  No further permits are to be issued to any licensee until all arrears or fees have been paid and all lawful orders by the electrical inspector have been complied with. 
(h)  The connection of replacement appliances and equipment such as furnaces, signs, air compressors, air conditioners, water heaters and like equipment shall constitute an extension of an existing or new branch circuit. The connection shall comply with the electrical code. 
(i)  Existing installations which have been declared a hazard to life and property shall be made safe. The installation of any permanent wiring and equipment to correct this hazard will constitute an extension of an existing or a new circuit. 
(j)  No permit for electrical installation in connection with a permanent or temporary sign in this village shall be issued until the permit required by section 133-1031 has been issued by the building inspector for the erection of such sign. 
(Code 1998, § 18-154; Ord. No. 95-8, § 15-4-19, 10-16-1995) 
Sec. 105-184. - Temporary work. 
    When applying for a permit for temporary electrical work, a specified period of time during which such wiring is to remain in service must be stated, but not exceeding 90 days. Service shall be cut off at the end of this period and shall not be reconnected without permission from the electrical inspector. This permit is for buildings where conduit wiring is required, special permits for temporary work and exposed wiring, lights, and power for building operations, display decorative wiring, etc., for use for a limited period, subject to discontinuance and complete removal at expiration and to condemnation and revocation within such period. 
(Code 1998, § 18-155; Ord. No. 95-8, § 15-4-20, 10-16-1995) 
Sec. 105-185. - Emergency work. 
    In emergency electrical work, the person doing or causing such work to be done shall report the work to the electrical inspector the next business day after beginning work, and such work shall be done in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1998, § 18-156; Ord. No. 95-8, § 15-4-21, 10-16-1995) 
Sec. 105-186. - Municipal electrical work. 
    Municipal electrical work requirements shall be the same for any electrical work on or in any building owned by the village, except that no fee shall be charged for an electrical permit issued to the village. 
(Code 1998, § 18-157; Ord. No. 95-8, § 15-4-22, 10-16-1995) 
Sec. 105-187. - Certificate of inspection. 
    No certificate of inspection shall be issued unless the electric light, power or heating installation and all other electrical apparatus connected with it are in strict conformity with this article and the rules and regulations of the state electrical code. 
(Code 1998, § 18-160; Ord. No. 95-8, § 15-4-25, 10-16-1995) 
Sec. 105-188. - Arbitration. 
    When the electrical inspector condemns all or part of the electrical installation of any building, the owner, within five days after receiving written notice from the electrical inspector, may file a petition in writing for review of such actions of the electrical inspector to the village administrator. Upon receipt, the administrator shall proceed to determine whether the electrical construction complies with this article, and within three days shall make a decision in accordance with such findings. Petitions filed shall be accompanied by fees in accordance with the fee schedule. No appeal shall be processed until such fees are paid in full. 
(Code 1998, § 18-161; Ord. No. 95-8, § 15-4-26, 10-16-1995) 
Secs. 105-189-105-214. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HEATING, VENTILATION AND AIR CONDITIONING CODE 

Sec. 105-215. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Air conditioning means the process of treating air to control simultaneously its temperature, humidity, cleanliness and distribution to meet the requirements of the conditioned space. 
    Furnace means a completely self-contained, direct-fired, automatically controlled, vented appliance for heating air by transfer of heat of combustion through metal to air and designed to supply heated air through ducts to spaces remote from the appliance location. 
    Heating system means any combination of building construction, machines, devices or equipment, so proportioned, arranged, installed, operated and maintained as to produce and deliver in place the required amount and character of heating service. 
    Ventilating means the process of supplying or removing air by natural or mechanical means, to or from any space. 
(Code 1998, § 18-194) 
Sec. 105-216. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to provide minimum regulations, provisions and requirements in the village to ensure safety and adequacy to persons and property wherever heating, ventilating and air conditioning is installed and to all alterations or improvements, including replacement of any apparatus or device, pertaining to heating, ventilating and air conditioning. 
(b)  This article shall apply to every building or portion of a building devoted to a new use for which the requirements are in any way more stringent than the requirements covering the previous use. 
(Code 1988, § 15-3-2; Code 1998, § 18-192) 
Sec. 105-217. - State regulations adopted. 
(a)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 5, Licenses, certifications and registrations, SPS 364 and 365 and NFPA 54, National Fuel Gas Code and any future amendments, revisions and modifications of such chapters incorporated herein, are intended to be and are hereby made a part of this Code. 
(b)  Copies of such chapters and amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector. 
(Code 1998, § 18-193) 
Sec. 105-218. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for a person to construct, install, alter or repair any heating, ventilating or exhaust system and appurtenance; replace a boiler or furnace; install stoker and conversion units in or for any building before securing a permit, except that in cases of emergency the contractor may proceed with the work and file the application for a permit within 24 hours thereafter, Sundays and holidays excepted. A heating permit will not be required for the installation of electric baseboard or bathroom heaters when installed as auxiliary heat; that is, to supplement the existing heating system designed and installed to satisfy the load requirements of the space to be heated. The reference to appurtenances shall include direct heaters, cooling coils, central residential air conditioning (cooling) and similar devices affecting the safety or operation of the heating system. 
(b)  Application. The application shall be in writing upon forms which the heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector shall provide and shall include the name of the owner and the description of the property on which the work is to be done, along with such pertinent information as the heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector may require, and shall state that the property owner and the applicant will be bound by and subject to the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Issuance, term, suspension and revocation. When the heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector is satisfied that the work proposed by the applicant can be done in conformity with the provisions of this article and after the appropriate fees have been paid to the heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector, the heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector shall issue the permit. Such permit shall allow for the continuous performance of the work named thereon. A permit shall automatically expire when work ceases for a period of 60 days without good and reasonable cause as may be approved by the heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector and shall automatically expire on completion of the work for which it is issued, provided the heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector may, upon notice, suspend or revoke such permit for violation of the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Restrictions on issuance. 
(1)  No heating, ventilating and air conditioning permit shall be issued to any person who is in violation of this article until such violation has been corrected. 
(2)  No heating, ventilating and air conditioning permit shall be issued to any person against whom an order issued by the heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector is pending, provided this restriction may be waived by the heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector. 
(e)  Appeals for failure to issue, suspension and revocation. Any person directly interested who is aggrieved by the decision of the heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector to refuse to issue a permit or to suspend or revoke such permit or to order work stopped under subsection (c) of this section may obtain review of such determination under Wis. Stats. §§ 68.01-68.14. 
(Code 1998, § 18-195) 
Sec. 105-219. - Inspections. 
(a)  In any new building or addition, immediately upon completion of those portions of the installation which are thereafter to be concealed or covered, the heating contractor shall notify the heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector that such portions of the installations are ready for inspection; and it shall be unlawful for any person to lath over, plaster or cover up any heating work before such work has been inspected and a rough inspection card posted. The heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector shall have the right and authority to order the removal of all such lath, plaster or other covering which may have been placed over such work as has not been inspected. The heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector shall make inspections within two working days after notice. Final inspection on new installations is to be made upon completion of such work. Inspection of repairs, replacement or conversion work is to be made upon completion of such work. The heating contractor shall notify the heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector as soon as the installation is complete and ready for inspection. 
(b)  Wherever any work or project governed by provisions of this article and for which a permit has been issued, as provided in section 105-218(c), is being performed or carried on in violation of any of the provisions of this article, it shall be the duty of the heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector to post a printed notice to stop work signed by the heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector on the premises where such work is in progress and to notify anyone in charge of such work on the premises of such stop work order. After the posting of such notice, it shall be unlawful for any person to do any further work on such project until such time as the defects or violations of this article have been eliminated to the approval of the heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector. 
(c)  When the heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector finds any installation in which there are violations of this article, the heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector shall issue a written order specifying the violation and stating the date by which these corrections shall be made. Any licensee failing or neglecting to comply with written orders at the discretion of the heating, ventilating and air conditioning inspector shall not be issued any further permits until such violations have been corrected and a penalty fee paid. Failure or neglect to comply with the provision of this article and of the permit issued under this article shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(Code 1998, § 18-196) 
Sec. 105-220. - Permit fees. 
    The schedule of heating, ventilating and air conditioning permit fees to be paid shall be as established by resolution, and such fees shall be paid at the time the permit is issued. 
(Code 1998, § 18-197; Ord. No. 99-21, § 6, 11-15-1999) 
Secs. 105-221-105-248. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PLUMBING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Plumbing, Wis. Stats. ch. 145. 

Sec. 105-249. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Plumbing means and includes the following: 
(1)  All piping, fixtures, appliances, equipment, devices and appurtenances in connection with the water supply, water distribution and drainage systems, including hot water storage tanks, water softeners and water heaters connected with such water and drainage systems, and the installation thereof; 
(2)  The construction, connection or installation of any drain or waste piping system from the outside or proposed outside foundation walls of any building to the mains or other sewer system terminal within the bounds of or beneath an area subject to easement for highway purposes, including private domestic sewage treatment and disposal systems, and the alteration of any such systems, drains or waste piping; 
(3)  The water service piping from the outside or proposed outside foundation walls of any building to the main or other water utility service terminal within the bounds of or beneath an area subject to easement for highway purposes and its connections; 
(4)  The water pressure systems other than municipal systems as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 281; 
(5)  A plumbing and drainage system so designed and vent piping so installed as to keep the air within the system in free circulation and movement; to prevent with a margin of safety unequal air pressures of such force as might blow, siphon or affect trap seals or retard the charge from plumbing fixtures or permit sewer air to escape into the building; to prohibit cross connection, contamination or pollution of the potable water supply and distribution systems; and to provide an adequate supply of water to properly service, cleanse and operate all fixtures, equipment, appurtenances and appliances served by the plumbing system. 
(Code 1988, § 15-2-4; Code 1998, § 18-229) 
Sec. 105-250. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to provide minimum regulations, provisions and requirements in the village to ensure safety and adequacy to persons and property wherever plumbing is installed and to all alterations or improvements, including replacement of any apparatus or device pertaining to plumbing. 
(b)  This article shall apply to every building or portion of a building devoted to a new use for which the requirements are in any way more stringent than the requirements covering the previous use. 
(Code 1988, § 15-2-2; Code 1998, § 18-227) 
Sec. 105-251. - State regulations adopted. 
(a)  Wis. Stats. ch. 145 and the state plumbing code, being Wis. Admin. Code chs. SPS 381-387, are adopted and by reference made a part of this article with the same force and effect as though set out in full. 
(b)  A copy of the state plumbing code shall be on file in the offices of the plumbing inspector and the village administrator. 
(Code 1988, § 15-2-3; Code 1998, § 18-228) 
Sec. 105-252. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. No work contemplated by this article shall be started until a permit has been obtained from the plumbing inspector, provided no permit shall be required for minor repairs to faucets or the removal of stoppages in soil and waste pipes. 
(b)  Application. The application shall be in writing upon forms which the plumbing inspector shall provide and shall include the name of the owner and the description of the property on which the work is to be done, along with such pertinent information as the plumbing inspector may require, and shall state that the property owner and the applicant will be bound by and subject to this article. 
(c)  Issuance, term, suspension and revocation. When the plumbing inspector is satisfied that the work proposed by the applicant can be done in conformity with this article and after the appropriate fees have been paid, the plumbing inspector shall issue the permit. Such permit shall allow for the continuous performance of the work named thereon. A permit shall automatically expire when work ceases for a period of 60 days without good and reasonable cause, as may be approved by the plumbing inspector, and shall automatically expire on completion of the work for which it is used, provided the plumbing inspector may, upon notice, suspend or revoke such permit for violation of this article. 
(d)  Restrictions on issuance. No plumbing permit shall be issued to any person: 
(1)  Who is in violation of this article until such violation has been corrected; 
(2)  Against whom an order issued by the plumbing inspector is pending, provided this restriction may be waived by the plumbing inspector. 
(e)  Appeals for failure to issue, suspension and revocation. Any person directly interested who is aggrieved by the decision of the plumbing inspector to refuse to issue a permit or to suspend or revoke such permit or to order work stopped under subsection (c) of this section may obtain review of such determination under Wis. Stats. §§ 68.01-68.14. 
(Code 1988, § 15-2-5; Code 1998, § 18-230) 
Sec. 105-253. - Licensing of plumbers. 
    All plumbing work shall be done only by a plumber licensed by the state for such work. However, a property owner may make repairs or installations in a single-family building owned and occupied by the property owner as a home if a permit is issued and the work is done in compliance with this article. 
(Code 1988, § 15-2-6; Code 1998, § 18-231) 
Sec. 105-254. - Permit fees; violations. 
(a)  Schedule of permit fees. The schedule of plumbing permit fees to be paid shall be as established by resolution, and such fees shall be paid at the time the permit is issued. 
(b)  Origination fee. A fee equal to ten percent of the plumbing permit will be charged for every permit issued. 
(c)  Violations. Enforcement of this article will be pursuant to section 105-1 including the requirement that double fees will be charged when work is commenced prior to the issuance of permits. 
(Code 1988, § 15-2-8; Code 1998, § 18-232; Res. No. 95-4, 9-18-1995; Ord. No. 99-21, § 7, 11-15-1999) 
Secs. 105-255-105-271. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 105-272. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Accessory structure. See subsection 133-18(2). 
    Basement means a space of full story height below the first floor which is not designed or used primarily for year-round living accommodations. Space, partly below grade, which is designed and finished as habitable space is not basement space. 
    Building. See subsection 133-18(14). 
    Deterioration means the condition or appearance of a building or structure or part thereof characterized by breaks, holes, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting, inadequate paint or other evidence of decay or neglect. 
    Dwelling means any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants, provided that temporary housing shall not be regarded as a dwelling. 
    Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling, forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
    Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the building inspector. 
    Fence means an independent structure forming a barrier at grade or between lots, between a lot and a street or any alley, or between portions of a lot or lots and includes a wall or lattice work screen, but excludes a hedge or natural growth, or a barrier of less than 18 inches in height which is used to protect plant growth. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking and consuming of food. 
    Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, or communicating corridors, closets, and storage spaces. 
    Infestation means the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents, or other pests. 
    Multiple dwelling means any dwelling containing three or more dwelling units. 
    Nuisance means: 
(1)  Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence, or as provided by the statutes of the state, or this Code. 
(2)  Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or safety of children in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to, basements, excavations, abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators, motor vehicles, any structurally unsound fences or structures, lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation such as poison ivy, oak, sumac, which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors. 
    Occupant means any person occupying or having use of a building, structure, premises or any part thereof. 
    Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a building, structure or premises or a part thereof. 
    Owner means any person who, alone, jointly, or severally shall have: 
(1)  Legal title to any building, structure, dwelling or dwelling unit, without accompanying actual possession thereof; provided, however, whenever the building, structure, dwelling or dwelling unit is subject to a lease with option to purchase or any other form of written contract under the terms of which any person is entitled to a conveyance of legal title upon payment of a specified sum, the term "owner" shall mean the person who shall have such a contractual right, rather than the person holding legal title; or 
(2)  Charge, care or control of any building, structure, dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner, agent of the owner, as personal representative, administrator, trustee, receiver or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person representing the owner shall comply with this article and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, as if such person were the owner. 
    Plumbing means any of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, bathtubs, hot tubs, whirlpools, showerbaths, installed clothes washers, catchbasins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer, or gas lines. 
    Refuse means all solid waste, except body waste, including, but not limited to, garbage; rubbish; ashes; street cleanings; abandoned, unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicles; and solid market and industrial wastes. 
    Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking and eating. 
    Roominghouse means any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator. 
    Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, and the term includes the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible material; paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust. 
    Structure. See subsection 133-18(86). 
    Supplied means paid for, furnished, or provided by or under the control of the owner or operator. 
    Temporary housing means any tent, trailer, or other structure used for human shelter, designed to be transportable, which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days. 
    Weathering means deterioration, decay or damage by exposure to the elements. 
    Yard. See subsection 133-18(93). 
(b)  Whenever the term "building," "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "roominghouse," "rooming unit," "premises" or "structure" is used in this article, it shall be construed as though it were followed by the phrase "or any part thereof." 
(Code 1998, § 18-262; Ord. No. 99-17, § 3, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 105-273. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any order of the building inspector under this article or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted by the village pursuant to this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture as provided by section 1-32. After such conviction, if such person continues to violate such order, such person shall be liable for further penalties without the building inspector issuing a new order, until compliance with such order. 
(Code 1998, § 18-275; Ord. No. 99-17, § 9, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 105-274. - Purpose and intent. 
    The village has determined that there are or may be structures which are so dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous, unhygienic or unsanitary as to constitute a menace to the health and safety of the people of the village. In addition, the village has determined that failure to maintain the appearance of exterior of premises in the village has a detrimental effect on property values in the vicinity as well as providing for breeding places for vermin and for the accumulation of damage to structures. The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Establish minimum standards governing the condition and maintenance of structures; 
(2)  Establish minimum standards governing supplied utilities and facilities and other physical conditions essential to make structures safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation; 
(3)  Establish minimum standards governing the condition of dwellings offered for rent; 
(4)  Fix certain responsibilities of owners and occupants of dwellings; 
(5)  Provide for the condemnation of dwellings unfit for human habitation; 
(6)  Provide for minimum standards for maintenance and appearance of exterior of premises; 
(7)  Coordinate the activities of the building inspector and the health officer; 
(8)  Fix penalties for violation and fix a time when such shall take effect. 
(Code 1998, § 18-261; Ord. No. 99-17, § 2, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 105-275. - Inspection of rental dwelling units, rooming units, nursing units, hotel units and exterior portion of premises by building inspector. 
(a)  Inspection by building inspector. Under this article, the building inspector is authorized to make inspections of rental dwelling units, rooming units, nursing units, hotel units and premises as follows: 
(1)  The building inspector shall make inspections to determine the condition of rental dwelling units, rooming units, nursing units, hotel units, and premises located within the village to safeguard the health and welfare of the occupants of dwellings and the general public. All complaints shall be received in writing, so that the location, tenant, owner and permission to inspect is obtained. 
(2)  For the purpose of making such inspections, the building inspector may enter, examine and survey, at proper times after due notice, all rental dwelling units, rooming units and premises. The owner or the person in charge shall give the building inspector access to such dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises at proper times, after due notice, for such inspection, examination and survey. 
(b)  Access by owner or operator. Every occupant of a dwelling unit, rooming unit, nursing unit or hotel unit shall give the owner or operator thereof or the owner's or operator's agent or employee access to any part of such rental dwelling unit, rooming unit, nursing unit, hotel unit, or its premises at all reasonable times for maintenance, making repairs or alterations as necessary to effect compliance with this article or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful notice or order issued pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Inspection by building inspector of exterior portion of premises. The building inspector is authorized and, upon receipt of complaint, shall make exterior inspections to determine whether the buildings, structures and premises located within the village conform to the requirements of this article. For the purpose of making exterior inspections, the building inspector is authorized to enter, examine and survey, at all reasonable times, the exterior portions of all buildings, structures or premises. Every owner or occupant shall give the building inspector free access to any of these premises. If the building inspector has probable cause to believe a violation of this article exists, the building inspector shall have authority to enter any of such premises after written notice has been given to the owner, occupant or his agent. If, after such notice is given, access is denied, the building inspector may apply to the circuit court for a special inspection warrant pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0119. 
(Code 1998, § 18-263; Ord. No. 99-17, §§ 4, 5, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 105-276. - Enforcement, service of notices and orders, hearings. 
(a)  Notice of violation. Whenever the building inspector determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of this article or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the building inspector shall notify the person responsible therefor. 
(b)  Contents of notice. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification; 
(3)  State the reason for its issuance; 
(4)  Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires; 
(5)  Be served upon the owner, operator, and the occupant, provided such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner, operator or occupant if a copy thereof is delivered to such person personally or is sent by registered mail to such person's last known address or is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice or if such person is served by any other method authorized or required under state laws; 
(6)  Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, shall comply with this article. 
(c)  Hearing. Any person affected by such notice or regulation adopted pursuant to this article may petition for a hearing on the matter before the village board of appeals. Such petition shall be filed in the office of the village administrator within 30 days after service of the notice. Upon receipt of such petition, the village administrator shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and show cause why the petitioner should not comply with the notice. 
(d)  Action by board of appeals. After the hearing, the board of appeals shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, based upon whether there has been compliance with this article. If the board sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed an order. Any order served pursuant to this section shall automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed with the village administrator within 30 days after such notice is served. After a hearing in a case when the board of appeals has sustained a notice suspending a building permit, the permit shall be automatically revoked. Any such permit suspended by a notice shall be automatically revoked if no petition is filed with the village administrator within ten days after such notice is served. 
(e)  Review of order of board of appeals. The findings and decision of the board of appeals shall be reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public record in the village offices. Such record shall also include a copy of every notice issued in connection with the matter. A copy of the written decision of the board of appeals shall be served on the petitioner in the manner prescribed under subsection (b)(5) of this section. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of appeals or any officer, department, board or bureau of the village may seek judicial review thereof as provided in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e)10-15. 
(f)  Emergency orders. Whenever the building inspector finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, the building inspector may, without notice or hearing, issue an order stating the existence of an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as deemed necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other sections of this article, such order shall be effective immediately. Upon petition to the village administrator by the affected person, a hearing shall be held as soon as possible, in the manner provided in subsection (c) of this section. After such hearing, depending upon whether the building inspector has complied with this article, the board of appeals shall sustain, modify or revoke the emergency order. 
(Code 1998, § 18-264) 
Sec. 105-277. - Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities. 
    No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for living, sleeping, cooking or eating meals therein which does not comply with the following: 
(1)  Kitchen sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working condition, properly connected to a water and sanitary sewer system approved by the plumbing inspector; 
(2)  Bathroom. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room, separate from the habitable rooms, which affords privacy to a person which is equipped with a flush water closet, a lavatory basin, bathtub or shower and the necessary accessories therefor in good working condition, properly connected to hot and cold water lines and sanitary sewer system approved by the building inspector; 
(3)  Exits. Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe, open space at ground level; 
(4)  Smoke detectors. Every dwelling unit, pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 101.145 and 101.645, shall have smoke detectors on each floor level, including basements; 
(5)  Guardrails and handrails. Every dwelling unit shall have properly maintained guardrails and handrails according to the requirements set forth in Wis. Admin. Code chs. SPS 321 and 362; 
(6)  Electrical requirements. Existing electrical conditions will be allowed until determined to be unsafe or until replacement or renovation takes place. Any electrical work must comply with Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 316; 
(7)  Minimum hot water requirements. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with water heating facilities which are installed in an approved manner, properly maintained and capable of heating water to such a temperature to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, shower, and laundry facility or other similar units, at a temperature of not more than 125 degrees Fahrenheit when needed; 
(8)  Screens. From May 1 to October 1, in every dwelling unit for protection against mosquitoes, flies, and other insects, every window used or intended to be used for ventilation shall be supplied with screens installed. 
(Code 1998, § 18-265) 
Sec. 105-278. - Minimum standards for light, ventilation and heating. 
    No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for living therein which does not comply with the following: 
(1)  Adequate light or ventilation. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can easily be opened or such other device as will adequately light and ventilate the room; 
(2)  Bathrooms. Every bathroom shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in subsection (1) of this section, except no window or skylight shall be required in an adequately ventilated bathroom equipped with an adequate ventilation system in operable condition; 
(3)  Heating facilities. Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed, which are maintained in safe and good working condition and which are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms and bathrooms in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at least 67 degrees Fahrenheit; 
(4)  Basements and cellars. Every basement shall receive natural or artificial light and shall be ventilated according to Federal Housing Administration requirements or the equal minimum. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation and every other opening to a basement which might provide an entry for rodents shall be screened with a wire mesh of not less than number 16 or other device as will effectively prevent their entrance. 
(Code 1998, § 18-266) 
Sec. 105-279. - Minimum standards for space, use and location. 
    No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for living therein which does not comply with the following: 
(1)  Minimum floor area for dwelling unit. Every dwelling unit shall contain a minimum gross floor area of not less than 150 square feet for the first occupant, 100 square feet for the second occupant, and 75 square feet for each additional occupant. The floor area shall be calculated on the basis of the total area of all the habitable rooms; 
(2)  Floor area for sleeping rooms. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 80 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied by more than one occupant shall contain an additional 40 square feet of space for each occupant thereof over the age of 12 years and at least 30 square feet for each occupant under the age of 12 years; 
(3)  Basement used as habitable room. No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless the floor and walls are of waterproof and dampproof construction; 
(4)  Access to sanitary facilities. Every occupant of every dwelling shall have unrestricted access to a kitchen sink, toilet, bath and lavatory basin. 
(Code 1998, § 18-267) 
Sec. 105-280. - Responsibilities of owners for maintenance of dwelling and dwelling units. 
    No person shall permit any dwelling containing one or more dwelling units to continue, which does not comply with the following: 
(1)  Foundations, exterior walls, roofs. Every foundation, exterior wall, and roof shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight, rodent-proof and insect-proof and shall be kept in a reasonably good state of repair; 
(2)  Interior walls, floors, ceilings. Every interior partition, wall, floor and ceiling shall be kept in a reasonably good state of repair and maintained to permit them to be kept in a clean, sanitary condition; 
(3)  Windows, exterior doors, basement hatchways. Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably weathertight and rodentproof, shall be kept in reasonably good working condition and shall be kept in a reasonably good state of repair. All exterior windows and doors shall have locks so entry is restricted. No security bars shall be installed on windows of rooms used for sleeping; 
(4)  Stairways and porches. Every inside and outside stairway, porch and appurtenance thereto shall be constructed to be reasonably safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and shall be kept in sound condition and in a reasonably good state of repair; 
(5)  Supplied plumbing fixtures. Every inside supplied plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition; 
(6)  Bathroom floors. Every bathroom floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water, permitting such floor to be kept in a clean, sanitary condition; 
(7)  Safe and effective functioning of supplied facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is required under this article shall be so constructed or installed that it will function properly and shall be maintained in reasonably good working condition; 
(8)  Vacant dwelling units prior to occupancy. No owner shall rent to any other person for occupancy or allow any other person to occupy any vacant dwelling unit unless it is reasonably clean, sanitary and complies with all sections of this article and all rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1998, § 18-268) 
Sec. 105-281. - Responsibilities of owners and occupants for maintenance of dwelling and dwelling units. 
(a)  Every owner of a dwelling containing three or more dwelling units shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof. 
(b)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises thereof which the occupant occupies and controls. 
(c)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all the rubbish and garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish containers. 
(d)  Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall exterminate any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises, and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever that dwelling unit is the only one infested. However, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rat-proof or reasonably insect-proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(e)  Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. 
(Code 1998, § 18-269) 
Sec. 105-282. - Duties and responsibilities of owners and operators as to maintenance and appearance of exterior of premises. 
(a)  The exterior of premises and all structures thereon shall be kept free of all nuisances, unsanitary conditions and any hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians and to the person utilizing the premises. Any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated by the owner or operator. 
(b)  The exterior of the premises and surrounding yard shall be kept free of hazards which include, but are not limited to, brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, garbage, trash and refuse. 
(c)  Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall be provided with banisters or railings properly designed and maintained to minimize the hazard of falling, and the same shall be kept structurally sound, in good repair and free of defects. 
(d)  The exterior appearance of all buildings shall reflect a level of maintenance in keeping with the standards of the neighborhood. No building shall present a blighted appearance or become an element leading to the progressive deterioration and downgrading of the neighborhood. 
(e)  The exterior of the premises shall be kept landscaped and lawns, hedges and bushes shall be kept trimmed and kept from becoming overgrown and unsightly where exposed to the public view. 
(f)  In addition to subsection (e) above, no grass upon any private premises within the village limits shall be allowed to grow in excess of an average length of six inches before it is mowed, cut or trimmed; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to land with a pitch greater than 300 from horizontal. 
(g)  Yards shall be kept substantially clear of debris and shall be provided with adequate lawn, ground cover or vegetation. Hedges or bushes shall be cut or trimmed as often as necessary to maintain a neat and attractive appearance. All areas in which the required vegetation has not yet grown in shall be treated to prevent dust or the blowing or scattering of dust particles into the air. All trees, bushes or vegetation which overhang a public entrance shall be properly trimmed to void obstruction of the view and movements of vehicles and pedestrians. 
(h)  Every yard, court, driveway or other portion of the lot shall be graded or drained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water on any such surface. Driveways shall be maintained in good condition and repair. 
(i)  Every building, structure and all exterior appurtenances on the premises shall be adequately protected against rats, mice, termites and other vermin infestation, and shall not permit the entrance of such rat, mice, termites and other vermin. Occupants and operators shall be responsible for the extermination of rodents and vermin from that part of the premises under their exclusive control, except where more than one unit is infested at the same time. In that case, the owner shall also be responsible for extermination of the infestation. 
(j)  Every building shall have adequate refuse, garbage or rubbish storage facilities. No occupant shall accumulate rubbish, boxes, lumber, metal refuse or other materials which may provide a harborage for rodents or vermin. 
(k)  The exterior of every principal structure or accessory structure, residential and nonresidential, including fences, shall be maintained in good repair and all surfaces thereof shall be kept painted where necessary for purposes of preservation and appearance. The same shall be maintained free of broken or loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling paint or other conditions reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance. 
(l)  Every principal structure and accessory structure, exterior wall, siding and roof shall be kept structurally sound and in a state of good repair to avoid safety, health or fire hazards and shall be so maintained as to be weather and water-tight. 
(m)  This chapter applies whether or not the premises are temporarily or continuously occupied or unoccupied, inhabited or uninhabited, commercial, industrial or residential, and whether or not there is a structure, building or other improvement upon the premises. 
(Code 1998, § 18-270; Ord. No. 99-17, § 10, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 105-283. - Transfer of ownership of noncomplying building. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building, structure or premises who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish to the building inspector a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation. 
(Code 1998, § 18-271; Ord. No. 99-17, § 11, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 105-284. - Condemnation of unfit dwellings and dwelling units. 
    The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation and the procedure for the condemnation and placarding of such unfit dwellings or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with section 105-88 and Wis. Stats. § 66.0413. 
(Code 1998, § 18-272; Ord. No. 99-17, § 6, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 105-285. - Authority to act on nuisances. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit the village in defining and declaring nuisances or the health officer or building inspector in removing or abating nuisances by summary or other appropriate proceedings. 
(Code 1998, § 18-273; Ord. No. 99-17, § 7, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 105-286. - Compliance with other codes. 
    This article shall not abrogate the responsibility of any person to comply with any provision of the state building codes and the village building code and chapter 133. 
(Code 1998, § 18-274; Ord. No. 99-17, § 8, 9-7-1999) 
Chapter 109 - CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Construction site erosion control and stormwater management, Wis. Stats. § 281.33. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 109-1-109-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 109-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affected means a regulated activity that has significantly: 
(1)  Caused negative impacts on water quality or the use or maintenance of land or business; or 
(2)  Endangered health, safety, or general welfare. 
    Agricultural means related to or used for the production of food and fiber, including, but not limited to, general farming, livestock and poultry enterprises, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod production, cranberry productions and wild crop harvesting and includes lands used for on-site buildings and other structures necessary to carry out such activities. 
    Bank erosion means the removal of soil or rock fragments along the banks or bed of a stream channel resulting from high flow after rain events. 
    Best management practices means a practice, technique or measure that is an effective, practical means of preventing or reducing soil erosion or water pollution, or both, from runoff both during and after land development activities. These can include structural, vegetative or operational practices. 
    Commercial land use means use of land for the retail or wholesale sale of goods or services. 
    Construction site erosion control means preventing or reducing soil erosion and sedimentation from land disturbing activity. 
    Control measure means a practice or combination of practices to control erosion and attendant pollution. 
    Control plan means a written description of the number, location, size and other pertinent information of control measures designed to meet the requirements of this article submitted by the applicant for review and approval by the building inspector and/or village engineer. 
    Erosion means the detachment and movement of soil, sediment or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity. 
    Erosion control measure means a control measure used to meet the requirements of section 109-56. 
    Excavation means any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, displaced, relocated or bulldozed, including the resulting conditions. 
    Existing development means buildings and other structures and impervious area existing prior to August 22, 2001. 
    Fill means any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved to a new location, including the resulting conditions. 
    Land developing activity means the construction of buildings, roads, parking lots, paved storage areas and similar facilities. 
    Land disturbing construction activity means any land alteration or disturbance that may result in soil erosion, sedimentation or change in runoff including, but not limited to, removal of ground cover, grading, excavating and fill of land. 
    Land user means any person operating, leasing, renting or having made other arrangements with the landowner by which the landowner authorizes usage of the land. 
    Landowner means any person holding title to, or having any interest in, land. 
    Plan means the erosion control plan required by section 109-56. 
    Runoff means the rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface. 
    Sediment means solid earth material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, gravity or ice, and has come to rest on the earth's surface at a different site. 
    Sedimentation means the deposition of eroded soils at a site different from the one where the erosion occurred. 
    Sensitive area means lakes, perennially flowing and intermittent streams or wetlands. 
    Sheet and rill erosion means a loss of soil caused by sheet flow or shallow concentrated flow, and characterized by an absence of channeling or relatively uniform loss across the exposed upper layer of the soil or shallow irregular scouring of the soil surface. 
    Site means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land disturbing or land development activity is proposed in the permit application. 
    Slope means the net vertical rise over horizontal run, expressed as a percentage, which represents a relatively homogeneous surface incline or decline over the area disturbed. 
    Soil loss rate means the rate, measured in tons per acre per year, at which soil movement occurs as a result of sheet and rill erosion and does not apply to ditches or areas of concentrated flows. 
    Storm events means the precipitation amounts that occur over a 24-hour period that have a specified recurrence interval for the county. For example, one-year, two-year, ten-year and 100-year storm events mean the precipitation amounts that occur over a 24-hour period that have a recurrence interval of one, two, ten and 100 years, respectively. 
    Structure means any humanmade object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon, or set into the ground, stream bed or lake bed. 
    Unnecessary hardship means that circumstance where special conditions, which were not self-created, affect a particular property and make strict conformity with regulations unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 18-329; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006) 
Sec. 109-20. - Authority. 
    This article is adopted pursuant to the guidelines in Wis. Stats. § 61.354. 
(Code 1998, § 18-326; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006) 
Sec. 109-21. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Findings. The village board finds that soil erosion from land disturbing activities and subsequent development can disturb natural cover and land surfaces resulting in a change of run-off patterns that may have a detrimental effect on water quality and downstream uses. Land disturbing activities and subsequent development need to be strictly regulated to avoid damage to other properties and sensitive areas. Further, effective sediment and stormwater management depends upon proper planning, design and timely installation of conservation practices, as well as continuing maintenance practices. 
(b)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to preserve the natural resources; to protect the quality of the waters of the state and village; and to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of the people, to the extent practicable, by minimizing the amount of sediment, soil loss and other pollutants carried by run-off or discharge from land disturbing activities and subsequent development of the property to lakes, streams and wetlands. 
(Code 1998, § 18-327; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006) 
Sec. 109-22. - Applicability. 
(a)  Unless expressly exempted by subsection (b) of this section, an erosion control permit under section 109-56 shall be required and all construction site erosion control provisions of this chapter shall apply within the territorial limits of the village and publicly-owned or privately-owned lands within the extraterritorial plat review jurisdiction of the village to any of the following activities: 
(1)  Grading, removal of protective ground cover or vegetation, excavation, land filling or other land disturbing activity which affects an area of 4,000 square feet or more; 
(2)  Land disturbing activity on a slope of greater than ten percent; 
(3)  Land disturbing activity that involves the excavation or filling, or a combination of excavation and filling, in excess of 400 cubic yards of material; 
(4)  Land disturbing activity that disturbs more than 100 lineal feet of road ditch, grass waterway or other area where surface drainage flows in a defined open channel, including the placement, repair or removal of any underground pipe, utility or other facility within the cross-section of the channel; 
(5)  Any street, highway, road or bridge construction, enlargement, relocation or reconstruction; 
(6)  Involves the laying, repairing, replacing or enlarging of an underground pipe or facility for a distance of 300 feet or more; 
(7)  Development that requires a certified survey or subdivision plat as defined in chapter 129; or 
(8)  Land disturbing activity that disturbs less than 4,000 square feet of land, including the installation of access drives, that the director of public works determines to have a high risk of soil erosion or water pollution, or that may significantly impact a lake, stream, or wetland area. Examples of activities with a high risk of soil erosion or water pollution may include, but are not limited to, land disturbance on erodible soil or disturbance adjacent to lakes, rivers, streams or wetlands. All such determinations made by the director of public works shall be in writing, unless waived by applicant. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from all requirements of this article: 
(1)  Any activity directly related to the planting, growing and harvesting of agricultural crops. 
(2)  One- and two-family dwelling units regulated under the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code; land disturbing activities in excess of one acre, or not associated with the construction of a dwelling, are not exempt from this chapter. 
(3)  Projects specifically exempted from local erosion control ordinances under state or federal statute. It is the responsibility of the landowner to demonstrate such exemption with documentation acceptable to the village. 
(4)  Projects subject to an approved shoreland erosion control permit under chapter 113. 
(5)  Agricultural development not subject to 109-93. 
(6)  Municipal road or county highway projects not exempted under subsection (b)(3) of this section are exempt from subsections 109-96(a)(1) and 109-96(a)(2) where all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The purpose of the project is only to meet current state or federal design or safety guidelines; 
b.  All activity takes place within existing public right-of-way; 
c.  All other requirements of section 109-96 are met; and 
d.  The project does not include the addition of new driving lanes. 
(Code 1998, § 18-328; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 281.33(3)(b). 
Sec. 109-23. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Inspections. As part of the plan approval process, the director of public works shall establish a minimum number of inspections to be conducted consistent with the land disturbing or land developing activity proposed to be undertaken. The site shall be inspected at least once every 30 days during the period of land disturbance. 
(b)  Verification. Within ten days after completion of installation of all required erosion control measures in an approved plan, and when soil stabilization has been achieved, the permittee shall notify the village to arrange a final inspection to verify plan compliance. This inspection shall occur within ten days of notification, and shall not relieve the permittee from the responsibility to maintain erosion control measures or uphold plan requirements as set forth in section 109-56. 
(c)  Noncompliance. 
(1)  If an inspection reveals any noncompliance with an approved erosion control plan, the director of public works shall notify the permittee by certified or registered mail of all specific instances of noncompliance. The notice shall describe the nature of the violation, remedial actions needed, a schedule of remedial action and additional enforcement action which may be taken. 
(2)  Upon receipt of written notification from the director of public works, the permittee shall bring the work into compliance with the erosion control plan as necessary to meet the specifications and schedule set forth by the director of public works in the notice. The permittee shall initiate such corrective action within 24 hours of notification by the village. 
(3)  If the violations in this article are likely to result in damage to properties, public facilities, or waters of the state, the director of public works or designee may enter the land and take emergency actions necessary to prevent such damage. The cost incurred by the village, plus interest and legal costs, shall be billed to the owner of record title of the property and, if not paid, entered on the tax rolls and collected as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(d)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  The director of public works shall issue and post a stop work order under either of the following circumstances: 
a.  Any land disturbing or land developing activity regulated under this article is being undertaken without a permit. 
b.  Any noncompliance with an approved erosion control plan in which the permittee has failed to initiate corrective action within 24 hours or to follow the specifications and schedule set forth by the director of public works under subsection (c) of this section. The director of public works may revoke approval of the plan issued under this article for noncompliance with the provisions of this article. Any erosion plan revocation, stop work order or cease-and-desist order shall remain in effect unless retracted by the director of public works or of a court of competent jurisdiction. The director of public works is authorized to refer any violation of this article, or of a stop work order or cease-and-desist order issued pursuant to this article, to the village attorney for the commencement of further legal proceedings. 
(2)  Upon issuance of a stop work order, the only permissible activity on the project shall be actions to bring the project into compliance with the approved plan following the specifications and schedule set forth by the director of public works, or actions to ensure issuance of an approved erosion control plan until such time as the director of public works certifies compliance. 
(e)  Injunction. Every violation of this article is a public nuisance. Compliance with this article may be enforced by an action for an injunction at the suit of the village pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(8). It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture pursuant to subsection (f) of this section before resorting to injunction proceedings. 
(f)  Forfeitures. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall also be subject to a forfeiture, with penalties as provided in section 1-32. 
(g)  Transfers of ownership. 
(1)  When a permittee transfers ownership, possession or control of property subject to an uncompleted erosion control plan, the party who is successor in interest to any portion of the real estate shall bear responsibility to control soil erosion on that portion of the real estate under the successor's ownership, possession or control, and shall comply with the standards provided in this article. 
(2)  When ownership, possession or control of property subject to an uncompleted erosion control plan is transferred from one party to another, the former owner shall notify the party taking possession as to the current status of compliance with the approved erosion control plan, also provide a copy of the notice to the director of public works, and shall provide a copy of the approved erosion control plan to the purchaser if the soil on the property being transferred has not been stabilized prior to the date of transfer. 
(3)  Transfers of interest in real estate subject to an approved, uncompleted erosion control plan may be completed consistent with this article under any of the following circumstances: 
a.  The transferee shall file a new, approved erosion control plan; 
b.  The transferee shall obtain an approved assignment from the village as subpermittee to complete that portion of the approved erosion control plan for the transferred property; or 
c.  The permittee shall provide the authority with a surety in an amount sufficient to complete the work proposed in the approved plan. At the time of transfer, the permittee may seek to reduce any prior surety to the amount necessary to complete the remaining work. If the permittee enters into escrow agreements with transferees to complete an approved plan, such escrowed amounts shall be available to the village to attain plan compliance. When an approved erosion control plan is not completed as proposed, the director of public works may obtain the surety to complete remaining work to achieve plan compliance. 
(Code 1998, § 18-334; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006) 
Sec. 109-24. - Appeals and variances. 
(a)  Board of appeals. The board of appeals, created under section 101-56 et seq. pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e), shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the director of public works in administering this article. The board shall also use the rules, procedures, duties, and powers authorized by statute in hearing and deciding appeals. 
(b)  Variances. In accordance with the procedures in section 133-98, the board of appeals may authorize variances from the provisions of this article which will not adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare, nor be contrary to the spirit, purpose and intent of this article, and where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of this article will result in unnecessary hardship. Such variances may be granted only to the minimum extent necessary to afford relief from the unnecessary hardship. Before a variance may be granted, the village engineer must find that the erosion control plan, to the extent possible and consistent with the need for a variance, will achieve compliance results comparable to those set forth in this chapter. In making such a finding, the village engineer shall consider water quality and impacts to downstream conditions. 
(c)  Who may appeal. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by any officer, department, or board of the village affected by any decision hereunder. 
(Code 1998, § 18-335; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006) 
Sec. 109-25. - Technical standards and specifications. 
    The design of all best management practice designed to meet the requirements of this article shall comply with the following technical standards: 
(1)  Natural Resources Conservation Service's "Wisconsin Field Office Technical Guide, Chapter 4" or its successor; 
(2)  Applicable construction or erosion control standards by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources; and 
(3)  Any other technical methodology approved by the Dane County Conservationist. 
(Code 1998, § 18-330; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006) 
Sec. 109-26. - Maintenance of control measures. 
    All sedimentation basins and other control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this article shall be maintained by the applicant or subsequent landowner during the period of land disturbance and land development of the site in a satisfactory manner to ensure adequate performance and to prevent nuisance conditions. 
(Code 1998, § 18-331; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006) 
Secs. 109-27-109-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND APPROVALS 

Sec. 109-56. - Erosion control plan requirements. 
(a)  Plan materials. Erosion control plans required under section 109-22 may include consideration of adjoining landowners' cooperative efforts to control transport of sediment and except as specifically exempted below, shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Property lines, lot dimensions, and limits of disturbed area; 
(2)  Limits of impervious area, including buildings. Include all public and private roads, interior roads, driveways, parking lots, and indicate type of paving and surfacing material; 
(3)  All natural and artificial water features including, but not limited to, lakes, ponds, streams (including intermittent streams), and ditches; and areas of natural woodland or prairie. The plan must show ordinary high-water marks of all navigable waters, 100-year flood elevations and delineated wetland boundaries. A certified flood zone determination and/or wetland delineation may be required at the applicant's expense; 
(4)  Cross sections of and profiles of channels, swales, and road ditches; 
(5)  Culvert sizes; 
(6)  Direction of flow of runoff; 
(7)  Watershed size for each drainage area; 
(8)  Design discharge for ditches and structural measures; 
(9)  Runoff velocities; 
(10)  Fertilizer and seeding rates and recommendations; 
(11)  Time schedules for stabilization of ditches and slopes; 
(12)  Description of methods by which sites are to be developed and a detailed land disturbance schedule including time schedules for stabilization of ditches and slopes; 
(13)  Provision for sequential steps mitigating erosive effect of land disturbing activities to be followed in appropriate order and in a manner consistent with accepted erosion control methodology suitable to proposed sites and amenable to prompt revegetation, including runoff calculations as appropriate; 
(14)  Provisions to prevent mud-tracking off-site onto public thoroughfares during the construction period; 
(15)  Provisions to disconnect impervious surfaces, where feasible; 
(16)  Provisions to prevent sediment delivery to, and accumulation in, any proposed or existing stormwater conveyance systems; 
(17)  Copies of permits or permit applications required by any other unit or government or agency; 
(18)  Existing and proposed elevations (referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929) and existing and proposed contours in the area, where deemed necessary; 
(19)  Any other information necessary to reasonably determine the location, nature and condition of any physical or environmental features of the site. 
(b)  Simplified plan checklist. Applicants may submit erosion control proposals using simplified checklists of standard erosion control practices, on a standard form approved by the village engineer, wherever all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The site does not exceed 20,000 square feet in area; and 
(2)  The slope of the land does not exceed six percent. 
(c)  Erosion control performance standards. 
(1)  Proposed design, suggested location and phased implementation of effective, practicable erosion control measures for plans shall be designed, engineered and implemented to achieve the following results: 
a.  Prevent gully and bank erosion; 
b.  Limit total off-site permissible annual aggregate soil loss for exposed areas resulting from sheet and rill erosion to an annual, cumulative soil loss rate not to exceed 7.5 tons per acre annually; and 
c.  Discharges from new construction sites must have a stable outlet capable of carrying designed flow as required in section 109-97(a)(1), (2), and (3), at a non-erosive velocity. Outlet design must consider flow capacity and flow duration. This requirement applies to both the site outlet and the ultimate outlet to stormwater conveyance or waterbody. 
(2)  Plan compliance under subsection (c)(1) of this section shall be determined using the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Services Technical Guide or another commonly accepted soil erosion methodology approved by the county conservationist that considers season of year, site characteristics, soil erodibility and slope. 
(3)  Erosion control measures for plan approval need not attempt to regulate soil transportation within the boundaries of the applicant's site. 
(4)  Post-January 1, 2011 requirements . The plan required under subsection (5) shall meet all of the following: 
a.  Erosion and sediment control practices . Erosion and sediment control practices at each site where land disturbing construction activity is to occur shall be used to prevent or reduce all of the following: 
1.  The deposition of soil from being tracked onto streets by vehicles. 
2.  The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into on-site storm water inlets. 
3.  The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into adjacent waters of the state. 
4.  The discharge of sediment from drainage ways that flow off the site. 
5.  The discharge of sediment by dewatering activities. 
6.  The discharge of sediment eroding from soil stockpiles existing for more than seven days. 
7.  The discharge of sediment from erosive flows at outlets and in downstream channels. 
8.  The transport by runoff into waters of the state of chemicals, cement, and other building compounds and materials on the construction site during the construction period. However, projects that require the placement of these materials in waters of the state, such as constructing bridge footings or BMP installations, are not prohibited by this subdivision. 
9.  The transport by runoff into waters of the state of untreated wash water from vehicle and wheel washing. 
Note: Wastewaters, such as from concrete truck washout, needs to be properly managed to limit the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state. A separate permit may be needed from the department where a wastewater discharge has the potential to adversely impact waters of the state. The appropriate department wastewater specialist should be contacted to determine if wastewater permit coverage is needed where wastewater will be discharged to waters of the state. 
b.  Sediment performance standards . In addition to the erosion and sediment control practices under subsection a., the following erosion and sediment control practices shall be employed: 
1.  For construction sites for which the department received a notice of intent for the construction project in accordance with subchapter III of ch. NR 216, within two years after January 1, 2011, BMPs that, by design, achieve a reduction of 80 percent, or to the maximum extent practicable, of the sediment load carried in runoff, on an average annual basis, as compared with no sediment or erosion controls, until the construction site has undergone final stabilization. 
2.  Two years after January 1, 2011, BMPs that, by design, achieve a reduction of 80 percent, or to the maximum extent practicable, of the sediment load carried in runoff, on an average annual basis, as compared with no sediment or erosion controls, until the construction site has undergone final stabilization. 
3.  For construction sites for which the department received a notice of intent for the construction project in accordance with subch. III of ch. NR 216, two years or more after January 1, 2011, BMPs that, by design, discharge no more than five tons per acre per year, or to the maximum extent practicable, of the sediment load carried in runoff from initial grading to final stabilization. 
4.  The department may not require any person to employ more BMPs than are needed to meet a performance standard in order to comply with maximum extent practicable. Erosion and sediment control BMPs may be combined to meet the requirements of this paragraph. The department may give credit toward meeting the sediment performance standard of this paragraph for limiting the duration or area, or both, of land disturbing construction activity, or for other appropriate mechanisms. 
5.  Notwithstanding subsections 1. or 2., if BMPs cannot be designed and implemented to meet the sediment performance standard, the plan shall include a written site-specific explanation of why the sediment performance standard cannot be met and how the sediment load will be reduced to the maximum extent practicable. 
Note : Soil loss prediction tools such as revised universal soil loss equation two that estimate the sediment load leaving the construction site under varying land and management conditions, or methodology identified in subch. V, may be used to calculate sediment reduction. 
Note : In accordance with subch. V, the department has developed technical standards to help meet the construction site performance standards. These technical standards are available from the department at (608) 267-7694. 
c.  Preventive measures . The plan shall incorporate all of the following: 
1.  Maintenance of existing vegetation, especially adjacent to surface waters whenever possible. 
2.  Minimization of soil compaction and preservation of topsoil. 
3.  Minimization of land disturbing construction activity on slopes of 20 percent or more. 
4.  Development of spill prevention and response procedures. 
(5)  Post-January 1, 2011 requirements . The design plan required under subsection (3) shall meet all of the following: 
a.  Erosion and sediment control practices . Erosion and sediment control practices at each site where land disturbing construction activity is to occur shall be used to prevent or reduce all of the following: 
1.  The deposition of soil from being tracked onto streets by vehicles. 
2.  The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into on-site storm water inlets. 
3.  The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into adjacent waters of the state. 
4.  The discharge of sediment from drainage ways that flow off the site. 
5.  The discharge of sediment by dewatering activities. 
6.  The discharge of sediment eroding from soil stockpiles existing for more than seven days. 
7.  The discharge of sediment from erosive flows at outlets and in downstream channels. 
8.  The transport by runoff into waters of the state of chemicals, cement and other building compounds and materials on the construction site during the construction period. However, projects that require the placement of these materials in waters of the state, such as constructing bridge footings or BMP installations are not prohibited by this subdivision. 
9.  The transport by runoff into waters of the state of untreated wash water from vehicle and wheel washing. 
Note : Wastewaters, such as from concrete truck washout, need to be properly managed to limit the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state. A separate permit may be needed from the department where a wastewater discharge has the potential to adversely impact waters of the state. The appropriate department regional wastewater specialist should be contacted to determine if wastewater permit coverage is needed where wastewater will be discharged to waters of the state. 
b.  Sediment performance standards . In addition to the erosion and sediment control practices under subsection a., the following erosion and sediment control practices shall be employed: 
1.  For transportation facility construction sites for which the department received a notice of intent for the construction project in accordance with subch. III of ch. NR 216 within two years after January 1, 2011, BMPs that, by design, achieve a reduction of 80 percent, or to the maximum extent practicable, of the sediment load carried in runoff, on an average annual basis, as compared with no sediment or erosion controls, until the construction site has undergone final stabilization. 
2.  For transportation facility construction sites for which the department received a notice of intent for the construction project in accordance with subch. III of ch. NR 216, two years or more after January 1, 2011, BMPs that, by design, discharge no more than five tons per acre per year, or to the maximum extent practicable, of the sediment load carried in runoff from initial grading to final stabilization. 
3.  The department may not require any person to employ more BMPs than are needed to meet a performance standard in order to comply with maximum extent practicable. Erosion and sediment control BMPs may be combined to meet the requirements of this paragraph. The department shall give credit toward meeting the sediment performance standard of this paragraph for limiting the duration or area, or both, of land disturbing construction activity, or for other appropriate mechanisms. 
4.  Notwithstanding subsections 1. or 2., if BMPs cannot be designed and implemented to meet the sediment performance standard, the plan shall include a written, site-specific explanation of why the sediment performance standard cannot be met and how the sediment load will be reduced to the maximum extent practicable. 
Note : Soil loss prediction tools such as revised universal soil loss equation two that estimate the sediment load leaving the construction site under varying land and management conditions, or methodology identified in subch. V, may be used to calculate sediment reduction. 
Note : In accordance with subch. V, the department has developed technical standards to help meet the construction site performance standards. These technical standards are available from the department at (608) 267-7694. 
c.  Preventive measures . The plan shall incorporate all of the following: 
1.  Maintenance of existing vegetation, especially adjacent to surface waters, whenever possible. 
2.  Minimization of soil compaction and preservation of topsoil. 
3.  Minimization of land disturbing construction activity on slopes of 20 percent or more. 
4.  Development of spill prevention and response procedures. 
(Code 1998, § 18-332; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006; Ord. No. 18-7, 3-19-2018) 
Sec. 109-57. - Erosion control permit. 
(a)  Application. No person may begin a land disturbing or land development activity subject to this article, and no person shall receive a zoning permit without having received prior approval of an erosion control plan pursuant to section 109-56. The applicant shall submit an application for an erosion control permit along with a proposed erosion control plan and pay all applicable fees. The application must be signed by the landowner or include a notarized statement signed by the landowner authorizing the applicant to act as the landowner's agent and bind the landowner to the terms of this article. The applicant shall submit copies of any permits or permit applications required by any other governmental entity for the project, and a proposed timetable and schedule for completion and installation of all elements of the approved erosion control management plan. Applicant shall also submit an estimate of the costs of completion and installation of all elements of the approved erosion control plan. By submitting an application, the applicant authorizes village enforcement officials to enter the site to obtain specific information required for an informed review of the erosion control plan. 
(b)  Review. Within 20 days of receipt of the application, the village shall review the application. A simplified checklist pursuant to subsection 109-56(b) may be reviewed by the zoning administrator, other staff or building inspector qualified to review such plans. In all other cases, erosion control plans shall be reviewed by the village engineer. If the application and the proposed plan are deficient, the approving official shall inform the applicant, in writing, of any deficiency and may either ask for additional information or disapprove the plan, giving written reasons for the disapproval. All deficiencies in the application and in the erosion control plan shall be corrected before an erosion control permit or a zoning permit is issued. 
(c)  Duration of erosion control permit. Any erosion control permit issued shall be valid for a period of 180 days. Upon application, the village engineer may extend the period for an additional 180 days, and may require additional erosion control measures as a condition for the extension if necessary to meet the requirements of this article. The applicant shall not be required to pay any additional fee for any extension granted. 
(d)  Surety. As a condition of approval and issuance of an erosion control permit, the village engineer may require the applicant to deposit a surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit or other form of surety satisfactory in form and amount to the village attorney to ensure execution of the approved erosion control plan and any conditions upon the erosion control permit. 
(e)  Conditions of permit. All erosion control permits shall require the permittee to: 
(1)  Notify the director of public works at least 48 hours prior to commencing any land disturbing activity; 
(2)  Notify the director of public works of completion of any erosion control measures within ten days after their installation; 
(3)  Obtain written permission from the director of public works and/or village engineer prior to modifying the erosion control plan; 
(4)  Install all erosion control measures identified in the approved erosion control plan; 
(5)  Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage systems, control measures and other facilities identified in the erosion control plan; 
(6)  Promptly repair any situation or erosion damage to adjoining services and drainageways resulting from the land disturbing or land developing activities regulated under the terms of the erosion control plan, initiating the repair within 24 hours of notice of the situation or erosion damage; 
(7)  Inspect the erosion control measures after each rain of one-half-inch or more and at least once per week, and to initiate repairs within 24 hours; 
(8)  Allow the director of public works and/or village engineer to enter the site for the purpose of inspecting compliance with the erosion control plan and for performing any work necessary to bring the site into compliance with the erosion control plan; 
(9)  Keep a copy of the erosion control plan on the site. 
These standard conditions shall be stated on the face of any permit issued by the village. 
(f)  Implementation of plan. The erosion control plan shall be implemented prior to the start of any land disturbing or land developing activity, and shall be maintained throughout the entire term of such activity. The applicant is responsible for successful completion of the erosion control plan as approved. Upon issuance of the permit, the permittee shall be liable for any and all costs incurred resulting from noncompliance with the permittee's approved plan. When a permittee seeks to transfer an interest in property subject to an approved erosion control plan prior to completion of the steps necessary to attain soil stabilization, the permittee must secure approval from the village to transfer any portion of the permittee's responsibility for implementing the approved plan to another party. 
(Code 1998, § 18-333; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006) 
Sec. 109-58. - Fees for erosion control plans. 
    No person may begin a land disturbing construction activity or land developing activity subject to this division until the person has paid the erosion control review and inspection fee to the director of public works. The fee shall be paid to the director of public works when the person submits an application for an erosion control permit along with a proposed erosion control plan pursuant to section 18-333(a). The erosion control review and inspection fee shall be $950.00 plus $0.03 for every square foot of the building or structure, or addition to an existing building or structure, that is part of the land disturbing construction activity or land developing activity. 
(Code 1998, § 18-336; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006; Ord. No. 15-11, § 18-336, 5-18-2015) 
Secs. 109-59-109-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER RUNOFF MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 109-90. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affected means a regulated activity that has significantly: 
(1)  Caused negative impacts on water quality or the use or maintenance of land or business; or 
(2)  Endangered health, safety, or general welfare. 
    Agricultural means related to or used for the production of food and fiber, including, but not limited to, general farming, livestock and poultry enterprises, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod production, cranberry productions and wild crop harvesting and includes lands used for on-site buildings and other structures necessary to carry out such activities. 
    Average annual rainfall means measured precipitation in Madison, Wisconsin between March 12 and December 2, 1981. 
    Bank erosion means the removal of soil or rock fragments along the banks or bed of a stream channel resulting from high flow after rain events. 
    Best management practice means a practice, technique, or measure that is an effective, practical means of preventing or reducing soil erosion or water pollution, or both, from runoff both during and after land development activities. These can include structural, vegetative or operational practices. 
    Business day means a day which offices of the village department of public works are routinely and customarily open for business. 
    Cease-and-desist order means an order issued by the director of public works or by a court to halt land developing or disturbing activity that is being conducted without the required permit. 
    Cold water community means surface waters capable of supporting a community of cold water fish and other aquatic life, or serving as a spawning area for cold water fish species (Wis. Admin. Code § NR 102.04(3)(a)). 
    Connected imperviousness means an impervious surface that is directly connected to a separate storm sewer or water of the state via an impervious flow path. 
    Design storm means the precipitation amounts that occur over a 24-hour period that have a specified recurrence interval for the county. For example, one-year, two-year, ten-year and 100-year design storms mean the precipitation amounts that occur over a 24-hour period that have a recurrence interval of one, two, ten and 100 years. 
    Discharge volume means the quantity of runoff discharged from the land surface as the result of a design storm. 
    Division of land means the creation from one parcel of two or more parcels, or building sites of 20 or fewer acres each in area where such creation occurs at one time or through successive divisions within a five-year period. 
    Effective infiltration area means the area of the infiltration system that is used to infiltrate runoff and does not include the area used for site access, berms or pretreatment. 
    Existing development means buildings and other structures and impervious areas existing prior to August 22, 2001. 
    Extraterritorial means the unincorporated area within 11/2 miles of the corporate limits of the village. 
    Fill means any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved to a new location and shall include the resulting conditions. 
    Financial guarantee means a performance bond, maintenance bond, surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantee submitted to the village by the permit holder to ensure that requirements of this article are carried out in compliance with the stormwater management plan. 
    Groundwater enforcement standard means a numerical value expressing the concentration of a substance in groundwater which is adopted under Wis. Stats. § 160.07 and Wis. Admin. Code § NR 140.10 or Wis. Stats. § 160.09 and Wis. Admin. Code § NR 140.12. 
    Groundwater preventive action limit means a numerical value expressing the concentration of a substance in groundwater which is adopted under Wis. Stats. § 160.15 and Wis. Admin. Code § NR 140.12 or 140.20. 
    Heavily disturbed site means a site where an area of land is subjected to significant compaction due to the removal of vegetative cover or earthmoving activities, including filling. 
    Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a variable used in the runoff calculation methodology promulgated by the United States Natural Resources Conservation Service Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices. 
    Impervious surface means a surface that does not allow infiltration during precipitation or ice melt events. Rooftops, sidewalks, parking lots, and street surfaces are examples of impervious surfaces. For purposes of this article, all road, driveway or parking surfaces, including gravel surfaces, shall be considered impervious, unless specifically designed to encourage infiltration and approved by the local approval authority. 
    Infiltration means any precipitation that does not leave the site as surface runoff. 
    Infiltration system means a device or practice such as a basin, trench, rain garden or swale designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but does not include natural infiltration in pervious surfaces such as lawns, redirecting of rooftop downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration from practices such as swales or road side channels designed for conveyance and pollutant removal only. 
    Karst feature means an area or surficial geologic feature subject to bedrock dissolution so that it is likely to provide a conduit to groundwater, and may include caves, enlarged fractures, mine features, exposed bedrock surfaces, sinkholes, springs, seeps or swallet. 
    Land developing activity means any land alteration which changes the volume of peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This term does not include agricultural cropping activities. 
    Land disturbing activity means any land alterations or disturbances that may result in soil erosion, sedimentation, or change in runoff including, but not limited to, removal of ground cover, grading, excavating and filling of land. 
    Lightly disturbed site means a site where an area of land is subjected to minor compaction due to the limited removal of vegetative cover or earthmoving activities. 
    Maximum extent practicable (MEP) means a level of implementing best management practices in order to achieve a performance standard specified in this chapter which takes into account the best available technology, cost effectiveness and other competing issues such as human safety and welfare, endangered and threatened resources, historic properties and geographic features. The term "MEP" allows flexibility in the way to meet performance standards and may vary based on the performance standard and site conditions. 
    New development means: 
(1)  Structural development, including construction of a new building or other structures; 
(2)  Expansion or alteration of an existing structure that results in an increase in the surface dimensions of the building or structure; 
(3)  Land disturbing activities; or 
(4)  Creation or expansion of impervious surfaces. 
    Non-erosive velocity means a rate of flow of stormwater runoff, usually measured in feet per second, that does not erode soils. Non-erosive velocities vary for individual sites, taking into account topography, soil type, and runoff rates. 
    Nonstructural measures or practices means a practice, technique, or measure to reduce the volume, peak flow rate, or pollutants in stormwater that does not require the design or installation of fixed stormwater management facilities. 
    Off-site means located outside the property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
    On-site means located within the property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
    Other than residential development means development of the following land uses: commercial, industrial, government and institutional, recreation, transportation, communication and utilities. 
    Peak flow discharge rate means the maximum rate at which a unit volume of stormwater is discharged resulting from a storm event. 
    Permit means a written authorization given by the village to the applicant to conduct land development activities. 
    Permit fee means a sum of money paid to the village by the permit applicant for the purpose of recouping the expenses incurred by the village in administering the permit. 
    Pervious surface means any land cover that permits rain or melting snow to soak into the ground. 
    Plan means a stormwater management plan required by this article. 
    Postdevelopment means the extent and distribution of land cover types anticipated to occur under conditions of full development of the submitted stormwater management plan that will influence stormwater runoff and infiltration. This term is used to match pre- and post-development stormwater peak flows as required by this article. 
    Predevelopment means the extent and distribution of land cover types present before the initiation of the proposed land development activity, assuming that all land uses prior to land disturbing activity are in a good condition as described in the Natural Resources Conservation Service Technical Release 55, "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds" (commonly known as TR-55). In a situation where cumulative impervious surface created after August 21, 2001, exceeds the 20,000 square foot threshold, the predevelopment conditions shall be those prior to the proposed land disturbance. This term is used to match predevelopment and postdevelopment stormwater peak flows and volumes as required by this article. 
    Pretreatment means the treatment of stormwater prior to its discharge to the primary stormwater treatment practice in order to reduce pollutant loads to a level compatible with the capability of the primary practice. 
    Redevelopment means any construction, alteration, or improvement exceeding 4,000 square feet of land disturbance performed on sites where the existing site is predominantly commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily residential uses. Projects may include a mix of redevelopment and new impervious surfaces. New impervious surfaces added as a result of redevelopment are subject to subsection 109-93(a)(1). 
    Runoff curve number (RCN) means has the meaning used in the runoff calculation methodology promulgated by the United States Natural Resources Conservation Service Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices. 
    Sediment means solid earth material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, gravity or ice, and has come to rest on the earth's surface at a different site. 
    Site means the bounded area described in an erosion control plan or stormwater management plan. 
    Slope means the net vertical rise over horizontal run, expressed as a percentage which represents a relatively homogeneous surface incline or decline over the area disturbed. 
    Storm events means the precipitation amounts that occur over a 24-hour period that have a specified recurrence interval for the county. For example, one-year, two-year, ten-year and 100-year storm events mean the precipitation amounts that occur over a 24-hour period that have a recurrence interval of one, two, ten and 100 years, respectively. 
    Stormwater means the flow of water which results from, and which occurs during and immediately following, a rainfall snow- or ice-melt event. 
    Stormwater conveyance system means any method employed to carry stormwater runoff from a land development activity to the waters of the state. Examples of methods include: swales, channels and storm sewers. 
    Stormwater management means any measures taken, or practices implemented, to permanently reduce or minimize the negative impacts of stormwater runoff quantity and quality after land development activities. 
    Stormwater management measures or practices means structural or nonstructural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates. 
    Street reconstruction means the removal and replacement of the road subgrade, where existing stormwater conveyance systems are modified. 
    Structure means any humanmade object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon, or set into the ground, stream bed or lake bed. 
    Unnecessary hardship means circumstances where special conditions, which are not self-created, affect a particular property and make strict conformity with regulations unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of this article. 
    Waters of the state means any channel, ditch, stream, lake or other body of water determined to be under state jurisdiction under Wis. Stats. § 281.01(18). 
    Wetland means an area where water is at, near, or above the land surface long enough to be capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which has soils indicative of wet conditions. The term "wetland" includes existing, mitigation and restored wetlands. 
    Wetland functional value means the type, quality, and significance of the ecological and cultural benefits provided by wetland resources, such as: flood storage, water quality protection, groundwater recharge and discharge, shoreline protection, fish and wildlife habitat, floral diversity, aesthetics, recreation, and education. 
    WPDES means Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
    WPDES stormwater permit means a permit issued by the state department of natural resources under Wis. Stats. § 283.33 that authorizes the point source discharge of stormwater to waters of the state. 
(Code 1998, § 18-363; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006) 
Sec. 109-91. - Authority. 
(a)  This article is adopted by the village under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 61.354. This article supersedes all conflicting and contradictory stormwater management regulations previously enacted under Wis. Stats. § 61.35. Except as specifically provided for in Wis. Stats. § 61.354, Wis. Stats. § 61.35 applies to this article and to any amendments to this article. 
(b)  The provisions of this article are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of the village board. 
(c)  The director of public works is designated to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(d)  The requirements of this article do not limit any additional stormwater management requirements that may be imposed by WPDES stormwater permits issued by the department of natural resources under Wis. Stats. § 283.33. 
(e)  County requirements adopted. The requirements of this article are in addition to the stormwater management requirements of subchapter II of chapter 14 of the Dane County Code of Ordinances as it may be amended from time to time (the "county requirements"). If any county requirements are more restrictive than the requirements of this article, or impose greater or additional obligations, the county requirements are adopted as part of this article by this reference. 
(Code 1998, § 18-361; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006; Ord. No. 08-13, 11-3-2008) 
Sec. 109-92. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Findings of fact. Uncontrolled stormwater runoff from land development activity has a significant impact upon water resources and the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. Specifically, uncontrolled stormwater runoff can: 
(1)  Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion, increasing stream bed scour, diminishing groundwater recharge, and diminishing stream base flows; 
(2)  Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life, recreational, and water supply uses by increasing loadings of nutrients and other urban pollutants; 
(3)  Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by increasing pollutant loads; 
(4)  Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading; 
(5)  Threaten public health, safety, property, and general welfare by overtaxing storm sewers, drainageways and other minor drainage facilities; 
(6)  Threaten public health, safety, property, and general welfare by increasing major flood peaks and volumes; 
(7)  Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence and levels of flooding; and 
(8)  Diminish the public enjoyment of natural resources. 
(b)  Purpose. The general purpose of this article is to set forth stormwater requirements and criteria which will prevent and control water pollution and diminish the threats to public health, safety, welfare, and the aquatic environment due to runoff of stormwater from land development activity. Specific purposes are to: 
(1)  Regulate long term, post-construction stormwater discharges from land development activities; 
(2)  Control the quantity, peak flow rates, and quality of stormwater discharges from land development activities; 
(3)  Promote regional stormwater management by watershed; 
(4)  Provide a set of performance values that are consistent with the standards set forth by the county; 
(5)  Provide services to maintain and enhance the quality of life within the community. To this end the village will manage stormwater to protect, maintain and enhance the natural environment; diversity of fish and wildlife; human life; property; and recreational use of waterways within the village area; and 
(6)  Control building sites, placement of structures and land uses, and promote sound economic growth. 
(Code 1998, § 18-362; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006) 
Sec. 109-93. - Applicability and jurisdiction. 
(a)  Applicability. This article applies to land development activities which meet the applicability criteria specified as follows: 
(1)  Any land developing or disturbing activity after August 22, 2001, that results in the cumulative addition of 20,000 square feet of impervious surface to the site; 
(2)  Agricultural development that creates new impervious surface area exceeding 20,000 square feet on the site; 
(3)  Any development that requires a subdivision plat, as defined in chapter 129; 
(4)  Any development that requires a certified survey map, as defined in chapter 129, for other than residential development; 
(5)  Redevelopment, as defined in section 109-90; 
(6)  A residential development with a gross aggregate area of five acres or more; 
(7)  A residential development with a gross aggregate area of three acres or more with at least 11/2 acres of impervious surfaces; 
(8)  A development other than a residential development with a gross aggregate area of three acres or more; 
(9)  Is likely to result in stormwater runoff which exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water, which causes undue channel erosion, which increases water pollution by scouring or the transportation of particulate matter or which endangers downstream property. 
(b)  Jurisdiction. This article applies to any land development activities or land disturbing activities within the boundaries of the village and lands within the extraterritorial plat review jurisdiction of the village, to the extent allowed by law. 
(c)  Exemptions and clarifications. The following activities are exempt from all requirements of this article: 
(1)  Any activity directly related to the planting, growing, and harvesting of agricultural crops; 
(2)  Construction of agricultural buildings, providing the resulting new total impervious surface area does not exceed 20,000 square feet; and 
(3)  The following activities are exempt from the infiltration standards described in subsection 109-96(a)(9): 
a.  Redevelopment sites; 
b.  New development sites with less than ten percent connected imperviousness based on complete development of the post construction site, provided the cumulative area of all impervious surface is less than one acre; 
c.  Agricultural facilities and practices; 
d.  Areas where the infiltration rate of the soil is less than 0.6 inches/hour measured at the bottom of the proposed infiltration system where the soil layer is not easily removed or manipulated; 
e.  Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for commercial and industrial development; 
f.  Roads in commercial, industrial and institutional land uses, and arterial roads. 
(Code 1998, § 18-364; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 281.33(3)(b). 
Sec. 109-94. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any land development activity initiated after the effective date of this article by any person subject to the provisions of this article shall be deemed a violation unless conducted in accordance with such provisions. 
(b)  The director of public works shall notify the responsible owner or operator by certified mail of any noncomplying land development or land disturbing activity. The notice shall describe the nature of the violation, remedial actions needed, a schedule for remedial action, and additional enforcement action which may be taken. 
(c)  Upon receipt of written notification from the director of public works, the permit holder shall correct work which does not comply with the stormwater management plan or other provisions of this permit within 30 days. The permit holder shall make corrections as necessary to meet the specifications and schedule set forth by the director of public works in the notice. 
(d)  The director of public works is authorized to post a cease-and-desist order on all land development activity in violation of this article, or to request the village attorney to obtain a cease-and-desist order from a court. This cease-and-desist order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the site and shall provide the following information: date of issuance, location of site, reason for posting, and the signature of the village authority posting the cease and desist order. 
(e)  The director of public works may revoke a permit issued under this article for noncompliance with article provisions. 
(f)  Any permit revocation or cease-and-desist order shall remain in effect unless retracted by the director of public works or by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(g)  The director of public works is authorized to refer any violation of this article, or of a cease-and-desist order issued pursuant to this article, to the village attorney for the commencement of further legal proceedings. 
(h)  Any person, firm, association, or corporation who does not comply with the provisions of this article shall be subject to a forfeiture as specified in section 1-32. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(i)  Every violation of this article is a public nuisance. Compliance with this article may be enforced by injunction order at the suit of the village pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(8). It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture before resorting to injunction proceedings. 
(j)  When the director of public works determines that the holder of a permit issued pursuant to this article has failed to follow practices set forth in the submitted and approved stormwater management plan, or has failed to comply with schedules set forth in the stormwater management plan, the director of public works or a party designated by the director of public works may enter upon the land and perform the work or other operations necessary to bring the condition of such lands into conformance with requirements of the approved plan. The director of public works shall keep a detailed accounting of the costs and expenses of performing this work. These costs and expenses shall be deducted from any financial guarantee posted pursuant to subsection 109-98(4). Where such a financial guarantee has not been established, or where it is insufficient to cover these costs, the costs and expenses shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the property pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627 and collected with any other taxes levied thereon for the year in which the work is completed. 
(Code 1998, § 18-370; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006) 
Sec. 109-95. - Appeals and variances. 
(a)  Board of appeals. The board of appeals, created under section 101-56 et seq. pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e), shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the director of public works in administering this article. The board shall also use the rules, procedures, duties, and powers authorized by statute in hearing and deciding appeals. 
(b)  Variances. In accordance with the procedures in section 133-155 the board of appeals may authorize variances from the provisions of this article which will not adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare, nor be contrary to the spirit, purpose and intent of this article, and where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the article will result in unnecessary hardship. A variance may only be granted to the minimum extent necessary to afford relief from the unnecessary hardship. Before a variance may be granted, the director of public works must find that the erosion control and/or stormwater management plan, to the extent possible and consistent with the need for a variance, will achieve compliance results comparable to those set forth in this chapter. In making such a finding, the village shall consider water quality and impacts to downstream conditions. 
(c)  Who may appeal. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by any officer, department, or board of the village affected by any decision hereunder. 
(Code 1998, § 18-371; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006) 
Sec. 109-96. - Stormwater management standards. 
(a)  Stormwater discharge quantity. Unless otherwise provided for in this article, all land development activities subject to this article shall establish management practices to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharged from the site as described in this article. All runoff calculations shall be according to the methodology described in the Natural Resource Conservation Service's Technical Release 55, "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds" (commonly known as TR-55), or other methodology approved by the county conservationist. For agricultural land subject to this section, the maximum runoff curve number (RCN) used in such calculations shall be 51 for HSG A, 68 for HSG B, 79 for HSG C, and 84 for HSG D. The TR-55-specified RCNs for other land uses shall be lowered one permeability class for hydrologic calculations on heavily disturbed sites. No permeability modification is required for lightly disturbed sites, or on sites where practices have been implemented to restore soil structure to predevelopment conditions. Except for redevelopment projects, all management practices shall be used to meet the minimum performance standards: 
(1)  Maintain predevelopment peak runoff rates for the two-year, 24-hour storm event (2.9 inches over 24 hours' duration). 
(2)  Maintain predevelopment peak runoff rates for the ten-year, 24-hour storm event (4.2 inches over 24 hours' duration). 
(3)  All stormwater conveyance systems within the proposed development, and receiving surface runoff from the proposed development, shall be designed to completely contain peak storm flows as described in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section. Calculations for determining peak flows for conveyance system sizing shall use runoff curve numbers (RCNs) based on the existing or future proposed land use for off-site areas (whichever results in the highest peak flows), and the proposed land use for the on-site areas. 
(4)  For open channel conveyance systems, the peak flow from the 25-year, 24-hour storm shall be completely contained within the channel bottom and banks. 
(5)  For open channel conveyance systems, the peak flow from the 25-year, 24-hour storm shall be completely contained within the pipes with no surcharging or pressurized flow. 
(6)  Increases or decreases in the hydrology of wetlands shall be minimized to the extent practical. Where such changes are proposed, the impact of the proposal on wetland functional values shall be assessed using methods acceptable to the director of public works. Significant changes to wetland functional values shall be avoided (as defined by Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 103). 
(7)  All control structures shall be designed to safely pass the 100-year, 24-hour event (6.0 inches over 24-hour duration). 
(8)  Discharges from new construction sites must have a stable outlet designed to carry the flows described in this section at a non-erosive velocity. Outlet design must consider low flow capacity and flow duration. This requirement applies to both the site outlet and the ultimate outlet to stormwater conveyance or waterbody. 
(9)  Infiltration. 
a.  Residential development. For residential developments, design practices to infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that post-development infiltration volume shall be at least 90 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based upon average annual rainfall. When designing appropriate infiltration systems, no more than one percent of the site is required to be used as effective infiltration area if the infiltration system has been designed to the maximum extent practicable. 
b.  Nonresidential development. For nonresidential development, including commercial, industrial and institutional development, design practices to infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that post-development infiltration volume shall be at least 60 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on average annual rainfall. When designing appropriate infiltration systems, no more than two percent of the site is required to be used as effective infiltration area if the infiltration system has been designed to the maximum extent practicable. 
c.  Pre-treatment. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for parking lot runoff and for runoff from new road construction in commercial, industrial and institutional areas that will enter an infiltration system. The pre-treatment shall be designed to protect the infiltration system from clogging prior to scheduled maintenance and to protect groundwater quality. 
d.  Prohibitions. Notwithstanding subsubsections (a)(9)a through (9)c of this section, infiltration systems may not be installed in any of the following areas: 
1.  Areas associated with tier 1 industrial facilities identified in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 216.21(2)(a), including storage, loading, rooftop and parking; 
2.  Storage and loading areas of tier 2 industrial facilities identified in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 216.21(2)(b); 
3.  Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas; 
4.  Areas within 1,000 feet up gradient or within 100 feet down gradient of karst features; 
5.  Areas with less than three feet separation distance from bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock, except that this provision does not prohibit infiltration of roof runoff; 
6.  Areas with runoff from industrial, commercial and institutional parking lots and roads and residential arterial roads with less than five feet separation distance from the bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock; 
7.  Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as specified in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 811.16(4), for runoff infiltrated from commercial, industrial and institutional land uses or regional devices for residential development; 
8.  Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 720.03(2), are present in the soil through which infiltration will occur; 
9.  Any area where the soil does not exhibit one of the following characteristics between the bottom of the infiltration system and the seasonal high groundwater and top of bedrock: at least a five-foot soil layer with ten percent fines or greater. This provision does not apply where the soil medium within the infiltration system provides an equivalent level of protection and does not prohibit infiltration of roof runoff. 
e.  Alternate use of runoff. Where alternate uses of runoff are employed, such as for toilet flushing, laundry or irrigation, such alternate use shall be given equal credit toward the infiltration volume required by this section. 
f.  Minimizing groundwater pollution. According to Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 151, infiltration systems designed in accordance with this section shall, to the extent technically and economically feasible, minimize the level of pollutants infiltrating to groundwater and shall maintain compliance with the preventive action limit at a point of standards application in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 140. However, if site-specific information indicates that compliance with the preventative action limit is not achievable, the infiltration system may not be installed or shall be modified to prevent infiltration to the maximum extent practicable. 
(b)  Stormwater discharge quality. Unless otherwise provided for in this article, all land development activities subject to this article shall establish management practices to control the quality of stormwater discharged from the site. Management practices shall be used to meet the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Sediment control. 
a.  For new development, design practices to retain soil particles greater than five microns on the site (80 percent reduction) resulting from a one-year, 24-hour storm event (2.5 inches over 24-hour duration), according to approved procedures, and assuming no sediment resuspension; 
b.  For redevelopment resulting in exposed surface parking lots and associated traffic areas, design measures to retain soil particles greater than 20 microns on the entire site (40 percent reduction) resulting from a one-year, 24-hour design storm, according to approved procedures, and assuming no sediment resuspension. Under no circumstances shall the site's existing sediment control level or trapping efficiency be reduced as a result of redevelopment. 
(2)  Discharge of urban stormwater pollutants to wetlands without pretreatment shall be minimized. Where such discharges are proposed, the impact of the proposal on wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method acceptable to the director of public works. Significant changes to wetland functional values due to stormwater pollutant loads shall be avoided. 
(3)  Stormwater discharges shall be pretreated prior to infiltration, to prolong maintenance of the infiltration practice and to prevent discharge of stormwater pollutants at concentrations that will result in exceedances of groundwater preventive action limits or enforcement standards established by the department of natural resources in Wis. Admin. Code. ch. NR 140. Stormwater infiltration is prohibited under the following circumstances: 
a.  Stormwater is generated from highly contaminated source areas at manufacturing or industrial sites; 
b.  Stormwater is carried in a conveyance system that also carries contaminated, nonstormwater discharges; 
c.  Stormwater is generated from active construction sites. 
(4)  Stormwater control measures and infiltration devices shall not be located closer to water supply wells than indicated below without first notifying the director of public works: 
a.  One hundred feet from a nonpublic water supply well; 
b.  Four hundred feet from a municipal water supply well; 
c.  One thousand two hundred feet from a community water supply well (or the defined well for which recharge area surrounding a community water wellhead protection plan has been established). 
(5)  Land development activities with stormwater runoff reaching outstanding or exceptional resource waters as identified in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 102, may be required to use additional stormwater management measures to exceed the minimum requirements of this section. 
(6)  Oil and grease control. For all stormwater plans for commercial or industrial developments and all other uses where the potential for pollution by oil or grease, or both, exists, the first 0.5 inches of runoff will be treated using the best oil and grease removal technology available. The director of public works may waive this plan requirement only when the applicant can demonstrate that installation of such measures is not necessary. 
(7)  Thermal control. Unless the applicant can justify by use of a model approved by the county conservationist that measures are not necessary because the temperature increase of runoff from the site post-development will be zero, the stormwater management plan shall include provisions and measures to reduce the temperature of runoff of sites located within the watershed of a river or stream identified as: 
a.  A cold water community as identified through Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 102.04(3)(a) and ch. NR 104, and Class I, Class II, and Class III Trout Streams identified in "Wisconsin Trout Streams," DNR publication PUB-FH-806-2002 or its successor. This shall also include any rivers or streams proposed by the state department of natural resources for designation as cold water communities, or Class I, II, and III trout streams; 
b.  A current list and maps of affected watersheds shall be available for review at the office of the director of public works. 
(c)  General considerations for on-site and off-site management measures. Natural topography and land cover features such as natural swales, natural depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity, and natural groundwater recharge areas shall be preserved and used, to the extent possible, to meet the requirements of this section. 
(d)  Stormwater management goals. The following standards shall be met whenever possible, and proposed design, suggested location and implementation of measures to meet these goals shall be included in all stormwater management plans: 
(1)  For existing development, design practices to retain soil particles greater than 40 microns on the site (20 percent reduction) resulting from a one-year, 24-hour design storm, according to approved procedures and assuming no sediment resuspension; 
(2)  For street reconstruction, design practices to retain soil particles greater than 20 microns on the site (40 percent reduction) resulting from a one-year, 24-hour design storm, according to approved procedures and assuming no sediment resuspension. 
(e)  Sites within a protective area that require a stormwater plan. Sites within a protective area requiring a stormwater plan must abide by the following: 
(1)  The term "protective area" means an area of land that commences at the top of the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary of wetlands, and that is the greatest of the following widths, as measured horizontally from the top of the channel or delineated wetland boundary to the closest impervious surface. However, in this subsection, the term "protective area" does not include any area of land adjacent to any stream enclosed within a pipe or culvert, such that runoff cannot enter the enclosure at this location. 
a.  For WDNR designated outstanding resource waters and exceptional resource waters, and for wetlands in areas of special natural resource interest as specified in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 103.04 (WDNR), 75 feet; 
b.  For perennial streams identified on a United States Geological Survey 7.5-minute series topographic map, or a county soil survey map, whichever is more current, 50 feet; 
c.  For lakes, 50 feet; 
d.  For highly susceptible wetlands, 50 feet. Highly susceptible wetlands include the following types: fens, sedge meadows, bogs, low prairies, conifer swamps, shrub swamps, other forested wetlands, fresh wet meadows, shallow marshes, deep marshes and seasonally flooded basins. Wetland boundary delineations shall be made in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § NR 103.08(1m) (WDNR). This subsection does not apply to wetlands that have been completely filled in accordance with all applicable state and federal regulations. The protective area for wetlands that have been partially filled in accordance with all applicable state and federal regulations shall be measured from the wetland boundary delineation after fill has been placed; 
e.  For less susceptible wetlands, ten percent of the average wetland width, but no less than ten feet nor more than 30 feet. Less susceptible wetlands include degraded wetlands dominated by invasive species such as reed canary grass; 
f.  In subsections (e)(1)a, d and e of this section, determinations of the extent of the protective area adjacent to wetlands shall be made on the basis of the sensitivity and runoff susceptibility of the wetland in accordance with the standards and criteria in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 103.03 (WDNR); 
g.  For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas greater than 130 acres, ten feet. 
(2)  This subsection applies to post-construction sites located within a protective area, except those areas exempted pursuant to subsection (e)(4) of this section. 
(3)  The following requirements shall be met: 
a.  Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective area to the maximum extent practicable. The stormwater management plan shall contain a written site-specific explanation for any parts of the protective area that are disturbed during construction; 
b.  Where land disturbing construction activity occurs within a protective area, and where no impervious surface is present, adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover of 70 percent or greater shall be established and maintained. The adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover shall be sufficient to provide for bank stability, maintenance of fish habitat and filtering of pollutants from upslope overland flow areas under sheet flow conditions. Non-vegetative materials, such as rock riprap, may be employed on the bank as necessary to prevent erosion, such as on steep slopes or where high velocity flows occur; 
c.  Best management practices such as filter strips, swales, or wet detention basins that are designed to control pollutants from non-point sources may be located in the protective area. 
(4)  This section does not apply to: 
a.  Redevelopment post-construction sites; 
b.  In-fill development areas less than five acres; 
c.  Structures that cross or access surface waters such as boat landings, bridges and culverts; 
d.  Structures constructed in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 59.692(1v); 
e.  Post-construction sites from which runoff does not enter the surface water, except to the extent that vegetative ground cover is necessary to maintain bank stability. 
(Code 1998, § 18-365; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 281.33(3)(c). 
Sec. 109-97. - Off-site stormwater management. 
(a)  Off-site management allowed. Off-site stormwater management is allowed, provided that all of the following conditions for the off-site facility are met: 
(1)  The facility is in place; 
(2)  The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that at least meets the ordinance standards; and 
(3)  The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its long-term operation and maintenance. 
(b)  Off-site facilities owned by the village with an adequate capacity to meet applicant's needs may be used to meet the requirements of this article. The development may be required to pay a proportionate share of the cost of such off-site facilities. The developer may also construct an off-site facility in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the village, and dedicate such facility to the village. The developer may be eligible for reimbursement from other contributing landowners for a proportionate share of the cost. 
(Code 1998, § 18-366; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006) 
Sec. 109-98. - Permitting requirements, procedures and fees. 
(a)  Permit required. No landowner or land operator may undertake a land development activity subject to this article without receiving a permit from the director of public works prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Permit application and fee. Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or land operator desiring a permit shall submit to the director of public works a permit application made on a form provided by the department of public works for that purpose. The applicant must provide the following when requesting a permit: 
(1)  Completed application form: 
a.  The application must be signed by the landowner or include a notarized statement signed by the landowner authorizing the applicant to act as the landowner's agent and bind the landowner to the terms of this article; 
b.  If the landowner appoints an agent to submit an application pursuant to subsection (b)(1)a of this section, the landowner shall be bound by all of the requirements of this article and the terms of any permit issued to the agent. 
(2)  Fees as required by section 109-101. 
(3)  A stormwater management plan meeting all of the standards of section 109-99 and covenants and restrictions prepared to meet the requirements of section 109-100. 
(4)  Copies of permits or permit applications or approvals required by any other governmental entity. 
(5)  A proposed timetable and schedule for completion and installation of all elements of the approved erosion control and stormwater management plans. 
(6)  An estimate of the cost of completion and installation of all elements of the approved stormwater management plan. 
(7)  Evidence of financial responsibility to complete the work proposed in the plan. The director of public works may require a financial guarantee under subsection (d) of this section. 
(8)  The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the requirements of section 109-99, the covenants and restrictions shall be prepared to meet the requirements of section 109-100, and fees shall be those established in section 109-101. 
(c)  Review and approval of permit application. The director of public works shall review any permit application that is submitted with a stormwater management plan, covenants and restrictions, and the required fee. The following approval procedure shall be used: 
(1)  Within 20 business days of the receipt of a complete permit application, including all documents as required by subsection (b) of this section, the director of public works shall inform the applicant whether the application, plan and covenants and restrictions are approved or disapproved. The director of public works shall base the decision on requirements set forth in this article. 
(2)  If the stormwater permit application, plan and covenants and restrictions are approved, the director of public works shall issue the permit. 
(3)  If the stormwater permit application, plan, or covenants and restrictions are disapproved, the applicant may revise the stormwater management plan or agreement, or may appeal the decision of the director of public works as provided for in section 109-95. 
(4)  If additional information is submitted, the director of public works shall have 20 business days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the plan and covenants and restrictions are either approved or disapproved. 
(5)  If the stormwater permit application, plan or covenants and restrictions are disapproved, the director of public works shall detail in writing the reasons for disapproval. 
(d)  Financial guarantee. The director of public works may require the submittal of financial guarantees prior to issuance of the permit in order to ensure that the stormwater measures are installed by the permit holder as required by the stormwater management plan. The amount of the financial guarantee, determined by the director of public works, shall not exceed the total estimated costs to install the stormwater management measures approved under the permit plus 25 percent. The financial guarantee shall be released in full only upon submission of as-built plans and written certification by a registered professional engineer in the state that the stormwater practice has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this article. The director of public works may make provisions for a partial pro rata release of the financial guarantee based on the completion of various development stages. 
(e)  Permit conditions. All permits issued under this article shall be subject to the following conditions, and holders of permits issued under this article shall be deemed to have accepted these conditions. The director of public works may suspend or revoke a permit for violation of a permit condition, following written notification of the permittee. An action by the director of public works to suspend or revoke this permit may be appealed in accordance with section 109-95. 
(1)  Compliance with this permit does not relieve the permit holder of the responsibility to comply with other applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations. 
(2)  The permit holder shall design, install, and maintain all structural and nonstructural stormwater management measures in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan, covenants and restrictions, and this permit. The permittee shall be liable for all costs incurred, including environmental restoration costs, resulting from noncompliance with an approved plan. 
(3)  The permit holder shall notify the director of public works at least two business days before commencing any work in conjunction with the stormwater management plan, and within five business days upon completion of the stormwater management measures. If required as a special condition, the permit holder shall make additional notification according to a schedule set forth by the director of public works so that practice installations can be inspected during construction. 
(4)  Completed stormwater management measures must pass a final inspection to determine if they are in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan and this article. The inspection must be made by the director of public works, or other competent professional identified by the director of public works. The director of public works shall notify the permit holder in writing of any changes required in such practices to bring them into compliance with the conditions of this permit. The permit holder is further required to submit a certificate of completion, stating the completion of the permitted work in accordance with the plans, as well as all applicable village, state and federal requirements. The certificate must be signed by the permit holder, the contractor and the design engineer. 
(5)  The permit holder shall notify the director of public works of any significant modifications it intends to make to an approved stormwater management plan. The director of public works may require that the proposed modifications be submitted for approval prior to incorporation into the stormwater management plan and execution. 
(6)  The permit holder shall maintain all stormwater management measures specified in the approved stormwater management plan until the measures either become the responsibility of the village, or are transferred to subsequent private owners as specified in the approved covenants and restrictions. 
(7)  The permit holder authorizes the director of public works to perform any work or operations necessary to bring stormwater management measures into conformance with the approved stormwater management plan, and consents to a special charge against the property as authorized under Wis. Stats. § 66.0627, or to charging such costs against the financial guarantee posted under subsection 109-98(4). 
(8)  If so directed by the director of public works, the permit holder shall repair at the permit holder's own expense all damage to adjoining municipal facilities and drainageways caused by stormwater runoff, where such damage is caused by activities that are not in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
(9)  The permit holder shall permit property access to representatives of the village for the purpose of inspecting the property for compliance with the approved stormwater management plan and this permit. 
(10)  Where a stormwater management plan involves direction of some or all runoff off-site, it shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to obtain from adjacent property owners any easements or other necessary property interests concerning flowage of water. Issuance of this permit does not create any such rights. 
(11)  The permit holder is subject to the enforcement actions identified in section 109-94 if the permit holder fails to comply with the terms of this permit. 
(f)  Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date the director of public works notifies the permit holder that all stormwater management measures have passed the final inspection required under permit conditions in subsection (e) of this section. 
(g)  Permit transfers. 
(1)  Stormwater management permits issued under this chapter are not assignable without prior written approval by the director of public works. 
(2)  When a landowner transfers ownership, possession or control of real estate, subject to an uncompleted stormwater management plan, the landowner may transfer his obligations under the permit under the following arrangements: 
a.  The transferee shall file a new, approved stormwater plan with the director of public works. 
b.  The transferee shall complete an approved assignment form from the village. 
c.  The financial guarantee held by the village may be released to the transferor if the transferee provides appropriate financial guarantees for the remaining obligations under the permit. 
d.  If the assignment is approved, the transferee shall be responsible for the remaining unfulfilled obligations of the erosion control and stormwater management permit, including long-term maintenance. 
(Code 1998, § 18-367; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006) 
Sec. 109-99. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
    Plan materials. The stormwater management plan required shall contain any such information the village may need to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the area affected by land development activity, the potential discharges, the potential impacts upon water, resources, and drainage utilities, and the effectiveness and acceptability of proposed stormwater management measures in meeting the performance standards set forth in this article. All site investigations, plans, designs, computations, and drawings shall be certified by a registered professional engineer in the state to be prepared in accordance with accepted engineering practice and in accordance with criteria set forth by the director of public works. Unless specified otherwise by this article, stormwater management plans shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  A narrative describing the proposed project, including implementation schedule for planned practices; 
(2)  Identification of the entity responsible for long-term maintenance of the project, and a narrative describing the proposed maintenance activities in perpetuity; 
(3)  A map showing drainage areas for each watershed area; 
(4)  A summary of runoff peak flow rate calculations, by watershed area, including: 
a.  Pre-existing flow rates; 
b.  Post-construction peak flow rates with no detention; 
c.  Post-construction peak flow rates with detention; 
d.  Assume runoff curve numbers (RCNs); and 
e.  Time of concentration (Tc) used in calculations. 
(5)  A complete site plan and specifications, signed by the person who designed the plan. All plans shall be drawn to an easily legible scale, shall be clearly labeled, and shall include, at a minimum, all of the following information: 
a.  The limits and area of the disturbed area; 
b.  The location and area of all proposed impervious surfaces; 
c.  Property lines and lot dimensions; 
d.  All buildings and outdoor uses, existing and proposed, including all dimensions and setbacks; 
e.  All public and private roads, interior roads, driveways and parking lots. Show traffic patterns and type of paving and surfacing material; 
f.  All natural and artificial water features, including, but not limited to, ponds, lakes, streams (including intermittent streams), and ditches. Show ordinary high water marks of all navigable waters, 100-year flood elevations and delineated wetland boundaries, if any. If not available, appropriate flood zone determination or wetland delineation, or both, may be required at the applicant's expense; 
g.  Depth to bedrock; 
h.  Depth to seasonal high water table; 
i.  The extent and location of all soil types as described in the county soil survey, slopes exceeding 12 percent, and areas of natural woodland or prairie; 
j.  Existing and proposed elevations (referenced to the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, where available) and existing and proposed contours in the area requiring a permit; 
k.  Elevations, sections, profiles and details as needed to describe all natural and artificial features of the project, including all existing and proposed drainage features; 
l.  Soil erosion control and overland runoff control measures, including runoff calculations as appropriate; 
m.  Detailed construction schedule; 
n.  Copies of permits or permit applications required by any other governmental entities or agencies; 
o.  Any other information necessary to reasonably determine the location, nature and condition of any physical or environmental features; 
p.  Location of all stormwater management measures; 
q.  If required under subsection 109-96(b)(7), a description and plan to control temperature of runoff; 
r.  Covenants and restrictions as required in section 109-100. 
(6)  Engineered designs for all structural management practices. 
(7)  A description of methods to control oil and grease or written justification for not providing such control. 
(8)  If required, a description and plans to control temperature of runoff. 
(9)  Covenants and restrictions for all permanent stormwater management practices as recorded with the county register of deeds, as required by section 109-100. 
(Code 1998, § 18-368; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006) 
Sec. 109-100. - Covenants and restrictions. 
(a)  Required. Following the final inspection and submission of as-built plans for all stormwater measures specified in a plan, the owner shall record: 
(1)  Covenants and restrictions, in a form approved by the village, providing for the perpetual maintenance of all stormwater measures; and 
(2)  As-built plans and specifications showing the performance and design contemplated for each measure. 
The covenants and restrictions shall be an encumbrance against the entire site covered by the plan and shall be binding and on the owner and the owner's successors and assigns. 
(b)  Provisions. The covenants and restrictions shall contain the following provisions: 
(1)  The landowner shall maintain stormwater management measures in accordance with the stormwater practice maintenance provisions contained in the approved stormwater management plan submitted under section 109-99. 
(2)  The village is authorized to access the property to conduct inspections of stormwater measures as necessary to ascertain the measures are being maintained and operated in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
(3)  The village shall maintain public records of the results of the site inspections, shall inform the landowner responsible for maintenance of the inspection results, and shall specifically indicate any corrective actions required to bring the stormwater management practice into proper working condition and a reasonable time frame during which the corrective action must be taken. 
(4)  The village shall be authorized to perform the corrective actions identified in the inspection report if the landowner does not make the required corrections in the specified time period and shall authorize the collection of the costs as a special charge against the property pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(c)  Modification or termination. The covenants and restrictions may be modified only with the village's written consent. The covenants and restrictions shall be terminated when responsibility for maintenance of the stormwater management practice is legally transferred to the village or agency acceptable to the village, through a written, binding agreement. The termination date of the covenants and restrictions required under subsection (a) of this section shall be the date upon which the legal transfer of maintenance responsibility to the village or agency is made effective. 
(Code 1998, § 18-369; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006) 
Sec. 109-101. - Fees for submission of plans. 
    Each applicant desiring to undertake a regulated activity subject to this article shall submit to the director of public works an application fee as established by the village board from time to time, and a plan review fee calculated as follows: The applicant shall be responsible for paying a fee equal to the actual cost to the village for all the engineering work and inspections incurred by the village in connection with review of the stormwater management plan and inspections of the implementation of the plan, plus ten percent of the total actual cost to cover village administrative expenses. At the time the application is submitted, the applicant shall prepay an estimated fee of in the amount established by resolution, unless waived by the director of public works. Following review of the plan, the village engineer shall estimate the total cost of the engineer's review and inspections in connection with the review and implementation of the plan. If the amount is estimated to be more than the amount deposited with the application, the director of public works shall require the applicant to deposit with the village treasurer, in escrow, the remaining sum required by the village engineer's estimate. The village treasurer shall pay bills submitted for engineering and inspection out of the escrowed funds. In the event the amount deposited with the village treasurer falls below 25 percent of the amount required to be deposited, the director of public works shall require the permittee to replenish the escrow to the original amount required hereunder. Upon final acceptance of implementation of the stormwater management plan, the amounts remaining in the escrow shall be refunded to the applicant. An accounting of all fees paid by the village and the status of the escrow shall be provided to the permittee at least quarterly. In the event the applicant or permittee defaults in establishing or replenishing the escrow, the village may take enforcement action as contemplated under this article. 
(Code 1998, § 18-372; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006) 
Sec. 109-102. - Technical standards and specifications. 
    The design of all best management practices designed to meet the requirement of this article shall comply with the following technical standards: 
(1)  Natural Resources Conservation Service's "Field Office Technical Guide, Chapter 4," or its successor; 
(2)  Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources' "Wisconsin Construction Site Best Management Practice Handbook" or its successor; 
(3)  Any other technical methodology approved by the county conservationist. 
(Code 1998, § 18-373; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 6-5-2006) 
Secs. 109-103-109-132. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GRADING PERMITS 

Sec. 109-133. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agricultural activities means use of land for planting, growing, cultivating and harvesting of crops for human or livestock consumption. 
    Director of public works means the person designated by the village as director of public works as well as any person to whom the director delegates or assigns certain responsibilities or functions. 
    Registered architect means a person duly registered with the state as a registered architect under Wis. Stats. § 443.03. 
    Registered land surveyor means a person duly registered with the state as a registered land surveyor under Wis. Stats. § 443.06. 
    Registered professional engineer means a person duly registered with the State of Wisconsin as a registered professional engineer under Wis. Stats. § 443.04. 
    Site stabilization means the point at which grading activities have ceased, and the site has been stabilized utilizing a stabilization practice approved by the director of public works as part of the permit. 
    Substantial grading activity means any manmade activity that alters the elevations and/or extent and distribution of land cover types on a site that may influence stormwater runoff and infiltration. 
(Code 1998, § 18-382; Ord. No. 02-06, § 5, 8-5-2002) 
Sec. 109-134. - Authority. 
(a)  This article is adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. §§ 61.34, and 61.354, Wis. Stats. ch. 236 and general home rule powers. 
(b)  The provisions of this article are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of the village board. 
(c)  The village board hereby authorizes the director of public works and his designated agents to oversee the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(d)  The requirements of this article are not intended to conflict with or limit any additional requirements of this Code, any other federal, state or local laws, WPDES stormwater permits issued by the department of natural resources under Wis. Stats. § 283.33, or the Uniform Dwelling Code found in Wis. Admin. Code chs. SPS 20-25. In the event there may be multiple or conflicting requirements or regulations, the more restrictive requirements shall apply consistent with promoting the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1998, § 18-380; Ord. No. 02-06, § 3, 8-5-2002) 
Sec. 109-135. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Findings of fact. The village board finds that proper site grading must be evaluated in a context broader than site-by-site and is essential to maintain proper stormwater management and drainage planning, the protection of water resources and the promotion of health, safety, and general welfare of the community. Specifically, improper site grading results in the misdirection of stormwater runoff which can: 
(1)  Divert stormwater runoff away from appropriate control structures, such as detention or retention basins, drainageways, ditches or sewers, resulting in uncontrolled stormwater runoff which can contribute to the deleterious stormwater effects as listed in subsection 18-362(a) which are incorporated herein by reference; 
(2)  Direct stormwater runoff onto an adjoining landowner's property, resulting in decreased property values and enjoyment of the use of that property; 
(3)  Create and/or exacerbate flooding and erosion control problems that the cumulative impacts of improper grading on specific sites can cause for an entire drainage area; 
(4)  Conflict with surface water drainage planning for a larger area such as a subdivision, neighborhood or drainage basin; 
(5)  Diminish the overall effectiveness of public stormwater management planning and facilities in the village. 
(b)  Purpose. The general purpose of this article is to set forth grading requirements and encourage compliance with approved grading plans in order to protect property values, promote proper area-wide drainage patterns, maintain the effectiveness of public stormwater management planning and facilities in the village, and diminish threats to public health, safety, welfare, and the aquatic environment due to changes in stormwater drainage patterns resulting from substantial grading activities. 
(Code 1998, § 18-381; Ord. No. 02-06, § 4, 8-5-2002) 
Sec. 109-136. - Applicability. 
(a)  Generally. This article applies to any substantial grading activities, subsequent to the completion of all the grading required pursuant to section 129-196, on any lands for which plats are approved after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, unless otherwise specifically exempted as provided below. 
(b)  Exceptions. This article applies to all substantial grading activities undertaken on platted lands within the boundaries of the village unless one of the following exceptions applies: 
(1)  Grading associated with agricultural activities shall not be subject to the requirements of this subdivision. 
(2)  If the substantial grading activity solely involves the planting of trees and/or other vegetation, the construction of flower beds, or the use or installation of other landscaping items or practices, the director of public works may waive the permit requirement if the proposed activity does not threaten to undermine the purposes of this article set forth in section 109-135. 
(Code 1998, § 18-383; Ord. No. 02-06, § 6, 8-5-2002) 
Sec. 109-137. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    If any violations or noncompliance with the requirements of this article occur, all the enforcement and penalty provisions of section 109-94 are available to the village and are incorporated herein by reference. In addition, when the director of public works determines that the permit holder has failed to follow practices set forth in the permit and/or approved grading plan, the director of public works may enter upon the land and perform the work or other operations necessary to obtain compliance. The director of public works shall keep a detailed accounting of the direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred in performing such work. These costs and expenses may be deducted from any deposit made pursuant to section 109-141. Where such deposit is insufficient to cover these costs, the costs and expenses shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the property pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627 and collected with any other taxes levied thereon for the year in which the work is completed. 
(Code 1998, § 18-388; Ord. No. 02-06, § 11, 8-5-2002) 
Sec. 109-138. - Appeals. 
    Appeals shall be afforded and conducted in accordance with the provisions of section 109-95. 
(Code 1998, § 18-389; Ord. No. 02-06, § 12, 8-5-2002) 
Sec. 109-139. - Permit application requirements and procedures. 
(a)  Permit required. No landowner or other person may undertake a substantial grading activity subject to this article without receiving a grading permit from the director of public works prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Permit application and fee. Any landowner or landowner's agent desiring a grading permit shall first submit to the director of public works a completed grading permit application. A permit application must include the following in order to be considered complete. 
(1)  A signed and completed application form as provided by the village; 
(2)  A grading plan in accordance with section 109-140; 
(3)  A performance security deposit pursuant to section 109-141; and 
(4)  A non-refundable application fee as provided in section 109-142. 
(c)  Review and approval of permit application. Within five business days of the receipt of a completed grading permit application, including all items as required by subsection (b) of this section, the director of public works shall inform the applicant whether the application and grading plan are approved or disapproved, with or without conditions, based upon the requirements set forth in section 109-140. 
(1)  If the application and plan are approved, the director of public works shall issue the permit, with or without conditions. Any conditions of approval shall be written on the permit. 
(2)  If the application and plan are disapproved, the director of public works shall state the reasons for disapproval in writing. The applicant may revise the plan and submit additional information, or may appeal the decision of the director of public works as provided in section 109-138. 
(3)  If additional information is submitted, the director of public works shall have five business days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the plan is either approved or denied. 
(4)  If the director of public works has failed to notify the applicant that the plan has been approved or denied within the time periods set by this subsection, the permit shall be deemed approved. 
(d)  General permit conditions. All permits issued under this article are subject to the specific permit conditions attached as a condition of approval under subsection (c) of this section, as well as the general conditions set forth below. The following general conditions are hereby deemed to be incorporated into all grading permits, whether or not expressly stated on the permit itself: 
(1)  Compliance with the permit does not relieve the permit holder of the responsibility to comply with other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(2)  The permit holder shall perform all substantial grading in accordance with the approved grading plan and shall comply with all the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(3)  If work on the substantial grading activity does not commence within 60 days of permit issuance, the permit holder shall notify the director of public works at least two business days before commencing any work in conjunction with the grading plan. The permit holder shall notify the director of public works within five business days upon completion of site stabilization. The permit holder shall permit property access to representatives of the village for the purpose of inspecting the property for compliance with the approved grading plan and this permit. 
(4)  Completed grading practices must be in accordance with the approved grading plan, permit, and ordinances. The permit holder is required to submit a certificate of completion on a form provided by the village, which certifies the completion of site stabilization and of the permitted work all in accordance with the approved grading plan and permit. This certificate must be signed by the permit holder and a registered land surveyor, a registered architect, or a registered professional engineer. 
(5)  The permit holder shall notify the director of public works of any significant modifications it intends to make to an approved grading plan. The director of public works may require that the proposed modifications be submitted for approval prior to incorporation into the grading plan and execution. 
(6)  If the permit holder fails to fully comply with the terms and conditions of the permit, the village shall provide the permit holder with written notice of noncompliance via certified mail. If the permit holder fails to remedy the situation to the satisfaction of the director of public works within 30 days following the receipt of the notice of noncompliance, by acceptance of the permit the permit holder authorizes the director of public works to enter onto the site in order to perform any work or operations necessary to bring grading measures into conformance with the approved grading plan. The permit holder further consents to a special charge against the property as authorized under Wis. Stats. § 66.0627, and/or, at the village's option, to charging such costs against the deposit posted under section 109-141. 
(e)  Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance as noted thereon and continuing for one year thereafter. All work, including submitting the certification of compliance shall be completed within this date, unless the permittee obtains a written extension from the director of public works. 
(Code 1998, § 18-384; Ord. No. 02-06, § 7, 8-5-2002) 
Sec. 109-140. - Grading plans. 
(a)  Plan requirements. The grading plan required under subsection 109-139(b) shall contain at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Lot corner elevations; 
(2)  Mid lot elevations; 
(3)  Lowest exposed elevation; and 
(4)  Any other information requested by the director of public works. 
(b)  Previously approved plan. If a grading plan for the site, such as a subdivision grading plan, has already been approved by the village as part of another approval process, the applicant may submit that existing plan for review to determine whether it fulfills the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Grading plan standards. All grading plans approved by the village will comply with the following standards: 
(1)  All grading plans must comply with any approved grading plan (such as a subdivision grading plan) applicable to the area subject to the substantial grading activities. 
(2)  Minimum ground slopes from lower level exposures shall be a minimum of1/4 inch per foot away from the building and any lower level exposures shall be a minimum of 24 inches above the lowest point on the lot, unless the applicant proposes and implements a reasonable engineering practice designed to mitigate the effects of altered drainage following a substantial drainage activity (e.g. a "French drain"). 
(d)  Village to provide datums and benchmarks. The village will provide benchmarks and datums wherever reasonably required. 
(Code 1998, § 18-385) 
Sec. 109-141. - Performance security deposit. 
    The applicant for a grading permit shall provide a deposit in the form of cash, corporate check, or a certified check made payable to the village prior to the issuance of the grading permit. The purpose of the deposit is to ensure that the terms and conditions of the grading permit are satisfactorily performed. The amount of the deposit shall be determined by a schedule as periodically approved by the village board. The amount of the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant within five business days after either of the following events occur: 
(1)  The village receives a certificate of completion signed by a registered land surveyor, registered architect, or registered professional engineer, as required by subsection 109-139(d)(4), certifying that the grading plan has been fully complied with and implemented, and that site stabilization has been achieved; or 
(2)  The responsibility for compliance with the grading plan has been assigned to and assumed by another entity or person via a written assignment on a form provided by the village, and a new deposit has been made by the successor or assignee to replace the initial deposit. 
(Code 1998, § 18-386; Ord. No. 02-06, § 9, 8-5-2002) 
Sec. 109-142. - Fees for submission of plans. 
    An applicant wishing to undertake a substantial grading activity subject to this article shall pay an application fee at the time of submission of the application, in accordance with a fee schedule as periodically approved by the village board. 
(Code 1998, § 18-387; Ord. No. 02-06, § 10, 8-5-2002) 
Chapter 113 - FLOODPLAIN ZONING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 113-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35 and 62.23, for villages and cities; Wis. Stats. §§ 59.69, 59.692, and 59.694 for counties; and the requirements in Wis. Stats. § 87.30. 
(Code 1998, § 42-1; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-1.1, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-2. - Finding of fact. 
    Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of this municipality would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general welfare and tax base. 
(Code 1998, § 42-2; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-1.2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    This chapter is intended to regulate floodplain development to: 
(1)  Protect life, health and property; 
(2)  Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the taxpayers; 
(4)  Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain; 
(6)  Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain; 
(7)  Discourage the victimization of unwary land and homebuyers; 
(8)  Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in conflicts between property owners; and 
(9)  Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain. 
(Code 1998, § 42-3; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-1.3, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-4. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the Floodplain Zoning Ordinance for the Village of Waunakee, Wisconsin. 
(Code 1998, § 42-4; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-1.4, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-5. - General provisions. 
(a)  Areas to be regulated. This chapter regulates all areas that would be covered by the regional flood or base flood. 
Note- Base flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in the flood insurance study. Regional flood elevations may be derived from other studies. Areas covered by the base flood are identified as A Zones on the flood insurance rate map. 
(b)  Official maps and revisions . The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as A, AE, AH, AO or A1-30 on the maps based on the flood insurance study (FIS) listed below. Any change to the base flood elevations (BFE) or any changes to the boundaries of the floodplain or floodway in the FIS or on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by the DNR and FEMA through the letter of map change process (see s. 8.0 Amendments ) before it is effective. No changes to RFE's on non-FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions are on file in the office of the zoning administrator, Village of Waunakee. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply. 
Official maps: Based on the FIS. 
(1)  Flood insurance rate map (FIRM), panel numbers 55025C0228G, 55025C0229G, dated January 2, 2009; panel numbers 55025C0233H, 55025C0236H, 55025C0237H, 5025C0241H, 55025C0242H, dated September 17, 2014; with corresponding profiles that are based on the flood insurance study (FIS), dated June 16, 2016, volume numbers 55025CV001D, 55025CV002D, 55025CV003D, and 550025CV004D 
Approved by: The DNR and FEMA. 
Official maps: Based on other studies. 
(1)  Letter of map revision (LOMR), dated November 26, 2008, prepared by Strand Associated, Inc. 
Approved by: The DNR and FEMA. 
(c)  Establishment of districts. The regional floodplain areas are divided into three districts as follows: 
(1)  The floodway district (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional floodwaters; 
(2)  The floodfringe district (FF) is that portion of the floodplain between the regional flood limits and the floodway; 
(3)  The general floodplain district (GFP) is those areas that have been or may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood. 
(d)  Locating floodplain boundaries. Discrepancies between boundaries on the official floodplain zoning map and actual field conditions shall be resolved using the criteria in subsection (d)(1) or (2) of this section. If a significant difference exists, the map shall be amended according to article VIII of this chapter. The zoning administrator can rely on a boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land use permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual pre-development field conditions and the basis upon which the district boundary was determined and for initiating any map amendments required under this section. Disputes between the zoning administrator and an applicant over the district boundary line shall be settled according to section 113-155(3) and the criteria in subsection (d)(1) or (2) of this section. 
(1)  If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall determine the district boundary. The regional or base flood elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies. 
(2)  Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the map scale, visual on-site inspection and any information provided by the department. 
Note- Where the flood profiles are based on established base flood elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must also approve any map amendment pursuant to subsection 113-187(6). 
(e)  Removal of lands from floodplain. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be grounds for removing land from the floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the map is amended pursuant to article VIII of this chapter. 
Note- This procedure does not remove the requirements for the mandatory purchase of flood insurance. The property owner must contact FEMA to request a letter of map change (LOMC). 
(f)  Compliance. Any development or use within the areas regulated by this chapter shall be in compliance with the terms of this chapter, and other applicable local, state, and federal regulations. 
(g)  Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13) applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the state department of transportation is exempt when Wis. Stats. § 30.2022 applies. 
(h)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
(1)  This chapter supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance enacted under Wis. Stats. § 59.69, 59.692 or 59.694 for counties; Wis. Stats. § 62.23 for cities; Wis. Stats. § 61.35 for villages; or Wis. Stats. § 87.30, which relate to floodplains. If another ordinance is more restrictive than this chapter, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise. 
(2)  This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. 
(i)  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter are the minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of the governing body and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by the state statutes. If a provision of this chapter, required by Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116, is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this chapter or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this chapter. 
(j)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The flood protection standards in this chapter are based on engineering experience and scientific research. Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply or guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free from flooding and flood damages. Nor does this chapter create liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the municipality or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that may result from reliance on this chapter. 
(k)  Severability. Should any portion of this chapter be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected. 
(l)  Annexed areas for cities and villages. The county floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116, and the national flood insurance program (NFIP). These annexed lands are described on the municipality's official zoning map. County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of the municipal zoning administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and the location of the floodway. 
(m)  General development standards. The community shall review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages; and be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above standards. All subdivision proposals (including manufactured home parks) shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data for any development that meets the subdivision definition of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 42-5; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-1.5, 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 14-10, § 1, 9-22-2014; Ord. No. 16-1, § 1(42-5), 2-15-2016) 
Sec. 113-6. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    A zones means those areas shown on the official floodplain zoning map which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A zones. The A zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area. 
    Accessory structure or use means a facility, structure, building or use which is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure or building. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and depicted on a FIRM. 
    Basement means any enclosed area of a building having its floor sub-grade (i.e., below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building. See Structure. 
    Bulkhead line means a geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the department pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 30.11 and which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary highwater mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this chapter. 
    Campground means any parcel of land which is designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by four or more camping units, or which is advertised or represented as a camping area. 
    Camping unit means any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in area, used as a temporary shelter, including, but not limited to, a camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pick-up truck, tent or other mobile recreational vehicle. 
    Certificate of compliance means a certification that the construction and the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter. 
    Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct normal flow of water. 
    Crawlways or crawl space means an enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to plumbing and electrical utilities. 
    Deck means an unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation. 
    Department means the state department of natural resources. 
    Development means any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure, regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities. 
    Dryland access means a vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles. 
    Encroachment means any fill, structure, equipment, building, use or development in the floodway. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots is completed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. At a minimum, this would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    Expansion to existing mobile/manufactured home park means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading, or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The overflow or rise of inland waters; 
(2)  The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; 
(3)  The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake Superior; or 
(4)  The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event. 
    Flood frequency means the probability of a flood occurrence which is determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in a specified number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in any given year. 
    Flood hazard boundary map means a map designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A Zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a flood insurance study and a flood insurance rate map. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means a map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both special flood hazard areas (the floodplain) and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Flood insurance study means a technical engineering examination, evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and unnumbered A Zones. Flood insurance rate maps, that accompany the flood insurance study, form the basis for both the regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood profile means a graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of land surface elevations along a stream or river. 
    Flood protection elevation means an elevation of two feet of freeboard above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood. (Also see Freeboard. ) 
    Flood storage means those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge. 
    Floodfringe means that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood and associated with standing water rather than flowing water. 
    Floodplain means land which has been or may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the floodfringe, and may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes. 
    Floodplain island means a natural geologic land formation within the floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood. 
    Floodplain management means policy and procedures to ensure wise use of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education, and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood discharge. 
    Freeboard means a safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of feet above a calculated flood level. The term "freeboard" compensates for any factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas due to development and aggregation of the river or stream bed. 
    Habitable structure means any structure or portion thereof used or designed for human habitation. 
    Hearing notice means publication or posting meeting the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 985. For appeals, a class 1 notice, published once at least one week (seven days) before the hearing, is required. For all zoning ordinances and amendments, a class 2 notice, published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at least a week (seven days) before the hearing. Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice, exceeding these minimums. 
    High flood damage potential means damage that could result from flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant economic loss to a structure or building and its contents. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is either: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Increase in regional flood height means a calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevation, equal to or greater than 0.01 foot, based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions which is directly attributable to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge. 
    Land use means any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate. (Also see Development. ) 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does not include a "mobile recreational vehicle." 
    Mobile recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model homes, do not fall within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicles." 
    Municipality or municipal means the county, town, city or village governmental units enacting, administering and enforcing this chapter. 
    NAVD or North American Vertical Datum means elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment. 
    New construction means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, the term "new construction" includes any structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    NGVD or National Geodetic Vertical Datum means elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment. 
    Nonconforming structure means an existing lawful structure or building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural requirements of this chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (For example, an existing residential structure in the floodfringe district is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the flood protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.) 
    Nonconforming use means an existing lawful use or accessory use of a structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (Such as a residence in the floodway.) 
    Obstruction to flow means any development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future development will cause an increase in regional flood height. 
    Official floodplain zoning map means that map, adopted and made part of this chapter, as described in this section, which has been approved by the department and FEMA. 
    Open space use means those uses having relatively low flood damage potential and not involving structures. 
    Ordinary highwater mark means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic. 
    Person means an individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, municipality or state agency. 
    Private sewage system means a sewage treatment and disposal system serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage system approved by the department of commerce, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system located on a different parcel than the structure. 
    Public utilities means those utilities using underground or overhead transmission lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer. 
    Reasonably safe from flooding means base floodwaters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special flood hazard area and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings. 
    Regional flood means a flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have occurred in the state. A regional flood is a flood with a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE. 
    Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means any manmade object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, stream bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts. 
    Subdivision means has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 236.02(12). 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Unnecessary hardship means where special conditions affecting a particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of the ordinance. 
    Variance means an authorization by the zoning board of appeals for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in the floodplain zoning ordinance. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the floodplain zoning ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface profile means a graphical representation showing the elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas. 
    Watershed means the entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a watercourse or body of water. 
    Well means an excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its intended use. 
(Code 1998, § 42-6; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-10.0, 12-15-2008) 
Secs. 113-7-113-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS 

Sec. 113-31. - Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses. 
(a)  Except as allowed in subsection (c) of this section, no floodplain development shall: 
(1)  Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development, increasing regional flood height; or 
(2)  Increase regional flood height due to floodplain storage area lost, which equals or exceeds 0.01 foot. 
(b)  The zoning administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the proposed development will obstruct flow or increase regional flood heights 0.01 foot or more, based on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless the provisions of subsection (c) of this section are met. 
(c)  Obstructions or increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be permitted if amendments are made to this chapter, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with article VIII of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 42-26; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-2.1, 12-15-2008) 
Note- This section refers to obstructions or increases in base flood elevations as shown on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR. 
Sec. 113-32. - Watercourse alterations. 
(a)  No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain shall be issued until the local official has notified in writing all adjacent municipalities, the department and FEMA regional offices and required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal permits. The flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. 
(b)  As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date of the watercourse alteration or relocation, the zoning administrator shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting appropriate technical or scientific data in accordance with NFIP guidelines that shall be used to revise the FIRM, risk premium rates and floodplain management regulations as required. 
(Code 1998, § 42-27; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-2.3, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-33. - Docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids. 
    Development which requires a permit from the department, under Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31, such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and amendments to the floodway lines, water surface profiles, BFE's established in the FIS, or other data from the officially adopted FIRM, or other floodplain zoning maps or the floodplain zoning ordinance are made according to article VIII of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 42-28; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-2.c, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-34. - Public or private campgrounds. 
    Public or private campgrounds shall have low flood damage potential and shall meet the following provisions: 
(1)  The campground is approved by the department of health and family services; 
(2)  A land use permit for the campground is issued by the zoning administrator; 
(3)  The character of the river system and the elevation of the campground is such that a 78-hour warning of an impending flood can be given to all campground occupants; 
(4)  There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that offers the minimum notice required under this section to all persons in the campground. This procedure shall include a written agreement between the campground owner, the municipal emergency government coordinator and the chief law enforcement official which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems to be used and the procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for conducting the evacuation; 
(5)  This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated, by the officials identified in subsection (4) of this section, to remain in compliance with all applicable regulations, including those of the state department of health and family services and all other applicable regulations; 
(6)  Only camping units are allowed; 
(7)  The camping units may not occupy any site in the campground for more than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours; 
(8)  All camping units that remain on-site for more than 30 days shall be issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a written copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period not to exceed 180 days and shall ensure compliance with all the provisions of this section; 
(9)  The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the campground operator to ensure compliance with the terms of this section; 
(10)  All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive days must meet the applicable requirements in either article III or IV of this chapter for the floodplain district in which the structure is located; 
(11)  The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a flood warning is issued; 
(12)  All service facilities, including, but not limited to, refuse collection, electrical service, natural gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. 
(Code 1998, § 42-29; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-2.4, 12-15-2008) 
Secs. 113-35-113-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW) 

Sec. 113-57. - Applicability. 
    This article applies to all floodway areas on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to section 113-109. 
(Code 1998, § 42-56; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-3.1, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-58. - Permitted uses. 
    The following open space uses are allowed in the floodway district and the floodway areas of the general floodplain district, if. They are not prohibited by any other ordinance. They meet the standards in section 113-59 and 113-60; and all permits or certificates have been issued according to section 113-153: 
(1)  Agricultural uses, such as: farming, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting; 
(2)  Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking areas and airport landing strips; 
(3)  Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill limitations of subsection 113-59(d); 
(4)  Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as historic structures that comply with sections 113-59 and 113-60; 
(5)  Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with subsection 113-59(d); 
(6)  Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with Wis. Stats. ch. 30 and 31; 
(7)  Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with subsection 113-59(c). 
(Code 1998, § 42-57; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-3.2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-59. - Standards for developments in floodway areas. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Any development in floodway areas shall comply with article II of this chapter and have low flood damage potential. 
(2)  Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects of the proposal according to section 113-31: 
a.  A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular to the watercourse, showing if the proposed development will obstruct flow; or 
b.  An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional flood height. 
(3)  The zoning administrator shall deny the permit application if the project will increase flood elevations upstream or downstream 0.01 foot or more, based on the data submitted for subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(b)  Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by permit if the structures comply with the following criteria: 
(1)  The structure is not designed for human habitation and does not have high flood damage potential; 
(2)  It must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement; 
(3)  Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and 
(4)  It must not obstruct flow of floodwaters or cause any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood. 
(c)  Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and bridges may be allowed by permit, if: 
(1)  Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood protection elevation; and 
(2)  Construction meets the development standards of section 113-31. 
(d)  Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may be allowed by permit, if: 
(1)  The requirements of section 113-31 are met; 
(2)  No material is deposited in the navigable channel unless a permit is issued by the department pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 30 and a permit pursuant to section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344 has been issued, if applicable, and the other requirements of this section are met; 
(3)  The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and 
(4)  The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material. 
(Code 1998, § 42-58; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-3.2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-60. - Prohibited uses. 
    All uses not listed as permitted uses in section 113-58 are prohibited, including the following uses: 
(1)  Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those not associated with permanent open space uses; 
(2)  Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life; 
(3)  Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining districts; 
(4)  Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are removed prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational areas and department-approved campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383; 
(5)  Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water, except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and 812; 
(6)  Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(7)  Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under section Wis. Admin. Code § NR 110.15(3)(b); 
(8)  Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or proposed development located outside the floodway which complies with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied. 
(Code 1998, § 42-59; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-3.4, 12-15-2008) 
Secs. 113-61-113-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FLOODFRINGE DISTRICT (FF) 

Sec. 113-79. - Applicability. 
    This article applies to all floodfringe areas shown on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to section 113-109. 
(Code 1998, § 42-86; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-4.1, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-80. - Permitted uses. 
    Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in the floodfringe district if the standards in section 113-81 are met, the use is not prohibited by this or any other ordinance or regulation and all permits or certificates specified in section 113-153 have been issued. 
(Code 1998, § 42-87; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-4.2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-81. - Standards for development in floodfringe areas. 
    Section 113-31 shall apply in addition to the following requirements according to the use requested: 
(1)  Residential uses. Any habitable structure, including a manufactured home, which is to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or moved into the floodfringe area, shall meet or exceed the following standards: 
a.  The elevation of the lowest floor, excluding the basement or crawlway, shall be at or above the flood protection elevation on fill. The fill shall be one foot or more above the regional flood elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure. The department may authorize other floodproofing measures if the elevations of existing streets or sewer lines makes compliance with the fill standards impractical; 
b.  The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood elevation if it is floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation; 
c.  Contiguous dry land access shall be provided from a structure to land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in subsection (1)d of this section; 
d.  In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations make compliance with subsection (1)c of this section impractical, the municipality may permit new development and substantial improvements where access roads are at or below the regional flood elevation, if: 
1.  The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided to the structure by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood event; or 
2.  The municipality has a natural disaster plan approved by state emergency management and the department. 
(2)  Accessory structures or uses. 
a.  Except as provided in subsection (2)b, an accessory structure which is not connected to a principal structure may be constructed with its lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation. 
b.  An accessory structure which is not connected to the principal structure and which is less than 600 square feet in size and valued at less than $10,000.00 may be constructed with its lowest floor no more than two feet below the regional flood elevation if it is subject to flood velocities of no more than two feet per second and it meets all of the provisions of section 113-59(b)(1), (2), (3) and (4) and subsection (5) of this section. 
(3)  Commercial uses. Any commercial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe area shall meet the requirements of subsection (1) of this section. Subject to the requirements of subsection (5) of this section, storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(4)  Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or industrial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe area shall be protected to the flood protection elevation using fill, levees, floodwalls, or other floodproofing measures in section 113-157. Subject to the requirements of subsection 113-81(5) of this section, storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(5)  Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with section 113-157. Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body during flooding. 
(6)  Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain development plans. 
a.  When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed essential, construction of and substantial improvements to such facilities may only be permitted if they are floodproofed in compliance with section 113-157 to the flood protection elevation; 
b.  Minor roads or non-essential utilities may be constructed at lower elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the regional flood elevation. 
(7)  Sewage systems. All on-site sewage disposal systems shall be floodproofed, pursuant to section 113-157, to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of all local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383. 
(8)  Wells. All wells shall be floodproofed, pursuant to section 113-157, to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and 812. 
(9)  Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in floodfringe areas. 
(10)  Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the provisions of this chapter. 
(11)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage, and prepare, secure approval of and file an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and escape routes, with local emergency management authorities. 
b.  In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall: 
1.  Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation; and 
2.  Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally during a flood. 
c.  Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new manufactured home parks and all single units outside of existing parks, all new, replacement and substantially improved manufactured homes shall meet the residential development standards for the floodfringe in subsection (1) of this section. 
(12)  Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that are on-site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and anchoring requirements in subsections (11)b and (11)c of this section. A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Code 1998, § 42-88; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-4.3, 12-15-2008) 
Secs. 113-82-113-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GFP) 

Sec. 113-106. - Applicability. 
    The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains for which flood profiles are not available or where flood profiles are available but floodways have not been delineated. Floodway and floodfringe districts shall be delineated when adequate data is available. 
(Code 1998, § 42-116; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-5.1, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-107. - Permitted uses. 
    Pursuant to section 113-109, it shall be determined whether the proposed use is located within a floodway or floodfringe area. Those uses permitted in floodway (section 113-58) and floodfringe areas (section 113-80) are allowed within the general floodplain district, according to the standards of section 113-108, provided that all permits or certificates required under section 113-153 have been issued. 
(Code 1998, § 42-117; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-5.2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-108. - Standards for development in the general floodplain district. 
    Article III of this chapter applies to floodway areas; article IV of this chapter applies to floodfringe areas. The rest of this chapter applies to either district. 
(Code 1998, § 42-118; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-5.3, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-109. - Determining floodway and floodfringe limits. 
    Upon receiving an application for development within the general floodplain district, the zoning administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a plan which shows the proposed development with respect to the general floodplain district limits, stream channel, and existing floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and floodproofing measures; 
(2)  Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information deemed necessary by the department to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation and to determine floodway boundaries: 
a.  A typical valley cross-section showing the stream channel, the floodplain adjoining each side of the channel, the cross-sectional area to be occupied by the proposed development, and all historic high water information; 
b.  Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information; 
c.  Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream; 
d.  Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage, water supply and sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Transmit one copy of the information described in subsections (1) and (2) of this section to the department regional office along with a written request for technical assistance to establish regional flood elevations and, where applicable, floodway data. Where the provisions of subsections 113-153(b)(3) apply, the applicant shall provide all required information and computations to delineate floodway boundaries and the effects of the project on flood elevations. 
(Code 1998, § 42-119; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-5.4, 12-15-2008) 
Secs. 113-110-113-131. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 113-132. - General regulations. 
(a)  Applicability. If these standards conform to Wis. Stats. § 59.69(10) for counties, or Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h) for cities and villages, they shall apply to all modifications or additions to any nonconforming use or structure and to the use of any structure or premises which was lawful before the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or any amendment thereto. 
(b)  The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter may continue subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure shall be permitted unless they comply with this chapter. The terms "modification" and "addition" include, but are not limited to, any alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory structure or use. Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered an extension, modification or addition; these include painting, decorating, paneling and the replacement of doors, windows and other nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of existing private sewage or water supply systems or connections to public utilities. Ordinary maintenance repairs do not include any costs associated with the repair of a damaged structure. The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an extension, modification or addition. The roof of the structure may extend over a portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and egress to the principal structure; 
(2)  If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted and any future use of the property, and any structure or building thereon, shall conform to the applicable requirements of this chapter; 
(3)  The municipality shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value, the cost of all modifications or additions which have been permitted, and the percentage of the structure's total current value those modifications represent; 
(4)  No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the structure would equal or exceed 50 percent of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with subsection 113-81(1). The costs of elevating a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are excluded from the 50 percent provisions of this subsection; 
(5)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(2) of this section, if any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet the current ordinance requirements. A structure is considered substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure to its pre-damaged condition equals or exceeds 50 percent of the structure's present equalized assessed value. For nonconforming buildings that are damaged or destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such nonconforming building may be permitted in order to restore it after the nonflood disaster, provided that the nonconforming building will meet all of the minimum requirements under applicable FEMA regulations (44 CFR 60), or the regulations promulgated thereunder; 
(6)  A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will not preclude the structures' continued designation as a historic structure, the alteration will comply with subsection 113-59(a), flood resistant materials are used, and construction practices and floodproofing methods that comply with section 113-157 are used. 
(Code 1998, § 42-146; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-6.1, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-133. - Floodway areas. 
(a)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in a floodway area, unless such modification or addition: 
(1)  Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all ordinance requirements; 
(2)  Meets the requirements of section 113-132; 
(3)  Will not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood height; 
(4)  Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed, pursuant to section 113-157, by means other than the use of fill, to the flood protection elevation; 
(5)  If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is enclosed, the following standards shall apply: 
a.  The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of floodwaters without human intervention. A minimum of two openings must be provided with a minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the opening can be no more than 12 inches above the adjacent grade; 
b.  The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials; 
c.  Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and 
d.  The use must be limited to parking or limited storage. 
(b)  No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on-site sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383. 
(c)  No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable water shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and 812. 
(Code 1998, § 42-147; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-6.2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-134. - Floodfringe areas. 
(a)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the municipality, and the modification or addition shall be placed on fill or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation in compliance with the standards for that particular use in section 113-81, except where subsection (b) of this section is applicable. 
(b)  Where compliance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section would result in unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential, the zoning board of appeals, using the procedures established in section 113-155, may grant a variance from those provisions of subsection (a) of this section for modifications or additions, using the criteria listed below. Modifications or additions which are protected to elevations lower than the flood protection elevation may be permitted if: 
(1)  No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential or commercial structures; 
(2)  Human lives are not endangered; 
(3)  Public facilities, such as water or sewer, will not be installed; 
(4)  Flood depths will not exceed two feet; 
(5)  Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; and 
(6)  The structure will not be used for storage of materials as described in subsection 113-81(5). 
(c)  If neither the provisions of subsection (a) or (b) of this section above can be met, one addition to an existing room in a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use may be allowed in the floodfringe, if the addition: 
(1)  Meets all other regulations and will be granted by permit or variance; 
(2)  Does not exceed 60 square feet in area; and 
(3)  In combination with other previous modifications or additions to the building, does not equal or exceed 50 percent of the present equalized assessed value of the building. 
(d)  All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 83. 
(e)  All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a well shall meet the applicable provisions of this chapter and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and 812. 
(Code 1998, § 42-148; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-6.3, 12-15-2008) 
Secs. 113-135-113-151. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 113-152. - Appointment to administer provisions. 
    Where a zoning administrator, planning agency or a board of adjustment/appeals has already been appointed to administer a zoning ordinance adopted under Wis. Stats. §§ 59.69, 59.692 or 62.23(7), these officials shall also administer this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 42-176; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 7.0, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-153. - Zoning administrator. 
(a)  Duties. The zoning administrator is authorized to administer this chapter and shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Advise applicants of the ordinance provisions, assist in preparing permit applications and appeals, and ensure that the regional flood elevation for the proposed development is shown on all permit applications. 
(2)  Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with provisions of this chapter, and issue certificates of compliance where appropriate. 
(3)  Inspect all damaged floodplain structures and perform a substantial damage assessment to determine if substantial damage to the structures has occurred. 
(4)  Keep records of all official actions such as: 
a.  All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved; 
b.  Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood elevations for floodplain development; 
c.  Records of water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures including changes, appeals, variances and amendments; and 
d.  All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain structures. 
(5)  Submit copies of the following items to the department regional office: 
a.  Within ten days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or text amendments; 
b.  Copies of any case-by-case analyses, and any other information required by the department including an annual summary of the number and types of floodplain zoning actions taken; and 
c.  Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all related correspondence concerning the assessments. 
Note- Information on conducting substantial damage assessments is available on the DNR website: 
http://dnr.wi.gov/org/water/wm/dsfm/flood/title.htm 
(6)  Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this chapter to the municipal zoning agency and attorney for prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the department regional office. 
(7)  Submit copies of text and map amendments and biennial reports to the FEMA regional office. 
(b)  Land use permit. A land use permit shall be obtained before any new development or any structural repair or change in the use of a building or structure, including sewer and water facilities, may be initiated. Application to the zoning administrator shall include: 
(1)  General information. 
a.  Name and address of the applicant, property owner and contractor; 
b.  Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new construction or a modification. 
(2)  Site development plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be submitted with the permit application form and shall contain: 
a.  Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot; 
b.  Location of the ordinary highwater mark of any abutting navigable waterways; 
c.  Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and street center lines; 
d.  Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply systems; 
e.  Location and elevation of existing or future access roads; 
f.  Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from the official floodplain zoning maps; 
g.  The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any fill using the vertical datum from the adopted study; either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD); 
h.  Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to determine whether or not the requirements of article III or IV of this chapter are met; and 
i.  Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or discharge according to section 113-79. This may include any of the information noted in subsection 113-59(a). 
(3)  Data requirements to analyze developments. The applicant shall provide all survey data and computations required to show the effects of the project on flood heights, velocities and floodplain storage, for all subdivision proposals, as "subdivision" is defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 236, and other proposed developments exceeding five acres in area or where the estimated cost exceeds $125,000.99. The applicant shall provide: 
a.  An analysis of the effect of the development on the regional flood profile, velocity of flow and floodplain storage capacity; 
b.  A map showing location and details of vehicular access to lands outside the floodplain; and 
c.  A surface drainage plan showing how flood damage will be minimized. The estimated cost of the proposal shall include all structural development, landscaping, access and road development, utilities, and other pertinent items, but need not include land costs. 
(4)  Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this chapter shall expire 365 days after issuance. 
(c)  Certificate of compliance. No land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning administrator, except where no permit is required, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a permit; 
(3)  If all ordinance provisions are met, the certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten days after written notification that the permitted work is completed; 
(4)  The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor that the fill, lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are in compliance with the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also require certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that floodproofing measures meet the requirements of section 113-157. 
(d)  Other permits. The applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state, and local agencies, including those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. 
(Code 1998, § 42-177; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-7.1, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-154. - Zoning agency. 
(a)  The planning committee and/or the joint planning committee shall: 
(1)  Oversee the functions of the office of the zoning administrator; and 
(2)  Review and advise the governing body on all proposed amendments to this chapter, maps and text. 
(b)  This zoning agency shall not: 
(1)  Grant variances to the terms of the ordinance in place of action by the zoning board of appeals; or 
(2)  Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the governing body. 
(Code 1998, § 42-178; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-7.2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-155. - Zoning board of appeals. 
    The zoning board of appeals, created under Wis. Stats. § 59.694, for counties or Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e), for cities or villages, is hereby authorized or shall be appointed to act for the purposes of this chapter. The board shall exercise the powers conferred by state statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of business. The zoning administrator may not be the secretary of the board. 
(1)  Powers and duties. The zoning board of appeals shall: 
a.  Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
b.  Boundary disputes. Hear and decide disputes concerning the district boundaries shown on the official floodplain zoning map. 
c.  Variances. Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the ordinance standards. 
(2)  Appeals to the board. 
a.  Generally. Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer or department of the municipality affected by any decision of the zoning administrator or other administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days unless otherwise provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the official whose decision is in question, and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the board all records regarding the matter appealed. 
b.  Notice and hearing for appeals including variances. 
1.  Notice. The board shall: 
(i)  Fix a reasonable time for the hearing; 
(ii)  Publish adequate notice pursuant to state statutes, specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing; 
(iii)  Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the department regional office at least ten days in advance of the hearing. 
2.  Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent. The board shall: 
(i)  Resolve boundary disputes according to subsection (3) of this section. 
(ii)  Decide variance applications according to subsection (4) of this section. 
(iii)  Decide appeals of permit denials according to section 113-156. 
c.  Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance application shall: 
1.  Be made within a reasonable time; 
2.  Be sent to the department regional office within ten days of the decision; 
3.  Be a written determination signed by the chairman or secretary of the board; 
4.  State the specific facts which are the basis for the board's decision; 
5.  Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or grant or deny the variance application; 
6.  Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the board proceedings. 
(3)  Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the board in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district boundaries: 
a.  If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other evidence may be examined. 
b.  In all cases, the person contesting the boundary location shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence to the board. 
c.  If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the board should inform the zoning committee or the person contesting the boundary location to petition the governing body for a map amendment according to article VIII of this chapter. 
(4)  Variance. 
a.  The board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards of this chapter if an applicant convincingly demonstrates that: 
1.  Literal enforcement of the ordinance provisions will cause unnecessary hardship; 
2.  The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain ordinance and unique property conditions, not common to adjacent lots or premises. In such case the ordinance or map must be amended; 
3.  The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and 
4.  The variance is consistent with the purpose of this chapter in section 113-3. 
b.  In addition to the criteria in subsection (4)(a) of this section, to qualify for a variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must be met: 
1.  The variance may not cause any increase in the regional flood elevation; 
2.  Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than one-half acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed below the RFE; 
3.  Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be contrary to the purpose of the ordinance. 
c.  A variance shall not: 
1.  Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning district. 
2.  Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss. 
3.  Be granted for a hardship which is self-created. 
4.  Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area. 
5.  Allow actions without the amendments to this chapter or map required in section 113-187. 
6.  Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use, which would preclude its continued designation as an historic structure. 
d.  When a floodplain variance is granted the board shall notify the applicant in writing that it may increase flood insurance premiums and risks to life and property. A copy shall be maintained with the variance record. 
(Code 1998, § 42-179; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-7.3, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-156. - To review appeals of permit denials. 
(a)  The zoning agency (section 113-154) or board shall review all data related to the appeal. This may include: 
(1)  Permit application data listed in subsection 113-153(b); 
(2)  Floodway/floodfringe determination data in section 113-109; 
(3)  Data listed in subsection 113-59(a)(2) where the applicant has not submitted this information to the zoning administrator; 
(4)  Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the board with the appeal. 
(b)  For appeals of all denied permits, the board shall: 
(1)  Follow the procedures of section 113-155; 
(2)  Consider zoning agency recommendations; and 
(3)  Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal. 
(c)  For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation, the board shall: 
(1)  Uphold the denial where the board agrees with the data showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be allowed after amending the flood profile and map and all appropriate legal arrangements are made with all adversely affected property owners; 
(2)  Grant the appeal where the board agrees that the data properly demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase equal to or greater than 0.01 foot provided no other reasons for denial exist. 
(Code 1998, § 42-180; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-7.4, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-157. - Floodproofing. 
(a)  No permit or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure or development to the flood protection elevation. 
(b)  Floodproofing measures shall be designed to: 
(1)  Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact forces and other regional flood factors; 
(2)  Protect structures to the flood protection elevation; 
(3)  Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral movement; and 
(4)  Ensure that structural walls and floors are watertight to the flood protection elevation, and the interior remains completely dry during flooding without human intervention. 
(c)  Floodproofing measures could include: 
(1)  Reinforcing walls and floors to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure. 
(2)  Adding mass or weight to prevent flotation. 
(3)  Placing essential utilities above the flood protection elevation. 
(4)  Installing surface or subsurface drainage systems to relieve foundation wall and basement floor pressures. 
(5)  Constructing water supply wells and waste treatment systems to prevent the entry of floodwaters. 
(6)  Putting cutoff valves on sewer lines or eliminating gravity flow basement drains. 
(Code 1998, § 42-181; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-7.5, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-158. - Public information. 
(a)  Marks shall be placed on structures to show the depth of inundation during the regional flood. 
(b)  All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and widely distributed. 
(c)  All real estate transfers should show what floodplain zoning district any real property is in. 
(Code 1998, § 42-182; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-7.6, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 113-159. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person shall be unlawful and shall be referred to the municipal attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, forfeit to the municipality a penalty of not less than $25.00 and not more than $1,000.00, together with a taxable cost of such action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this chapter is a public nuisance and the creation may be enjoined and the maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 87.30(2)(a) with a maximum fine of $50.00 per day. 
(Code 1998, § 42-183; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-9.0, 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 14-10, § 2, 9-22-2014) 
Secs. 113-160-113-186. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 113-187. - General standard. 
    The governing body may change or supplement the floodplain zoning district boundaries and this chapter in the manner provided by law. Actions which require an amendment include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Any change to the official floodplain zoning map, including the floodway line or boundary of any floodplain area; 
(2)  Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and floodplain zoning maps; 
(3)  Any fill in the floodplain which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain; 
(4)  Any fill or floodplain encroachment that obstructs flow, increasing regional flood height 0.01 foot or more; 
(5)  Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by Wis. Admin. Code § NR 116.05, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by the municipality; 
(6)  All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the floodfringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA. 
(Code 1998, § 42-206; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-8.1, 12-15-2008) 
Note- Consult the FEMA web site (www.fema.gov) for the map change fee schedule. 
Sec. 113-188. - Procedures. 
    Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of any interested party according to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23, for cities and villages, or Wis. Stats. § 59.69, for counties. Such petitions shall include all necessary data required by sections 113-109 and 113-153(b). 
(1)  The proposed amendment shall be referred to the zoning agency for a public hearing and recommendation to the governing body. The amendment and notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the department regional office for review prior to the hearing. The amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23, for cities and villages, or Wis. Stats. § 59.69, for counties. 
(2)  No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the department. 
(3)  All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow, increasing regional flood height 0.01 foot or more, shall obtain flooding easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely affected property owners and notify local units of government before the amendment can be approved by the governing body. 
(4)  For amendments in areas with no water surface profiles, the zoning agency or board shall consider data submitted by the department, the zoning administrator's visual on-site inspections and other available information (See subsection 113-5(d)). 
(Code 1998, § 42-207; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 42-8.1, 12-15-2008) 
Chapter 117 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 

Sec. 117-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Certificate of appropriateness means the certificate issued by the commission approving alteration, rehabilitation, construction, reconstruction or demolition of an historic structure, historic site or any improvement in an historic district. 
    Commission means the plan commission, selected as the historic preservation commission created under this chapter. 
    Historic district means an area designated by the village board, on recommendation of the commission, that contains two or more historic improvements or sites as well as those abutting improvement parcels which the commission determines should fall under this chapter to ensure that their appearance and development is harmonious with such historic structures or historic sites. 
    Historic site means any parcel of land of historic significance due to a substantial value in tracing the history or prehistory of man, or upon which an historic event has occurred, and which has been designed as an historic site under this chapter or an improvement parcel or part thereof, on which is situated an historic structure and any abutting improvement parcel or part thereof used as, and constituting part of, the premises on which the historic structure is situated. 
    Historic structure means any improvement which has special character or special historic interest of value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the village, state or nation and which has been designated as an historic structure pursuant to this chapter. 
    Improvement means any building, structure, place, work of art or other object constituting a physical betterment of real property or any part of such betterment, including streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, lighting fixtures, signs and the like. 
    Improvement parcel means the unit of property which includes a physical betterment constituting an improvement and the land embracing the site thereof and which is treated as a single entity for the purpose of levying real estate taxes. However, the term "improvement parcel" also includes any unimproved area of land which is treated as a single entity for such tax purposes. 
(Code 1998, § 50-28; Ord. No. 96-2, § II, 10-21-1996) 
Sec. 117-2. - Penalties for violations. 
    Any person violating any section of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty as provided in section 1-32. 
(Code 1998, § 50-33; Ord. No. 96-2, § VIII, 10-21-1996) 
Sec. 117-3. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement and use of improvements or sites of special character or special architectural or historic interest or value is a public necessity and is required in the interest of health, prosperity, safety and welfare of the people. The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(1)  Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of such improvements, sites and districts which represent or reflect elements of the village's cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history; 
(2)  Safeguard the village's historic and cultural heritage, as embodied and reflected in such historic structures, sites and districts; 
(3)  Foster civic pride in the notable accomplishment of the past; 
(4)  Stabilize and improve property values; 
(5)  Protect and enhance the village's attractions to residents, tourists and visitors, and serve as a support and stimulus to business and industry; 
(6)  Improve and enhance the visual and aesthetic character of the village. 
(Code 1998, § 50-27; Ord. No. 96-2, § I, 10-21-1996) 
Sec. 117-4. - Powers and duties of historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Designation of historic structures, sites and districts. The historic preservation commission shall have the power, subject to section 117-6, to designate historic structures and historic sites and to recommend designation of historic districts. Such designations shall be made based on section 117-5. Historic districts shall be approved by the village board. Once designated, such historic structures, sites and districts shall be subject to all sections of this chapter. 
(b)  Regulation of construction, reconstruction, alteration and demolition. Issuance of a certificate of appropriateness for construction, reconstruction, alteration and demolition shall be based on the following: 
(1)  No owner or person in charge of an historic structure, historic site or structure within an historic district shall reconstruct, alter or demolish all or any part of the exterior of such property or construct any improvement upon such designated property or cause or permit any such work to be performed upon such property or demolish such property unless a certificate of appropriateness has been granted by the historic preservation commission. Also, unless such certificate has been granted by the commission, the building inspector shall not issue a permit for any such work. 
(2)  Upon filing of any application for a certificate of appropriateness with the commission, the commission shall approve the application unless: 
a.  For a designated historic structure or historic site, the proposed work would detrimentally change, destroy or adversely affect any exterior feature of the improvement or site upon which such work is to be done; 
b.  For the construction of a new improvement upon an historic site or within an historic district, the exterior of such improvement would adversely affect or not harmonize with the external appearance of other neighboring improvements on such site or within the district; 
c.  For any property located in an historic district, the proposed construction, reconstruction, exterior alteration or demolition does not conform to the purpose and intent of this chapter and to the objectives and design criteria of the historic preservation plan for such district; 
d.  The building or structure is of such architectural or historical significance that its demolition would be detrimental to the public interest and contrary to the general welfare of the people of the village and state; 
e.  The building or structure is of such old and unusual or uncommon design, texture, or material that it could not be reproduced without great difficulty or expense; or 
f.  For a request for the demolition of a deteriorated building or structure, any economic hardship or difficulty claimed by the owner is self-created or is the result of any failure to maintain the property in good repair. 
(3)  If the commission determines that the application for a certificate of appropriateness and the proposed changes are consistent with the character and features of the property or district, it shall issue the certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall make this decision within 45 days of the filing of the application. 
(4)  If the commission fails to issue a certificate of appropriateness due to the failure of the proposal to conform to the guidelines, the applicant may appeal such decision to the village board within 45 days. In addition, if the commission fails to issue a certification of appropriateness, the commission shall, with the cooperation of the applicant, work with the applicant in an attempt to obtain a certificate of appropriateness within the guidelines of this chapter. 
(5)  The issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall not relieve the applicant from obtaining other permits and approvals required by the village. A building permit or other village permit shall be invalid if it is obtained without the presentation of the certificate of appropriateness required for the proposed work. 
(6)  Compliance with the certificate of appropriateness shall be started within 12 months after the issuance of the certificate, and the work shall conform to the provisions of the certificate. Failure to comply with a certificate of appropriateness or failure to obtain a certificate of appropriateness shall be a violation of this chapter. In addition to other penalties and remedies, the village shall issue a stop work order, and all work shall cease on the designated property. 
(7)  Ordinary maintenance and repairs may be undertaken without a certificate of appropriateness, provided that the work involves repairs to existing features of an historic structure or site or the replacement of elements of a structure with pieces identical in appearance and provided that the work does not change the exterior appearance of the structure or site and does not require the issuance of a building permit. 
(c)  Recognition of historic structures, sites and districts. At such time as an historic structure, site or district has been properly designated, the commission may cause to be prepared and erected on such property, at village expense, a suitable plaque declaring that such property is an historic structure, site or district. Such plaque shall be so placed as to be easily visible to passing pedestrians. 
(d)  Other duties. In addition to the other duties specified in this chapter, the commission shall: 
(1)  Actively work for the passage of enabling legislation which would permit the granting of full or partial tax exemptions to properties it has designated under this chapter. 
(2)  Work for the continuing education of the citizens of the village about the historic heritage of this village and the landmarks and landmark sites designated under this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 50-30; Ord. No. 96-2, § V, 10-21-1996) 
Sec. 117-5. - Historic structure, historic site and historic district designation criteria. 
(a)  For the purpose of this chapter, an historic structure, historic site, or historic district designation may be placed on any site, natural or improved, including any building, improvement or structure located thereon, or any area of particular historic architectural, archeological or cultural significance to the village such as historic structures, sites or districts which: 
(1)  Exemplify or reflect the broad cultural, political, economic or social history of the nation, state or community; 
(2)  Are identified with historic personages or with important events in national, state or local history; 
(3)  Embody the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or specimen inherently valuable for a study of a period, style, method of construction, or of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; 
(4)  Are representative of the notable work of a master builder, designer or architect who influenced such builder's age; or 
(5)  Have yielded or may be likely to yield information important to prehistory or history. 
(b)  The historic preservation commission shall adopt specific operating guidelines for an historic structure, historic site and historic district designation, providing such are in conformance with this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 50-29; Ord. No. 96-2, § IV, 10-21-1996) 
Sec. 117-6. - Procedures for designation of historic structures, historic sites and historic districts. 
(a)  The historic preservation commission may, after notice and public hearing, designate historic structures, historic sites and recommend historic districts or rescind such designation or recommendation, after application of the criteria in section 117-5. At least ten days prior to such hearing, the commission shall notify the owners of record, as listed in the office of the village assessor, who are the owners of property in whole or in part situated within 200 feet of the boundaries of the property affected or within the boundaries of the historic district. These owners shall have the right to confer with the commission prior to final action by the commission on the designation. Notice of such hearing shall also be published as class 1 notice, under state law. The commission shall also notify the following: department of public works, parks division, fire and police departments, building inspection division and plan commission. Each such department may respond to the commission within 30 days of notification with its comments on the proposed designation or rescission. 
(b)  The commission shall then conduct such public hearing and, in addition to the notified persons, may hear expert witnesses and shall have the power to subpoena such witnesses and records as it deems necessary. The commission may conduct an independent investigation into the proposed designation or rescission. Within ten days after the close of the public hearing, the commission may designate the property as either an historic structure, historic site, or may recommend its inclusion in an historic designation, or may rescind the designation. After the designation or rescission has been made, notification shall be sent to the property owner. Notification shall also be given to the village clerk, building inspection division, plan commission, and the village assessor. The commission shall cause such designation or rescission to be recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county. 
(Code 1998, § 50-31; Ord. No. 96-2, § VI, 10-21-1996) 
Sec. 117-7. - Maintenance in compliance with chapter. 
    Every person in charge of an historic structure, historic site or improvement in an historic district shall maintain the historic structure, historic site or improvement or cause or permit it to be maintained within the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 50-32; Ord. No. 96-2, § VII, 10-21-1996) 
Chapter 121 - IMPACT FEES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Impact fees, Wis. Stats. § 66.0617. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 121-1-121-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARK IMPACT FEES 

Sec. 121-19. - Intent. 
    This article is intended to allocate financial burdens of providing public facilities fairly between existing village residents and owners of existing land developments within the village on the one hand and developers of new land developments on the other, and to comply with Wis. Stats. § 66.0617 on municipal impact fees. 
(Code 1998, § 70-61; Ord. No. 97-4, § I(3-2-14), 5-5-1997; Ord. No. 01-14, § 1, 10-15-2001) 
Sec. 121-20. - Imposition of park facilities and community center impact fees. 
(a)  Appropriateness and use of fee . 
(1)  The village board has determined that it is appropriate to impose and use impact fees to pay for the capital costs for park facilities that are necessary to accommodate new land development without decreasing current levels of service in the village. The impact fees will be imposed in accordance with Wis. Stat. § 66.0617 and the needs assessment and methodology set forth in the Public Facilities Needs Assessment Park Impact Fee Report, as prepared in 2017, on file in the office of the village clerk. 
(2)  The village board has determined that it is appropriate to impose and use impact fees to pay for the capital costs for the community center that are necessary to accommodate new land development without decreasing current levels of service in the village. The impact fees will be imposed in accordance with Wis. Stat. § 66.0617 and the needs assessment and methodology set forth in the Public Facilities Needs Assessment for the Community Center, as prepared in 2005, on file in the office of the village clerk. 
(b)  Payment of community center and park facilities impact fees required . Any person who applies for a building permit or an extension of a previously issued building permit for the construction or modification of improvements to real property that creates additional residential dwelling units within the village, including a group quarters dwelling unit as defined in subsection (d), shall pay impact fees as follows: 
(1)  The amount of the park facilities impact fee imposed per additional single-family residential unit to be constructed, per additional multifamily residential dwelling unit to be constructed, and per additional group quarters dwelling unit to be constructed shall be as established by the village board by resolution. 
(2)  The amount of the community center impact fee imposed per additional single-family residential unit to be constructed, per additional multifamily residential dwelling unit to be constructed, and per additional group quarters dwelling unit to be constructed shall be as established by the village board by resolution. 
(3)  Payment of the impact fees shall be made to the village upon the issuance of any building permit for which the fee is applicable except as provided in subsection (c) below. 
(c)  Low-cost housing . The impact fee imposed by this section may be waived or reduced by the village board upon recommendation of the plan commission on new development for low-cost housing in accordance with Wis. Stat. § 66.0617(7). 
(d)  Definitions . 
(1)  The definitions set forth in Wis. Stat. § 66.0617(1), and any amendments thereto, are hereby incorporated and made a part of this article unless otherwise expressly modified in the needs assessment reports. 
(2)  For purposes of this article, "group quarters dwelling unit" is defined as follows: a dwelling unit where individuals live or stay that is owned or managed by an entity or organization providing housing and/or services for the residents. The services may include, but are not limited to, custodial or medical care and other types of assistance (for example, a skilled-nursing facility). Residency is restricted to the individuals receiving the services, and the individuals typically do not participate in the labor force while a resident. Typically, a group quarters dwelling unit has one resident per unit. 
(e)  Fees review . The village treasurer shall report annually to the village board with regard to all deposits, withdrawals and fund balances in the accounts established for impact fees. Upon review of such reports, the village board may determine to make reasonable modifications to the impact fees, if necessary, in accordance with Wis. Stat. § 66.0617. 
(Code 1998, § 70-62; Ord. No. 97-4, § I(3-2-14(b)), 5-5-1997; Ord. No. 01-14, § 2, 10-15-2001; Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 04-10, §§ 1, 2, 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 05-03, §§ 1, 2, 3-21-2005; Ord. No. 05-04, § 1, 4-4-2005; Ord. No. 06-04, §§ 1, 2, 6-5-2006; Ord. No. 07-03A, §§ 1, 2, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. 08-03, § 1, 1-21-2008; Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 3-3-2008; Ord. No. 08-9, § 2, 6-16-2008; Ord. No. 09-05, §§ 1, 2, 6-1-2009; Ord. No. 10-4, §§ 1, 2, 5-3-2010; Ord. No. 11-2, §§ 1, 2, 5-16-2011; Ord. No. 12-2, §§ 1, 2, 5-16-2012; Ord. No. 13-5, §§ 1, 2, 4-15-2013; Ord. No. 14-05, §§ 1, 2, 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 15-5, §§ 1, 2(70-62), 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 16-3, §§ 1, 2(70-62), 4-4-2016; Ord. No. 18-2, § 1, 2-5-2018) 
Sec. 121-21. - Other means of financing the community center and park improvements reserved. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0617(2)(b), the imposition of community center and park facilities impact fees under this section does not prohibit or limit the village's authority to finance the community center or park facilities by other means authorized by law, including, but not limited to, for example, the use of fees in lieu of land dedication under chapter 129 which are deemed to not be impact fees as that term is used in Wis. Stats. § 66.0617. 
(Code 1998, § 70-63; Ord. No. 97-4, § I(3-2-14(c)), 5-5-1997; Ord. No. 01-14, § 3, 10-15-2001; Ord. No. 05-04, § 2, 4-4-2005) 
Sec. 121-22. - Public facilities needs assessments for park improvements and the community center. 
(a)  Park improvements . In accordance with Wis. Stat. § 66.0617(4), the village has prepared a needs assessment report for park facilities improvements. The needs assessment, standards and methodology used for calculation of the park facilities impact fee, together with documentation of the village's compliance with the statutory requirements, are contained in the Public Facilities Needs Assessment Park Impact Fee Report, as prepared in 2017, on file in the office of the village clerk. 
(b)  Community center . In accordance with Wis. Stat. § 66.0617(4), the village has prepared a needs assessment report for the community center. The needs assessment, standards and methodology used for calculation of the community center impact fee, together with documentation of the village's compliance with the statutory requirements, are contained in the Public Facilities Needs Assessment for the Community Center, as prepared in 2005, on file with the village clerk. 
(Code 1998, § 70-64; Ord. No. 97-4, § I(3-2-14(d)), 5-5-1997; Ord. No. 01-14, § 4, 10-15-2001; Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 4-4-2005; Ord. No. 18-2, § 2, 2-5-2018) 
Sec. 121-23. - Disposition of revenues; expenditures. 
    Revenues collected as impact fees under this article shall be placed by the village treasurer in segregated interest-bearing accounts and shall be accounted for separately from other funds of the village. Impact fee revenues and interest earned on impact fee revenues may be expended by the village only for the capital costs for which the impact fees were imposed and shall be expended on a first-in first-out basis. Separate accounts shall be kept of fees collected from different impact fee zones, where the particular impact fee ordinance provides for differential fees according to zones, and revenues collected in particular zones shall be spent in those zones as appropriate. 
(Code 1998, § 70-65; Ord. No. 97-4, § I(3-2-14(e)), 5-5-1997) 
Sec. 121-24. - Time limits. 
(a)  Subject to subsections (b), (c), and (d) of this section, and with regard to an impact fee that is collected after April 10, 2006, impact fees that are collected by the village within seven years of the effective date of the particular impact fee ordinance, but are not used within ten years after the effective date of the particular impact fee ordinance to pay the capital costs for which they were imposed, shall be refunded to the current owner of the property with respect to which the impact fees were imposed, along with any interest that has accumulated. 
(b)  The ten-year time limit for using impact fees that is specified under subsection (a) of this section may be extended for three years if the village adopts a resolution stating that, due to extenuating circumstances or hardship in meeting the ten-year limit, it needs an additional three years to use the impact fees that were collected. The resolution shall include detailed written findings that specify the extenuating circumstances or hardship that led to the need to adopt a resolution under this subsection. 
(c)  Required uses are as follows: 
(1)  An impact fee that was collected before January 1, 2003, must be used for the purpose for which it was imposed not later than December 31, 2012. Any such impact fee that is not used by that date shall be refunded to the current owner of the property with respect to which the impact fee was imposed, along with any interest that has accumulated. 
(2)  An impact fee that was collected after December 31, 2002, and before April 11, 2006, must be used for the purpose for which it was imposed not later than the first day of the 120th month beginning after the date on which the fee was collected. Any such impact fee that is not used by that date shall be refunded to the current owner of the property with respect to which the impact fee was imposed, along with any interest that has accumulated. 
(d)  With regard to an impact fee that is collected after April 10, 2006, and that is collected more than seven years after the effective date of the particular impact fee ordinance, such impact fees shall be used within a reasonable period of time after they are collected to pay the capital costs for which they were imposed, or they shall be refunded to the current owner of the property with respect to which the impact fees were imposed, along with any interest that has accumulated. 
(e)  The village finds that the time periods set forth in subsections (a), (c), and (d) of this section constitute reasonable time periods within which impact fees collected for park improvements or the community center must be spent or refunded, subject to possible extension under subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1998, § 70-66; Ord. No. 97-4, § I(3-2-14(f)), 5-5-1997; Ord. No. 05-04, § 4, 4-4-2005; Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 121-25. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals to this article may be brought by developers as defined in Wis. Stats. § 66.0617 as follows: 
(1)  It shall be a condition to the lodging of such an appeal that the impact fee appealed from shall be paid as and when the fee or any installments thereof become due and payable, and upon default in making any such payment, such appeal shall be dismissed. 
(2)  The only questions that are appealable under this article are the following, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0617: 
a.  The amount of fee charged to and paid by the appellant developer; 
b.  The method of collection of the fee; 
c.  The use of the particular fee charged to and paid by the appellant developer. 
(3)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0617, the appeals board may authorize the payment of a fee that is otherwise payable at the time of issuance of a building permit or other required municipal approval as specified within the ordinance imposing the particular impact fee in installment payments. The appeals board may require that interest be paid on installment payments at a rate comparable to the rate charged by the village on installment payments of special assessments modified to reflect then-current interest costs or interest cost estimates. A challenge to the use of impact fees that are collected shall address solely the question of whether the fees are being used for the purposes for which they were collected within the allowable time established under section 121-24. Appeals as to use of proceeds are not entitled to challenge the village's public facility plans or needs assessments. 
(b)  Appeals must be brought within 30 days of the date of payment of the impact fee by the appellant. The appeal must be submitted to the village clerk in writing and must specify the basis of the appeal. 
(c)  For purposes of this article, the village board shall be the hearing and appeals board, and appeals and notices of appeal shall be filed with the village clerk. An application fee to bring an appeal shall be paid at the time of the filing of the appeal in the amount of $200.00. The appeal fee is nonrefundable, and failure to pay this amount shall cause the appeal to be dismissed. 
(d)  Following the filing of appeal, the village clerk shall compile a record of the ordinance imposing the impact fee that is the subject of the appeal, a record of the management and expenditure of the proceeds of such fee and shall transmit such with the appeal documents to the appeal board. In consultation with appropriate departments, the village clerk shall also compile a report on each appeal in which the appellant is seeking a reduction or total refund in the fee paid by the appellant. This report shall identify the fiscal impact on the village if the request to the appellant is granted. If this fiscal impact report indicates that the granting of the appeal will cause a revenue shortfall that otherwise had not been expected with respect to the public facility, and if this revenue shortfall cannot be reconciled by reduction in impacts caused by development on the appellant's property, the report shall estimate whether it will be necessary for the village to adjust impact fees to amendment of existing ordinances, to make up the revenue shortfall. 
(e)  The appeals board shall hold a public hearing on the appeal proceeded by a class 1 notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985, providing fair opportunity for the appellant to be heard. The burden shall be on the appellant to establish illegality or impropriety of the fee from which the appeal has been taken. Following the close of the public hearing, the appeals board shall deliberate upon the matter, conducting such studies and inquiries as it deems appropriate, and shall decide the appeal. 
(f)  If the appeals board feels that the appeal has merit, the appeals board may determine the appropriate remedies. These may include redirection of the proceeds of the impact fee in question to accomplish the purposes for which the fee was collected, refunding in full or in part the impact fee that was collected along with interest collected by the village thereon or granting the appellant the opportunity to make the impact fee payment in installment payments as described in this article or such other remedies as the appeals board deems appropriate to the case. 
(Code 1998, § 70-67; Ord. No. 97-4, § I(3-2-14(g)), 5-5-1997; Ord. No. 01-14, § 5, 10-15-2001) 
Chapter 125 - SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 125-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    This chapter for shoreland-wetland protection is adopted pursuant to the authorization contained in Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35, 61.351, 87.30 and 281.31 
(Code 1998, § 43-1; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 125-2. - Findings of fact. 
    The uncontrolled development and use of the shoreland-wetlands, floodplains, rivers or streams of the village would adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare and impairs its tax base. The state legislature has delegated responsibility to municipalities to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; and preserve shore cover and natural beauty. 
(Code 1998, § 43-2; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 125-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    To promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare and to protect life, health and property, this chapter has been established to: 
(1)  Maintain the stormwater and floodwater storage capacity of wetlands; 
(2)  Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which filter or store sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters; 
(3)  Protect fish spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life and wildlife by preserving wetlands and other fish and aquatic habitat; 
(4)  Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area; 
(5)  Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting shoreland-wetland excavation, filling and other earth-moving activities. 
(Code 1998, § 43-3; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 125-4. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Ordinance for the village. 
(Code 1998, § 43-4; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 125-5. - Compliance with chapter. 
(a)  Compliance. Any development, as defined in section 125-8, in shoreland-wetlands shall be in full compliance with the terms of this chapter. However, see article IV of this chapter for the standards applicable to nonconforming uses. It is the responsibility of the applicant to secure all other necessary permits from appropriate federal, state and local agencies, including those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. 
(b)  Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns and counties are required to comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13) applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the state department of transportation are exempt when Wis. Stats. § 30.12(4)(a) applies. 
(Code 1998, § 43-5; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 125-6. - Abrogation and greater restrictions; interpretation of chapter. 
(a)  Greater restrictions. This chapter supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance enacted under Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35, 62.23 or 87.30, which relate to shoreland-wetlands. However, where another municipal zoning ordinance is more restrictive than the provisions contained in this chapter, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise. The more restrictive of either the shoreland-wetland district or floodplain district regulations shall apply when a property is located in both zoning districts. 
(b)  Abrogation. It is not otherwise intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions; however, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, this chapter shall prevail. 
(c)  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall: 
(1)  Be held to be minimum requirements; 
(2)  Be liberally construed in favor of the village board; and 
(3)  Not be deemed a limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by state law. 
Where any terms or requirements of this chapter may be inconsistent or conflicting, the more restrictive requirement or interpretation shall control. 
(Code 1998, § 43-6; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 125-7. - Zoning maps. 
    The following maps, which are on file in the office of the zoning administrator, are adopted and made part of this chapter: 
    The Wisconsin Wetland Inventory Map for Waunakee, Wisconsin, most recent version developed by the department. 
(Code 1998, § 43-7; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 125-8. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. All distances, unless otherwise specified, shall be measured horizontally. 
    Boathouse means a permanent structure used for the storage of watercraft and associated materials and includes all structures which are totally enclosed, have roofs or walls or any combination of these structural parts. 
    Bulkhead line means a geographic line along a reach of a navigable body of water that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the state department of natural resources pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 30.11, and which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high water mark except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway sections of this chapter. 
    Certificate of compliance means a certification by the zoning administrator stating that the construction and the use of land or a building is in compliance with all of the sections of this chapter. 
    Department means the state department of natural resources. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or substantial alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the placement of buildings or structures; ditching, lagooning, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and the deposition or extraction of earthen materials. 
    Drainage system means one or more artificial ditches, tile drains or similar devices which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey it to a point of discharge. 
    Environmental control facility means any facility, temporary or permanent, which is reasonably expected to abate, reduce or aid in the prevention, measurement, control or monitoring of noise, air or water pollutants, solid waste and thermal pollution, radiation or other pollutants, including facilities installed principally to supplement or to replace existing property or equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting acceptable pollution control standards or which are to be supplemented or replaced by other pollution control facilities. 
    Navigable waters means Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within the state and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other waters within the territorial limits of this state, including the portion of boundary waters in this state, which are navigable under the laws of this state. The state supreme court has declared navigable bodies of water with a bed differentiated from adjacent uplands and with levels or flow sufficient to support navigation by a recreational craft of the shallowest draft on an annually recurring basis. (Muench v. Public Service Commission, 261 Wis. 492 (1952), and DeGayner and Co., Inc. v. Department of Natural Resources, 70 Wis. 2d 936 (1975).) 
    Ordinary high water mark means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic. 
    Shoreland-wetland district means the zoning district, created in this chapter, comprised of shorelands that are designated as wetlands on the wetlands inventory maps which have been adopted and made a part of this chapter. 
    Shorelands means lands within the following distances from the ordinary high water mark of navigable waters; 1,000 feet from a lake, pond or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. 
    Watershed means the entire region or area contributing runoff or surface water to a particular watercourse or body of water. 
    Well means an excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or other methods for the purpose of obtaining groundwater, regardless of its intended use. 
    Wetland alteration means any construction filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization measures or dike and dam construction in a wetland area. 
    Wetlands means those areas where water is at, near or above the land surface long enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which have soils indicative of wet conditions. 
(Code 1998, § 43-8; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 14-17, §§ 1, 2, 12-15-2014) 
Secs. 125-9-125-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 125-35. - Duties of zoning administrator. 
    The zoning administrator is authorized to administer this chapter. The zoning administrator shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Advise applicants as to the provisions of this chapter, assist them in preparing permit applications; 
(2)  Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with this chapter and issue certificates of compliance when appropriate; 
(3)  Keep records of all official actions such as: 
a.  All permits issued; 
b.  Inspections made; 
c.  Work approved; 
d.  Records of nonconforming uses and structures including changes, appeals, variances and amendments; 
(4)  Submit copies of the following items to the department district office: 
a.  Within ten days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or text amendments; 
b.  Copies of any case-by-case analyses and any other information required by the department; 
(5)  Investigate, prepare reports and report violations of this chapter to the village plan commission and to the village attorney for prosecution. Copies of the violation reports shall also be sent to the appropriate district office of the department of natural resources. 
(Code 1998, § 43-36; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 125-36. - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  Building/zoning permits. Unless another section of this chapter specifically exempts certain types of development from this requirement, a building or zoning permit shall be obtained from the zoning administrator before any development, as defined in section 125-8, including any change in the use of an existing building or structure, is initiated. Application for a land use permit shall be made to the zoning administrator upon forms furnished and shall include, for the purpose of proper enforcement of this chapter, the following data: 
(1)  General information. General information shall be included as follows: 
a.  Name and address of the applicant, property owner and contractor-builder; 
b.  Legal description of the property, type of proposed use and an indication as to whether new construction or a modification to an existing structure is involved. 
(2)  Site development plan. The site development plan shall be drawn to scale and submitted as a part of the permit application form and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot; 
b.  Location and boundaries of wetlands; 
c.  Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland alteration; 
d.  Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and vegetative cover; 
e.  Location of the ordinary high water mark of any abutting navigable waterways; 
f.  Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and centerline of all abutting streets or highways; 
g.  Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewer systems or private water supply systems; 
h.  Location and elevation of existing or future access roads. 
(3)  Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this chapter shall expire one year from the date of issuance. 
(b)  Certificate of compliance. 
(1)  No land shall be occupied or used and no building which is constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning administrator, except where no building, zoning or conditional use permit is required, subject to the following: 
a.  The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof and the proposed use conform to this chapter; 
b.  Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a permit; 
c.  The certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten days after notification of completion of the work specified in the permit, providing the building or premises or proposed use conforms to all sections of this chapter. 
(2)  The zoning administrator may issue a temporary certificate of compliance for a building, premises or part thereof according to rules and regulations established by the village. 
(3)  Upon written request from the owner, the zoning administrator shall issue a certificate of compliance for any building or premises existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, certifying after inspection the extent and type of use made of the building or premises and whether or not such use conforms to this chapter. 
(c)  Other permits. It is the responsibility of the applicant to secure all other necessary permits from all appropriate federal, state and local agencies, including those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. 
(Code 1998, § 43-37; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 125-37. - Fees. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the village board may, by resolution, adopt fees for the following: 
(1)  Building/zoning permits; 
(2)  Certificates of compliance; 
(3)  Public hearings; 
(4)  Legal notice publications; 
(5)  Conditional use permits. 
(Code 1998, § 43-38; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 125-38. - Board of appeals. 
(a)  Powers and duties. The board of appeals shall: 
(1)  Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter; 
(2)  Conditional uses. Hear and decide applications for any conditional use permits required by this chapter; 
(3)  Variances. Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the dimensional standards of this chapter. 
(b)  Appeals to board. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the village affected by any decision of the zoning administrator or other administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the zoning administrator and with the board of appeals a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for appeal. The official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record concerning the matter appealed. 
(c)  Notice and hearing for appeals, including variances. The board shall provide notice of hearings for appeals and variances and shall render its decisions as follows: 
(1)  Notice. The board shall: 
a.  Fix a reasonable time for the hearing; 
b.  Publish adequate class 1 notice pursuant to state law, specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing. 
(2)  Decision. A decision regarding the appeal or application shall be made as soon as practical. Copies of decisions on variances, conditional uses and appeals for map or text interpretations shall be submitted to the appropriate district office of the department within ten days after they are granted or denied. The final disposition of an appeal or application to the board of appeals shall be in the form of a written resolution or order signed by the chairman and secretary of the board of appeals. Such resolution shall state the specific facts which are the basis of the board's determination and shall either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part; dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or prosecution; or grant the application. 
(d)  Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the board of appeals in hearing disputes concerning the district boundaries shown on the official shoreland-wetland zoning map: 
(1)  In all cases, the person contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence to the board of appeals; 
(2)  Where it is determined that the district boundary is incorrectly mapped, the board should either inform the planning agency or the person contesting the location of the boundary to petition the village board for a map amendment. 
(e)  Variance. 
(1)  The board of appeals may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the dimensional standards of this chapter where an applicant convincingly demonstrates that: 
a.  Literal enforcement of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship on the applicant; 
b.  The hardship is due to adoption of this chapter and special conditions unique to the property not common to a group of adjacent lots or premises; in such case this chapter or map must be amended; 
c.  Such variance is not contrary to the public interest. 
(2)  A variance shall not: 
a.  Grant or increase any use of property prohibited in the zoning district; 
b.  Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss; 
c.  Be granted for a hardship which is self-created; 
d.  Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area. 
(Code 1998, § 43-39; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 125-39. - Conditional use permits. 
(a)  Application. Any use listed as a conditional use in this chapter shall be permitted only after an application has been submitted to the zoning administrator and a conditional use permit has been granted by the board of appeals, following the procedures in subsection 125-38(d). To secure information upon which to base its determination, the board of appeals may require the applicant to furnish, in addition to the information required for a building/zoning permit, other pertinent information which is necessary to determine if the proposed use is consistent with the purpose of this chapter. 
(b)  Conditions. Upon consideration of the permit application and the standards applicable to the permitted uses in this chapter, the board of appeals shall attach such conditions to a conditional use permit, in addition to those required elsewhere in this chapter, as are necessary to further the purposes of this chapter as listed in section 125-3. Such conditions may include specifications for, without limitation because of specific enumeration, type of shore cover; erosion protection measures; increased side yard setback; specific sewage disposal and water supply facilities; landscaping and planting screens; period of operation; operational control; sureties; deed restrictions; location of piers, docks, parking areas and signs; and type of construction. 
(Code 1998, § 43-40; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 125-40. - Review; appeals of permit denials. 
(a)  The board of appeals shall review all data constituting the basis for the appeal of permit denial. This data may include, where appropriate: 
(1)  Permit application data listed in subsection 125-36(a). 
(2)  Data listed in subsection 125-36(a) where the applicant has not submitted this information to the zoning administrator. 
(3)  Other data submitted to the zoning administrator with the permit application or submitted to the board with the appeal. 
(b)  For appeals of all denied permits, the board shall: 
(1)  Follow the procedures of section 125-38. 
(2)  Consider village agency recommendations. 
(3)  Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal. 
(Code 1998, § 43-41; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 125-41. - Public information. 
    All available information in the form of maps, engineering data and regulations shall be readily available and should be widely distributed. 
(Code 1998, § 43-42; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 125-42. - Authorization to change boundaries and regulations. 
    The village board may supplement or change the district boundaries and the regulations contained in this chapter according to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2, Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 117, and the following: 
(1)  The shoreland-wetland district amendment provisions of section 125-94 apply. 
(2)  A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted to the appropriate district office of the department within five days of the submission of the proposed amendment to the village planning agency. 
(3)  All proposed text and map amendments shall be referred to the village plan commission and a public hearing shall be held as required by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2, following publication of a class 2 notice. The appropriate district office of the department shall be provided with written notice of the public hearing at least ten days prior to such hearing. 
(4)  A copy of the decision on each amendment shall be provided to the department district office within ten days of the decision. 
(Code 1998, § 43-43; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 125-43. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    Any development, as defined in section 125-8, or use established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives in violation of this chapter by any person, including building contractors or their agents, shall be deemed a violation. The zoning administrator shall refer violations to the planning agency and the village attorney who shall prosecute such violations. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any of the sections of this chapter shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-32. Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this chapter is a public nuisance and the creation thereof may be enjoined and the maintenance thereof may be abated by action at suit of the village, the state or any citizen thereof pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 87.30. 
(Code 1998, § 43-44; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Secs. 125-44-125-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 125-75-125-91. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SHORELAND-WETLAND 

Sec. 125-92. - District boundaries. 
(a)  The shoreland-wetland zoning district includes all wetlands in the village which are shown on the final wetland inventory map that has been adopted and made a part of this chapter in section 125-7 and which are: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high water mark of navigable lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages in the village shall be presumed to be navigable if they are listed in the department publication "Surface Water Resources of Dane County" or are shown on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have been made a part of this chapter in section 125-7. 
(2)  Within 300 feet of the ordinary high water mark of navigable rivers or streams or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as either continuous or intermittent waterways on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter in section 125-7. 
(b)  Determinations of navigability and ordinary high water mark location shall initially be made by the zoning administrator. When questions arise, the zoning administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the department for a final determination of navigability or ordinary high water mark. 
(c)  When an apparent discrepancy exists between the shoreland-wetland district boundary shown on the official zoning maps and the actual field conditions at the time the maps were adopted, the zoning administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the department to determine if the shoreland-wetland district boundary as mapped is in error. If department staff concur with the zoning administrator that a particular area was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the zoning administrator shall have the authority to immediately grant or deny a land use or building permit in accordance with the regulations applicable to the correct zoning district. In order to correct wetland mapping errors shown on the official zoning maps, the zoning administrator shall be responsible for initiating a map amendment within a reasonable period. 
(d)  Under Wis. Stats. § 281.31(2m), notwithstanding any other provision of law or administrative rule, wetland zoning ordinances required under Wis. Stats. § 61.351 for villages or Wis. Stats. § 62.231 for cities and Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 117, do not apply to lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches if: 
(1)  Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river; 
(2)  Those parts of the drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not navigable streams before ditching; and 
(3)  Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use. 
(Code 1998, § 43-161; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 125-93. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in shoreland-wetland zoning districts subject to Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31, and the provisions of other local, state and federal laws, if applicable: 
(1)  Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit, provided that no wetland alteration occurs, are as follows: 
a.  Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling and boating; 
b.  The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops; 
c.  The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and harvesting of timber; 
d.  The pasturing of livestock; 
e.  The cultivation of agricultural crops; and 
f.  The construction and maintenance of duck blinds. 
(2)  Uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit and which may involve wetland alterations are permitted only to the extent as specifically follows: 
a.  The practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water level stabilization measures which are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected; 
b.  The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland alterations necessary for the purpose of growing and harvesting cranberries; 
c.  The maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems, where permissible under Wis. Stats. § 30.20, to restore preexisting levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling necessary to dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the filling is permissible under Wis. Stats. ch. 30, and that dredged spoil is placed on existing spoil banks where possible; 
d.  The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance; 
e.  The construction and maintenance of piers, docks and walkways, observation decks and trail bridges built on pilings, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance; 
f.  The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of draining lands outside the shoreland-wetland zoning district, provided that such installation or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the shoreland-wetland listed in subsection 125-95(a); and 
g.  The maintenance, repair, replacement and construction of existing highways and bridges, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction. 
(3)  Uses which are allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit and which may include wetland alterations are permitted only to the extent specifically as follows: 
a.  The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for the continuity of the village street system, the provision of essential utility and emergency services or to provide access to uses permitted under this section, provided: 
1.  The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
2.  The road is designed and constructed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in subsection 125-95(a); 
3.  The road is designed and constructed with the minimum cross sectional area practical to serve the intended use; 
4.  Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate area of the roadbed only; and 
5.  Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction or maintenance of the road. 
b.  The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings are permitted, provided that: 
1.  The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted in the shoreland-wetland district or for the raising of waterfowl, minnows or other wetland or aquatic animals; 
2.  The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
3.  The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area; and 
4.  Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide structural support for the building is allowed. 
c.  The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation areas; outdoor education areas; historic, natural and scientific areas; game refuges and closed areas; fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects; game bird and animal farms; wildlife preserves; and public boat launching ramps are permitted, provided that: 
1.  Any private development allowed under this subsection shall be used exclusively for the permitted purpose; 
2.  Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches or the construction of park shelters or similar structures is allowed; 
3.  The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the uses permitted under this subsection are allowed only where such construction and maintenance meets the criteria in subsection (3)a.1 of this section; and 
4.  Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms and wildlife preserves shall be for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland values. 
d.  The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone transmission lines and water, gas and sewer lines and related facilities and the construction and maintenance of railroad lines are permitted, provided that: 
1.  The transmission and distribution lines and related facilities and railroad lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
2.  Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such construction or maintenance is allowed; and 
3.  Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in subsection 125-95(a). 
(Code 1998, § 43-162; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 125-94. - Prohibited uses. 
(a)  Any use not listed in section 125-93 is prohibited in the shoreland-wetland zoning district, unless the wetland or a portion of the wetland has been rezoned by amendment of this chapter in accordance with sections 125-42 and 125-95. 
(b)  The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or placement of a boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary high water mark of any navigable waters are prohibited. 
(Code 1998, § 43-163; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 125-95. - Rezoning. 
(a)  Rezoning of a shoreland-wetland shall require amendment of the final Wisconsin Wetland Inventory Map adopted in section 125-7 pursuant to procedures established in section 125-42. In order to ensure that any amendment will be consistent with the shoreland protection objectives of Wis. Stats. § 281.31, the village shall not rezone a wetland in a shoreland-wetland zoning district or any portion thereof where the proposed rezoning may result in a significant adverse impact upon any of the following: 
(1)  Stormwater and floodwater storage capacity; 
(2)  Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a wetland to another area or the flow of groundwater through a wetland; 
(3)  Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters; 
(4)  Shoreline protection against soil erosion; 
(5)  Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds; 
(6)  Wildlife habitat; or 
(7)  Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including scarce wetland types of habitat of endangered species. 
(b)  Upon notification of a proposed amendment as required by section 125-42, if the district office of the department determines that a proposed rezoning may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in subsection (a) of this section, the department shall so notify the village of its determination either prior to or during the public hearing held on the proposed amendment. 
(c)  If the department notifies the municipal planning agency in writing that a proposed amendment may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in subsection (a) of this section, that proposed amendment, if approved by the village, shall not become effective until more than 30 days have elapsed since written notice of the board approval was mailed to the department, as required by section 125-42. If, within the 30-day period, the department notifies the village board that the department intends to adopt a superseding shoreland-wetland zoning ordinance for the village under Wis. Stats. § 61.351(6), the proposed amendment shall not become effective until that ordinance adoption procedure is completed or otherwise terminated. The record of the village board decision on the proposed amendment shall advise the petitioner of this section. 
(Code 1998, § 43-164; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Secs. 125-96-125-118. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 125-119. - Continuation of nonconforming structures and uses. 
    The lawful use of a building, structure or property which existed on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or that an applicable amendment to this chapter took effect and which is not in conformity with this chapter, including the routine maintenance of such a building or structure, may be continued, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the building, structure or property shall conform to the appropriate sections of this chapter. 
(2)  Any legal nonconforming use of property which does not involve the use of a structure and which existed at the time of the adoption or subsequent amendment of this chapter adopted under Wis. Stats. § 61.351 may be continued although such use does not conform with this chapter. However, such nonconforming use may not be extended or increased. 
(3)  The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses which are located below the ordinary high water mark of any navigable waters shall comply with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 30.121. 
(4)  Uses which are nuisances under common law shall not be permitted to continue as nonconforming uses. 
(Code 1998, § 43-251; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 125-120. - Shoreland-wetland nonconforming structures. 
    Notwithstanding Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h), for shoreland-wetland districts, the repair, reconstruction, renovating, remodeling or expansion of a legal nonconforming structure or any environmental control facility related to a legal nonconforming structure in existence at the time of adoption or subsequent amendment of this chapter adopted under Wis. Stats. § 61.351 is permitted under Wis. Stats. § 61.351(5). 
(Code 1998, § 43-252; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 12-15-2008) 
Secs. 125-121-125-138. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SHORELAND ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 125-139. - Title; statutory authorization. 
    This article shall be known as the Shoreland Zoning District Ordinance. This Shoreland Zoning District Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35 and 61.353. 
(Code 1998, § 43-300; Ord. No. 14-17, § 3, 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 125-140. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Principal building means the main building or structure on a single lot or parcel of land and includes any attached garage or attached porch. 
    Shorelands has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 59.692(1)(b). 
    Shoreland setback area has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 59.692(1)(bn). 
    The definitions contained in section 125-8 shall also apply to this Shoreland Zoning District article, except to the extent that they conflict with the definitions contained in this section. 
(Code 1998, § 43-301; Ord. No. 14-17, § 3, 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 125-141. - Findings of fact and purpose. 
    Uncontrolled use of shorelands and pollution of the navigable waters of the village would adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare and impair the tax base. The state legislature has delegated responsibility to all municipalities to: 
(1)  Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare; 
(2)  Limit certain land use activities detrimental to shorelands; and 
(3)  Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by controlling the location of structures in shoreland areas and restricting the removal of natural shoreland vegetation. 
(Code 1998, § 43-302; Ord. No. 14-17, § 3, 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 125-142. - Compliance. 
    The use of shorelands governed by this article shall be in full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable local, state or federal regulations. All permitted development shall require the issuance of a zoning permit unless otherwise expressly excluded by a provision of this article. 
(Code 1998, § 43-303; Ord. No. 14-17, § 3, 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 125-143. - Municipalities and state agencies regulated. 
    Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this article and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13) applies. 
(Code 1998, § 43-304; Ord. No. 14-17, § 3, 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 125-144. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
(a)  This article supersedes all the provisions of any other applicable municipal article, except that where another municipal article is more restrictive than this article, that article shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise. 
(b)  This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(c)  The lands within the Shoreland Zoning District are subject to all applicable provisions of this Code. Where the provisions of this article are more restrictive than other regulations in the Municipal Code, the provisions of this article shall apply. 
(Code 1998, § 43-305; Ord. No. 14-17, § 3, 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 125-145. - Interpretation; severability. 
(a)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the village and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by the state statutes or state constitution. 
(b)  Should any portion of this article be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be affected. 
(Code 1998, § 43-306; Ord. No. 14-17, § 3, 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 125-146. - Applicability; district boundaries. 
(a)  The Shoreland Zoning District regulations apply only to shorelands annexed by the village after May 7, 1982, and that prior to annexation were subject to a county shoreland zoning ordinance under Wis. Stats. § 59.692. 
(b)  The Shoreland Zoning District areas regulated by this article shall include all shorelands covered by subsection (a) of this section that are in the village and are: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages shall be presumed to be navigable if they are listed in the state department of natural resources surface water data viewer available on the DNR website, or are shown on United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps; 
(2)  Within 300 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable rivers or streams, or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as continuous waterways or intermittent waterways on United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps. Flood hazard boundary maps, flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary-floodway maps, county soil survey maps or other existing county floodplain zoning maps shall be used to delineate floodplain areas. 
(c)  Determinations of navigability and ordinary high-water mark location shall initially be made by the zoning administrator. When questions arise, the zoning administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the state department of natural resources for a final determination of navigability or ordinary high-water mark. 
(d)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 61.353, the Shoreland Zoning District does not include lands adjacent to an artificially constructed drainage ditch, pond, or retention basin if the drainage ditch, pond or retention basin is not hydrologically connected to a natural navigable water body. 
(Code 1998, § 43-307; Ord. No. 14-17, § 3, 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 125-147. - Setbacks. 
(a)  Principal buildings. All principal buildings shall be set back at least 50 feet from the ordinary high-water mark. However, a setback less than 50 feet is permitted if both of the following apply: 
(1)  The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel of land that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel of land containing a principal building; and 
(2)  The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance equal to the average setback of the principal building on the adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary high-water mark, whichever distance is greater. 
(b)  Boathouses. Boathouses accessory to permitted and conditional uses may be located within the 50-foot setback area, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Boathouses shall be located entirely above the ordinary high-water mark; 
(2)  Boathouses shall be constructed in such a manner as to orient the main opening of the boathouse toward the body of water and shall be used strictly for the storage of boats and water-related recreational accessories. The use of a boathouse for human habitation is prohibited. No plumbing, heating or cooking facilities may be provided in or for a boathouse; 
(3)  Boathouses shall not be located in the vegetative buffer zone required under section 125-148, but may be located in the viewing or access corridor described in section 125-148(3). 
(Code 1998, § 43-308; Ord. No. 14-17, § 3, 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 125-148. - Vegetative buffer zone. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 61.353, a landowner must maintain a vegetative buffer zone as follows: 
(1)  A person who owns shoreland property that contains vegetation must maintain that vegetation in a vegetative buffer zone along the entire shoreline of the property and extending 35 feet inland from the ordinary high-water mark of the navigable water, except as provided in subsection (2) of this section. 
(2)  If the vegetation in a vegetative buffer zone contains invasive species or dead or diseased vegetation, the owner of the shoreland property may remove the vegetation, except that if the owner removes all of the vegetation in the vegetative buffer zone, the owner shall establish a vegetative buffer zone with new vegetation. 
(3)  A person who is required to maintain or establish a vegetative buffer zone under subsection (1) of this section may remove all of the vegetation in a part of that zone in order to establish a viewing or access corridor that is no greater than 30 feet wide for every 100 feet of shoreline frontage and extends no more than 35 feet inland from the ordinary high-water mark. 
(Code 1998, § 43-309; Ord. No. 14-17, § 3, 12-15-2014) 
Chapter 129 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Platting lands, Wis. Stats. ch. 236; local subdivision regulation, Wis. Stats. § 236.45. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 129-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as, referred to, or cited as the "Village of Waunakee Subdivision Chapter/Ordinance" or "Village of Waunakee Land Division and Subdivision Chapter/Ordinance." 
(Code 1998, § 86-5; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-6, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a public or private right-of-way shown on a plat, which provides secondary access to a lot, block or parcel of land. 
    Arterial street means a street that provides for the movement of relatively fast or heavy traffic to, from or within the village. It has a secondary function of providing access to abutting land. 
    Block means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by a combination of streets, exterior boundary lines of the subdivision, and streams or water bodies. 
    Collector street means a street that collects and distributes internal traffic within an urban area such as a residential neighborhood, between arterial and local streets. It provides access to abutting property. 
    Commission means the plan commission created by the village board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23. 
    Condominium means a real estate development in which the condominium form of ownership, pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 703, is utilized. 
    Cul-de-sac means a short street having but one end open to traffic and the other end being permanently terminated in a vehicular turnaround. 
    Easement means the area of land set aside or over or through which a liberty, privilege, or advantage in land, distinct from ownership of the land, is granted to the public or some particular person or part of the public. 
    Extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction means the unincorporated area within 11/2 miles of the village, except as modified by any legally binding boundary agreements entered into by the village and the Town of Westport or other units of government. 
    Final plat means the final map, drawing, or chart on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented for approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to the county register of deeds. 
    Floodplain means that land which has been or may be covered by floodwater during the 100-year regional flood as delineated by the flood hazard boundary maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or area otherwise mapped and adopted as the 100-year floodplain by the village means the floodplain includes the floodway and the flood fringe and general floodplain areas. 
    Frontage street means a local street auxiliary to and located on the side of an arterial street for control of access and for service to the abutting development. 
    Improvement, public, means any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, open channel, curb and gutter, water main, roadway, park, parkway, public access, sidewalk, pedestrian way, planting strip, or other facility for which the village may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation. 
    Land division means a general term for a division of land where the title or any part thereof is transferred by the execution of a land contract, an option to purchase, an offer to purchase an acceptance, a deed, or a certified survey. Land divisions regulated by this chapter include either a subdivision plat or certified survey map. 
    Local street means a street designed to provide access to abutting property and leading into collector streets, but which is not designed to carry through traffic from outside the neighborhood in which it is located. 
    Lot means a parcel of land having frontage on a public street or other officially approved means of access, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal structure or use and sufficient in size to meet the lot width, lot frontage, lot area, yard, parking area, and other open space provisions of this chapter and any applicable zoning ordinance. 
    Lot area means the area contained within the exterior boundaries of a lot, excluding streets and land under navigable bodies of water. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot abutting intersecting streets at their intersection. 
    Lot lines means the peripheral boundaries of a lot as defined in this section. 
    Lot, reversed corner, means a corner lot that is oriented so that it has its rear lot line coincident with or parallel to the side lot line of the interior lot immediately to its rear. 
    Lot, through, means a lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two more or less parallel public streets and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines. 
    Lot width means the width of a parcel of land measured along the front building line. 
    Major thoroughfare means a street used or intended to be used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic. Major thoroughfares shall include freeways, expressways, and other highways and parkways, as well as arterial streets. 
    Master plan means a comprehensive plan prepared by the village, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(3), indicating the general locations recommended for the various functional classes of land use, places and structures, and for the general physical development of the village, and includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. 
    Owner means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, private corporation, public or quasi-public corporation, or combination of these. 
    Pedestrian pathway means a public way, usually running at right angles to streets, that is intended for the convenience of pedestrians only; it may also provide public right-of-way for utilities. 
    Plat means the map, drawing, or chart on which the subdivider's plat of subdivision is presented to the village for approval. 
    Preliminary plat means the preliminary plat map, drawing or chart indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the plan commission/village board for its consideration as to compliance with the master plan, chapter 133, and this chapter, along with required supporting data. 
    Protective covenants means contracts entered into between private parties or between private parties and public bodies pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 236.293, that constitute a restriction on the use of all private or platted property within a land division created by a certified survey map or subdivision for the benefit of the public or property owners and to provide mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development that would tend to impair stability of values. 
    Replat means the process of changing or a map or plat that changes the boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or part thereof. The legal dividing of a large block, lot or outlot within a recorded subdivision plat or certified survey map without changing exterior boundaries of such block, lot, or outlot is not a replat. 
    Shorelands means those lands within the following distances: 1,000 feet from the high water elevation of navigable lakes, ponds, and flowages or 300 feet from the high water elevation of navigable streams or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever is greater. 
    Subdivider means any person or any agent thereof dividing or proposing to divide land resulting in a subdivision plat, certified survey map, or replat. 
    Subdivision. 
(1)  The term "subdivision" means a division of a lot, parcel, or tract of land by the owner thereof or the owner's agent for the purpose of sale or of building development and to which any of the following applies: 
a.  The act of division creates five or more parcels or building sites of 11/2 acres each or less in area. 
b.  Five or more parcels or building sites of 11/2 acres each or less in area are created by successive divisions within a period of five years. 
(2)  The term "subdivision" does not include a division of land into five or more parcels or building sites by a certified survey map. 
    Wetlands means an area where water is at, near, or above the land surface long enough to be capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which has soils indicative of wet conditions (Wis. Stats. § 23.32(1)). 
(Code 1998, § 86-6; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-10, 11-3-1997) 
State Law reference- Definitions, Wis. Stats. § 236.02. 
Sec. 129-3. - Interpretation. 
    In its interpretation and application, this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the village and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by state law. 
(Code 1998, § 86-3; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-3, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-4. - Introduction and purpose. 
(a)  Introduction. In accordance with the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 236.45, and for the purposes listed in Wis. Stats. §§ 236.01 and 236.45, the village board ordains as follows: 
(1)  The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted to promote the health, safety, morals, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare of the village; 
(2)  This chapter shall not repeal, impair, or modify private covenants or public ordinances, except that it shall apply whenever it imposes stricter restrictions on land use. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the subdivision of land to promote public health, safety and general welfare; to further the orderly layout and use of land; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to lessen congestion in the streets and highways; to provide for adequate light and air; to facilitate adequate provision for water, sewerage and other public requirements; to provide for proper ingress and egress; and to promote proper monumenting of land subdivided and conveyancing by accurate legal description. The approvals to be obtained by the subdivider as required in this chapter shall be based on requirements designed to accomplish the aforesaid purposes. 
(Code 1998, § 86-1; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-1, 11-3-1997) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 236.02. 
Sec. 129-5. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with existing easements, covenants, agreements, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, this chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1998, § 86-2; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-2, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-6. - Compliance. 
    No person shall divide any land located within the jurisdictional limits of this chapter that results in a subdivision, land division created by certified survey map, condominium or a replat; no such land division or replat shall be entitled to recording; and no street shall be laid out or improvements made to land without compliance with all requirements of this chapter and the following: 
(1)  The provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 236; 
(2)  The rules of the department of safety and professional services, contained in Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 285 for land divisions not served by public sewer; 
(3)  The rules of the division of highways, state department of transportation, contained in Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 233 for subdivisions that abut a state trunk highway or connecting street; 
(4)  The rules of the state department of natural resources contained in the Wisconsin Administrative Code for the floodplain management program; 
(5)  Master plans or components of such plans prepared by state, regional, county, or municipal agencies duly adopted by the village board; 
(6)  All applicable local and county regulations, including zoning, sanitary, building and official mapping ordinances; 
(7)  All applicable rules contained in the Wisconsin Administrative Code not listed in this section. 
(Code 1998, § 86-7; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-20(a), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-7. - Jurisdiction. 
    Jurisdiction of this chapter shall include all lands within the corporate limits of the village and the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village. This chapter, as it applies to divisions of tracts of land into less than five parcels, shall not apply to: 
(1)  Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order; 
(2)  Leases for a term not to exceed ten years, mortgages or easements; 
(3)  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and the lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by this chapter or other applicable laws or ordinances; 
(4)  Cemetery plats under Wis. Stats. § 157.07; 
(5)  Assessors' plats made under Wis. Stats. § 70.27, but such assessors' plats shall comply with Wis. Stats. §§ 236.15(1) and 236.20(1), (2)(a)-(c). 
(Code 1998, § 86-8; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-20(b), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-8. - Applicability to condominiums. 
    This chapter is expressly applicable to condominium developments within the village's jurisdiction, pursuant Wis. Stats. § 703.27(1). For purposes of this chapter, a condominium unit and any associated limited common elements shall be deemed to be equivalent to a lot or parcel created by the act of subdivision. 
(Code 1998, § 86-11; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-20(e), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-9. - Certified survey. 
    Any division of land other than a subdivision, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 236.02(12), shall be surveyed and a certified survey map prepared, as provided in Wis. Stats. § 236.34. 
(Code 1998, § 86-9; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-20(c), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-10. - Building permits. 
    The village shall not issue any building permit relating to any parcel of land forming all or any part of lands included in a subdivision, land division, replat, or certified survey map originally submitted to the village on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives until the applicant has complied with all of the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 86-10; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-20(d), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-11. - Land suitability. 
(a)  Generally. No land shall be subdivided for residential, commercial, or industrial use that is held unsuitable for such use by the village board, upon the recommendation of the plan commission, for reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of the future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community. 
(b)  Specific requirements. In addition to subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  No lot served by public sanitary sewer facilities shall have more than 50 percent of its required lot area below an elevation at least two feet above the elevation of the 100-year recurrence interval flood. No lot one acre or less in area served by an on-site sanitary sewage disposal (septic tank) system shall include floodplains. All lots more than one acre in area served by a septic tank system shall contain not less than 40,000 square feet of land that is above flood protection elevation at least two feet above the elevation of the 100-year recurrence interval flood, or where such data is not available, five feet above the maximum flood of record; 
(2)  Lands made, altered, or filled with manmade materials within the preceding 20 years shall not be divided into building sites that are to be served by soil absorption waste disposal systems; 
(3)  Lands made, altered, or filled with earth within the preceding seven years shall not be divided into building sites that are to be served by on-site soil absorption sanitary sewage disposal systems; 
(4)  Lands having a slope of 12 percent or more shall be maintained in permanent open space use. No lot shall have more than 50 percent of its minimum required area in slopes of ten percent or greater; 
(5)  Lands having bedrock within six feet of the natural undisturbed surface shall not be divided into building sites to be served by on-site soil absorption sewage disposal systems; 
(6)  Lands having groundwater within six feet of the natural undisturbed surface shall not be divided into building sites to be served by soil absorption sewage disposal systems; 
(7)  Lands covered by soils having a percolation rate slower than 60 minutes per inch or faster than ten minutes per inch shall not be divided into building sites to be served by on-site soil absorption sewage disposal systems; 
(8)  Lands drained by farm drainage tile or farm ditch systems shall not be divided into building sites to be served by on-site soil absorption sewage disposal systems. 
(c)  Determination of suitability by board. The village board, in applying the provisions of this section, shall in writing recite the particular facts upon which it bases its conclusion that the land is not suitable for residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional use and shall afford the subdivider an opportunity to present evidence regarding such unsuitability if the subdivider so desires. Thereafter, the village board may affirm, modify, or withdraw its determination of unsuitability. 
(d)  Existing flora. The subdivider shall make every effort to protect and retain all existing trees, shrubbery, vines, and grasses not actually lying in public roadways, drainageways, building foundation sites, private driveways, soil absorption waste disposal areas, paths, and trails. Such trees are to be protected and preserved during construction in accordance with sound conservation practices, possibly including the preservation of trees by well islands or retaining walls whenever abutting grades are altered, pursuant to a landscaping plan filed by the subdivider. 
(Code 1998, § 86-12; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-21, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-12. - Condominium developments. 
(a)  Purpose. The findings of the village board and the purpose of this section are as follows: 
(1)  The village board finds that certain issues arise in condominium developments that require limited applicability of this chapter to condominium developments. The state legislature has recognized that subdivision ordinances may apply to condominiums, but that subdivision ordinances shall not impose burdens upon condominiums that are different from those imposed on other property of a similar character not subject to a declaration of condominium; 
(2)  The factor that makes this chapter applicable to a condominium development is the creation of multiple, distinct property entities at or near the ground surface, subject to property taxation as separate parcels, with each property entity having different ownership and management. The village determines that this factor makes a condominium development dissimilar, both physically and in ownership, from developments in which the land and improvements are under unitary ownership, management, and control; 
(3)  Thus, the village board finds that new condominium developments can place impacts on community resources in the same manner as other new developments which are characterized by division of land into lots. These impacts include: 
a.  Additional population density; 
b.  Possibility of use of particular land in a manner unsuitable to the land's characteristics; 
c.  Additional demands upon village parks, recreation areas, utility facilities, and schools; 
d.  Additional traffic and street use. 
(b)  Portions of chapter applicable to condominium developments. The following sections of this chapter shall apply to condominium developments: 
(1)  Section 129-11 relating to land suitability and construction practices; 
(2)  Sections 129-91 through 129-93 relating to preliminary plat approval. This stage of approval shall be the only approval required for a condominium development. The technical requirements for preliminary plats set forth in section 129-121 shall not apply, since condominiums have separate technical standards set forth in Wis. Stats. ch. 703; 
(3)  Article IV of this chapter relating to required improvements; 
(4)  Article V of this chapter relating to design standards for improvements; 
(5)  Article VI of this chapter relating to dedication requirements; 
(6)  Section 129-36 relating to fees for review. 
(c)  Exemptions. This section shall not apply to any condominium plat recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives. 
(Code 1998, § 86-13; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-22, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-12, § 2, 7-19-1999; Ord. No. 99-12, § 2, 7-19-1999) 
Sec. 129-13. - Waunakee/Westport joint planning area. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Waunakee/Westport Joint Planning Area. The Waunakee/Westport Joint Planning Area or JPA is that area of land within the Village of Waunakee and Town of Westport as defined in the Boundary Stipulation and Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement between the Village of Waunakee and the Town of Westport dated September 19, 1996, or as amended by the village and the town. 
(2)  Expanded ETZ area. The Waunakee expanded ETZ area is that area of land where the Village of Waunakee has extended its ETZ powers, but which lies outside of the JPA. 
(b)  General purpose of this section. 
(1)  In the above area, the Village of Waunakee and Town of Westport governing bodies have agreed to delegate certain review and approval abilities over land use decisions to the joint planning committee (JPC) created by that agreement. 
(2)  By this section, it is the intent of the village to specify those powers of the JPC in this area under this chapter. No action of the JPC is effective unless approved by a majority vote of the entire membership of the JPC. 
(c)  Applicable provisions. 
(1)  Land divisions for JPA. For those areas of the village which also lie within the JPA, and also for those areas outside the village but within the JPA, the JPC shall act as the plan commission under division 1 of article III of this chapter for any land division review requested. The JPC shall conduct all public hearings on land divisions requested in this area, as necessary. The village board may not approve any land division in the JPA until and unless such land division has been approved by a majority of the members of the entire JPC after any required public hearing. No land divisions of property with a zoning classification under section 133-860 shall be approved or allowed until that property is rezoned to an appropriate zoning classification other than under section 133-860 pursuant to the procedures in section 133-74. 
(2)  Variances and exceptions for JPA. The JPC shall act as the plan commission under section 129-37 and division 2 of article II of this chapter for variances and/or exceptions from the terms of this chapter as requested in the JPA. The village board may not approve any variance and/or exception in the JPA until and unless such variance and/or exception have been approved by a majority of the members of the entire JPC. All other provisions of this chapter not in conflict herein shall apply and shall be followed by the JPC acting as the plan commission as to reviews of variances and/or exceptions in the JPA. 
(3)  Land suitability for JPA. The JPC shall act as the plan commission under section 129-11 of this chapter for land suitability decisions in the JPA. All other provisions of that section not in conflict herein shall be followed by the JPC acting as the plan commission as to land suitability reviews in the JPA. 
(4)  Remaining sections. The remaining sections of this chapter, to the extent they do not conflict with the provisions of this section, shall apply in the JPA and expanded ETZ area. 
(d)  Reserved. Reserved for future provisions. 
(e)  Amendment. The provisions of this section shall not be amended unless and until approval of such amendment has been recommended by a majority vote of the entire membership of the JPC after following the procedures for amendment under Wis. Stats. § 236.45. 
(Code 1998, § 86-14; Ord. No. 98-2, § 7, 3-30-1998; Ord. No. 07-04, § 6, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 129-14. - Time deadlines. 
    To the extent that this chapter contains time limits, deadlines, notice requirements, or other provisions that are more restrictive than time limits, deadlines, notice requirements, or other provisions that provide protections for a subdivider contained in Wis. Stats. ch. 236, the time limits, deadlines, notice requirements or other provisions that provide protections for a subdivider contained in Wis. Stats. ch. 236 shall apply. 
(Code 1998, § 86-15; Ord. No. 10-13, 12-6-2010) 
Sec. 129-15. - Certified survey map parcels. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the village board reserves the authority to exercise powers under Wis. Stats. § 236.34(1)(ar). Specifically, the village board, following the procedure set forth in Wis. Stats. § 236.34(1)(ar), may, on a case-by-case basis, adopt resolutions that specify a maximum number of parcels that is greater than four into which land that is situated in the village and zoned for commercial, industrial, or mixed-use development may be divided by certified survey map. 
(Code 1998, § 86-16; Ord. No. 14-18, § 1, 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 129-16. - Lot line adjustment procedure by certified survey map. 
(a)  Applicability. Notwithstanding any other provisions within the village subdivision chapter/ordinance, the regulations contained within this section shall apply to a lot line adjustment within the corporate limits of the village. For purposes of this section, the term "lot line adjustment" means an adjustment or relocation of property line between adjacent lots or a combination of one or more lots that does not result in the creation of additional lots and where the lot is not reduced in size below standards identified in the village zoning code or below minimum lot design standards of this chapter. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. The applicant shall submit two copies of the certified survey map and the lot line adjustment application to the village zoning administrator. 
(c)  Approval. The village zoning administrator shall have the authority to administratively review and approve the certified survey map and the lot line adjustment application. The certified survey map shall satisfy all applicable rules and regulations as set forth in this chapter and in Wis. Stats. § 236.34. The village zoning administrator shall act within 90 days of receiving a certified survey map and lot line adjustment application that comply with the requirements of this section. The village zoning administrator shall not approve a lot line adjustment that results in a violation of the village subdivision or zoning ordinances. 
(d)  Recordation. Upon approval, the applicant shall record the certified survey map (and any other necessary records) with the county register of deeds office. The applicant shall submit two recorded copies of the certified survey map (and any other necessary records) to the village zoning administrator. One copy will be kept by the village zoning administrator and one copy will be sent to the village assessor. 
(Code 1998, § 86-17; Ord. No. 14-18, § 2, 12-15-2014) 
Secs. 129-17-129-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 129-36. - Administrative and other fees. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Fees for procedures requested by a private party. Required fees shall be determined from time to time by the village board. 
(2)  Fees for procedures requested by the village. There shall be no fee in the case of applications filed in the public interest by the village board or the plan commission, other agency, or official of the village. 
(3)  Payment of fees. Fees shall be payable at the time applications are filed with the appropriate officer of the village (per the requirements of this title) and are not refundable. 
(b)  Engineering and plat review fee. The subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the actual cost to the village for all engineering or plat review work incurred by the village in connection with the plat or certified survey map, including inspections required by the village. The subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the actual cost to the village of such plat review, engineering work, and inspection as the village board or village engineer deems necessary to ensure that the construction of the required improvements is in compliance with the plans, specifications, and ordinances of the village or any other governmental authority. Engineering work shall include the preparation of construction plans, standard specifications, and administration of the engineering work. 
(c)  Administrative fee. The subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the cost of any legal, plan review, administrative, or fiscal work that may be undertaken by the village in connection with the plat or certified survey map. 
(d)  Objecting agency review fees. The subdivider shall transmit all fees required for state agency review to the zoning administrator at the time of application. Such review fees shall be retransmitted to the proper state review agency by the zoning administrator. Such fees shall be applicable, where appropriate, to review fees required by the state department of commerce, state department of transportation and the state department of natural resources. 
(e)  Digitizing and mapping fee. Upon approval of a land division, the subdivider shall pay a fee equal to cost to the village for digitizing the mapping of the approved land division and public improvements. The digitizing and mapping fee will apply to the following: 
(1)  All additions and changes to parcel boundaries; 
(2)  Public rights-of-way; 
(3)  Access, stormwater, and utility easements; and 
(4)  The following utility systems: sanitary sewer, public water supply, and stormwater. 
(f)  Escrow for fees and administrative charges. At such time as the subdivider submits a preliminary plat or certified survey map for review by the plan commission and village board, the subdivider shall deposit with the village, in escrow, the sum required to guarantee the timely payment of all of the village's fees. If the amount deposited with the village falls below 25 percent of the amount required to be deposited, the plan commission or the village board shall have the option of requiring the subdivider to replenish the escrow to the original amount required under this section. If the subdivider withdraws the plat or minor subdivision or the plat or minor subdivision is approved and money remains in escrow over and above the village's fees, the excess shall be refunded to the subdivider. The escrow account shall not draw interest for the benefit of the subdivider. The village clerk, with the approval of the village board, shall have the right to draw upon the escrow to reimburse the village for the fees it has incurred in reviewing the minor subdivision or subdivision on a periodic basis. An accounting of all fees incurred by the village and the status of the escrow shall also be provided to the subdivider periodically. If the subdivider defaults in establishing or replenishing the escrow, the village shall not be required to act further upon the subdivider's request. Failure to replenish the escrow shall be sufficient cause to reject the minor subdivision or subdivision. 
(Code 1998, § 86-41; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-100, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 07-02, §§ 2-4, 4-2-2007) 
Sec. 129-37. - Enforcement, penalties and remedies. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful to build upon, divide, convey, record, or monument any land in violation of this chapter or state law, and no person shall be issued a building permit by the village authorizing the building on or improvement of any subdivision, land division, or replat within the jurisdiction of this chapter not of record as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives until the requirements of this chapter have been fully met. The village may institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin violations of this chapter or the applicable state law. 
(b)  Penalties. Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any person who fails to comply with this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-32; 
(2)  Recordation improperly made has penalties provided in Wis. Stats. § 236.30; 
(3)  Conveyance of lots in unrecorded plats has penalties provided for in Wis. Stats. § 236.31; 
(4)  Monuments disturbed or not placed have penalties as provided for in Wis. Stats. § 236.32; 
(5)  Assessor's plat made under Wis. Stats. § 70.27 may be ordered by the village as a remedy at the expense of the subdivider when a subdivision is created by successive divisions. 
(c)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by an objection to a plat or a failure to approve a plat may appeal therefrom, as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 236.13(5) and 62.23(7)(e)10, 14, and 15, within 30 days of notification of the rejection of the plat. Where failure to approve is based on an unsatisfied objection, the agency making the objection shall be made a party to the action. The court shall direct that the plat be approved if it finds that the action of the approving or objecting agency is arbitrary, unreasonable, or discriminatory. 
(Code 1998, § 86-42; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-91, 11-3-1997) 
Secs. 129-38-129-62. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VARIANCES AND EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 129-63. - Authority; application. 
(a)  Where, in the judgment of the village board, it would be inappropriate to apply literally the provisions of this chapter because exceptional or undue hardship would result, the village board may waive or modify any requirements to the extent deemed just and proper. 
(b)  Application for any such variance shall be made in writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for consideration, stating fully all facts relied upon by the petitioner, and shall be supplemented with maps, plans, or other additional data that may aid the village board in the analysis of the proposed project. 
(Code 1998, § 86-71; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-90(a), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-64. - Conditions for granting. 
    The village board shall not grant variances or exceptions to this chapter unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that: 
(1)  The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located; 
(2)  The conditions upon which the request for a variation is based are unique to the property for which the variation is sought and are not applicable generally to other property; 
(3)  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, financial hardship, or self-imposed hardship, if the strict letter of this chapter were carried out; 
(4)  Such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by other similar properties in the vicinity. 
(Code 1998, § 86-72; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-90(b), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-65. - Granting by board. 
(a)  The village board, if it approves of the variance to this chapter, shall do so by motion or resolution and shall instruct the zoning administrator to notify the plan commission and the subdivider. 
(b)  Such relief shall be granted without detriment to the public good, without impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter or the desirable general development of the village in accordance with any village master plan or component thereof, this chapter, or chapter 133. A majority vote of the entire membership of the village board shall be required to grant any modification of this chapter, and the reasons shall be entered in the minutes. 
(Code 1998, § 86-73; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-90(c), (d), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-66. - Placement of monuments. 
    The village board may waive the placing of monuments, required under Wis. Stats. § 236.15(1)(b), (c), and (d), for a reasonable time on condition that the subdivider execute a surety bond to ensure the placing of such monuments within the time required by the village. 
(Code 1998, § 86-74; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-90(e), 11-3-1997) 
Secs. 129-67-129-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLATS AND SURVEY MAPS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Plat approval, Wis. Stats. § 236.10 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 129-91. - Preliminary consultation. 
    Before filing a preliminary plat or certified survey map, the subdivider is encouraged to consult with the plan commission for advice regarding general subdivision requirements. Information on meeting dates, agenda deadlines, and filing requirements may be obtained from the zoning administrator. The subdivider shall also submit a location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to traffic arteries and existing community facilities. This consultation is neither formal nor mandatory but is intended to inform the subdivider of the purpose and objectives of this chapter, the master plan, master plan components, and duly adopted plan implementation devices of the village and to otherwise assist the subdivider in planning the subdivider's development. In so doing, both the subdivider and planning agency may reach mutual conclusions regarding the general program and objectives of the proposed development and its possible effects on the neighborhood and community. The subdivider will gain a better understanding of the subsequent required procedures. 
(Code 1998, § 86-101; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-30, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-92. - Submission of preliminary plat. 
(a)  Generally. Before submitting a final plat for approval, the subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat and a letter of application. The subdivider shall submit 20 copies of the preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall be prepared in accordance with this chapter, and the subdivider shall file copies of the plat and the application as required by this section with the zoning administrator at least 21 days prior to the meeting of the plan commission at which action is desired. The zoning administrator shall submit a copy of the preliminary plat to the plan commission and to the village engineer for review and written report of the zoning administrator's recommendations and reactions to the proposed plat. 
(b)  Property owners' association; restrictive covenants. A draft of the legal instruments and rules for proposed property owners' associations, when the subdivider proposes that common property within a subdivision would be either owned or maintained by such an organization of property owners or a subunit of the village pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 236.29(3), and proposed deed restrictions or restrictive covenants shall be submitted at the time of filing the preliminary plat with the zoning administrator. 
(c)  Affidavit. The surveyor preparing the preliminary plat shall certify on the face of the plat that it is a correct representation of all existing land divisions and features and that the surveyor has fully complied with this chapter. 
(d)  Supplementary data filed with preliminary plat. The following shall also be filed with the preliminary plat: 
(1)  Use statement. A statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of residential buildings with number of proposed dwelling units and types of business or industry so as to reveal the effect of the development on traffic, fire hazards, and congestion of population; 
(2)  Zoning changes. If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning plan for the areas, including dimensions; and 
(3)  Area plan. Where the subdivider owns property adjacent to that which is being proposed for the subdivision, the plan commission and village board may require that the subdivider submit a preliminary plat of the remainder of the property to show the possible relationships between the proposed subdivision and future subdivision. In any event, all subdivisions must be shown to relate well with existing or potential adjacent subdivisions. 
(e)  Drafting standards. The subdivider shall submit to the zoning administrator and to those agencies having the authority to object to plats, under Wis. Stats. ch. 236, copies of a preliminary plat or certified survey based upon an accurate exterior boundary survey by a registered land surveyor that shall show clearly the proposed subdivision at a scale of not more than one inch per 100 feet having two-foot contour intervals; shall identify the improvements (grading, tree planting, paving, installation of facilities, and dedications of land) and easements the subdivider proposes to make; and shall indicate by accompanying letter when the improvements will be provided. Proposed restrictive covenants for the land involved shall be submitted. 
(Code 1998, § 86-102; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-31, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-93. - Preliminary plat review and approval. 
(a)  Administrative staff and utility commission reviews. The zoning administrator shall provide copies of the preliminary subdivision plat to village department heads and to the utility commission for their review and comment. The village staff and utility commission comments will be forwarded to the plan commission and village board for consideration during the review process. 
(b)  Plan commission recommendation. After review of the preliminary plat and negotiations with the subdivider on changes and the kind and extent of public improvements that will be required, the plan commission shall recommend to the village board disapproval, approval, or conditional approval of the preliminary plat within 60 days of the filing date. 
(c)  Public hearing. The zoning administrator shall schedule a public hearing on the preliminary plat before the village board. The zoning administrator shall give notice of the village board's review and public hearing on the preliminary plat by listing it as an agenda item in the board's meeting notice published in the official village newspaper. The notice shall include the name of the applicant, the address of the property in question, and the requested action. Property owners within 200 feet of the proposed land division shall receive written notice of the public hearing. 
(d)  Board action. After receipt of the plan commission's recommendation, the village board shall, within 90 days of the date the plat was filed with the zoning administrator, approve, approve conditionally, or reject such plat and shall state, in writing, conditions of approval or reasons for rejection, unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. Failure of the village board to act within 90 days or extension thereof shall constitute an approval of the preliminary plat, unless other authorized agencies object to the plat. The zoning administrator shall communicate to the subdivider the action of the village board. If the preliminary plat is approved, the zoning administrator shall endorse it for the village board. 
(e)  Effect of approval. Approval of a preliminary plat shall be valid for 36 months from the date of approval. Approval or conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute automatic approval of the final plat, except that if the final plat is submitted within 36 months of preliminary plat approval and conforms substantially to the preliminary plat layout, the final plat shall be entitled to approval with respect to such layout. The preliminary plat shall be deemed an expression of approval or conditional approval of the layout submitted as a guide to the preparation of the final plat, which will be subject to further consideration by the plan commission and village board at the time of its submission. 
(f)  Amendment. If the subdivider desires to amend the preliminary plat as approved, the subdivider may resubmit the amended plat, which shall follow the same procedure, except for the fee, unless the amendment is, in the opinion of the village board, of such scope as to constitute a new plat, in which case it shall be refiled. 
(Code 1998, § 86-103; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-32, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-94. - Final plat review and approval. 
(a)  Filing requirements. A final subdivision plat shall be filed in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The subdivider shall prepare a final plat and a letter of application in accordance with this chapter and shall file 20 copies of the plat and the application with the zoning administrator at least 21 days prior to the meeting of the plan commission at which action is desired. The owner or subdivider shall file the final plat not later than 36 months after the date of approval of the preliminary plat; otherwise, the preliminary plat and final plat will be considered void unless an extension is requested in writing by the subdivider and for good cause granted by the village. The owner or subdivider shall also submit at this time a current certified abstract of title or registered property report and such other evidence as the village attorney may require showing title or control in the applicant. 
(2)  The subdivider or the subdivider's agent shall submit the original plat to the state department of administration. 
(3)  The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved and to the requirements of all applicable village ordinances and state laws and shall be submitted for certification of those agencies having the authority to object to the plat as provided by Wis. Stats. § 236.12. 
(4)  Simultaneously with the filing of the final plat or map, the owner shall file with the zoning administrator four copies of the final plans and specifications of public improvements required by this chapter. 
(5)  The zoning administrator shall refer two copies of the final plat to the plan commission, one copy to the village engineer, and a copy each to the telephone and power and other utility companies. The abstract of title or registered property report may be referred to the village attorney for the village attorney's examination and report. The zoning administrator shall also refer the final plans and specifications of public improvements to the village engineer for review. The recommendations of the plan commission and the village engineer shall be made within 30 days of the filing of the final plat. The village engineer shall examine the plat or map and final plans and specifications of public improvements for technical details and, if the village engineer finds them satisfactory, shall so certify in writing to the plan commission. If the plat or map or the plans and specifications are not satisfactory, the village engineer shall return them to the owner and so advise the plan commission. 
(b)  Administrative staff and utility commission reviews. The zoning administrator shall provide copies of the final plat to village department heads and to the utility commission for their review and comment. The village staff and utility commission comments will be forwarded to the plan commission and village board for their consideration during the review process. 
(c)  Plan commission review. 
(1)  The plan commission shall examine the final plat as to its conformance with the approved preliminary plat; any conditions of approval of the preliminary plat; this chapter; and all applicable ordinances, rules, regulations, master plans, and master plan components that may affect it and shall recommend approval, conditional approval, or rejection of the plat to the village board. 
(2)  If the final plat is not submitted within six months of the last-required approval of the preliminary plat, the village board may refuse to approve the final plat. 
(3)  The plan commission shall, within 30 days of the date of filing of the final plat with the zoning administrator, recommend approval, conditional approval, or rejection of the plat and shall transmit the final plat and application along with its recommendations to the village board. The plan commission may hold the matter in abeyance if there is incomplete or inadequate information. 
(d)  Board review and approval. 
(1)  The village board shall, within 60 days of the date of filing the original final plat with the zoning administrator, approve or reject such plat unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. If the plat is rejected, the reasons shall be stated in the minutes of the meeting and a written statement of the reasons forwarded to the subdivider. The village board may not inscribe its approval on the final plat unless the zoning administrator certifies on the face of the plat that the copies were forwarded to objecting agencies as required in this section, the date thereof, and that no objections have been filed within 20 days or, if filed, have been met. 
(2)  The village board shall, when it determines to approve a final plat, give at least ten days' prior written notice of its intention to the municipal clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any portion of such proposed plat but failure to give such notice shall not invalidate any such plat. 
(3)  For failure of the village board to act within 60 days, the time having not been extended and no unsatisfied objections having been filed, the plat shall be deemed approved. 
(e)  Recordation. After the final plat has been approved by the village board and required improvements either installed or a contract and sureties ensuring their installation is filed, the zoning administrator shall cause the certificate inscribed upon the plat attesting to such approval to be duly executed and the plat returned to the subdivider for recording with the county register of deeds. The register of deeds cannot record the plat unless it is offered within 12 months after the date of the last approval of the plat and within 36 months after the first approval. 
(f)  Copies. The subdivider shall file eight copies of the final plat with the zoning administrator for distribution to the approving agencies, affected sanitary districts, and other affected agencies for their files. 
(g)  Partial platting. The final plat may, if permitted by the village board, constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record at the time. 
(Code 1998, § 86-104; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-33, 11-3-1997) 
State Law reference- Final plat, Wis. Stats. § 236.20 et seq. 
Sec. 129-95. - Certified survey map. 
(a)  Use of certified survey map. When it is proposed to divide land into at least two but no more than four parcels or building sites or when it is proposed to create by land division not more than four parcels or building sites within a recorded subdivision plat without changing the exterior boundaries of a block, lot, or outlot or when it is proposed to divide any number of parcels greater than 15 acres in size (thus not constituting a subdivision, as defined in this chapter), the subdivider shall prepare a certified survey map in accordance with this chapter and shall file eight copies of the map along with a location map showing the location of lots with respect to the nearest collector and arterial streets and the letter of application with the zoning administrator at least 21 days prior to the meeting of the plan commission at which action is desired. 
(b)  Referral to plan commission. The zoning administrator shall transmit the copies of the map and letter of application to the plan commission. 
(c)  Review by other village agencies. The plan commission shall transmit a copy of the map to all affected village boards, commissions, or departments for their review and recommendations concerning matters within their jurisdiction. Their recommendations shall be transmitted to the plan commission within ten days from the date the map is filed. The map shall be reviewed by the plan commission for conformance with this chapter and all ordinances, rules, regulations, master plans, master plan components, and neighborhood plans. 
(d)  Review and approval. The plan commission shall, within 30 days from the date of filing of the certified survey map, recommend approval, conditional approval, or rejection of the map and shall transmit the map along with its recommendations to the village board. Following public hearing in the manner used for preliminary plats, the village board shall approve, approve conditionally and thereby require resubmission of a corrected certified survey map, or reject such certified survey map within 60 days from the date of filing of the map unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. If the map is rejected, the reason shall be stated in the minutes of the meeting and a written statement forwarded to the subdivider. If the map is approved, the village board shall cause the zoning administrator to so certify on the face of the original map and return the map to the subdivider. 
(e)  Recordation. The subdivider shall record the map with the county register of deeds 12 months after the date of the last approval of the map and within 36 months after the date of the first approval of the map. If the subdivider fails to record the map as required in this section, the land division shall become null and void. 
(f)  Copies. The subdivider shall file five copies of the certified survey map with the zoning administrator for distribution to the village engineer, building inspector, assessor and other affected departments for their files. 
(Code 1998, § 86-105; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-34, 11-3-1997) 
State Law reference- Certified survey maps, Wis. Stats. § 236.34. 
Sec. 129-96. - Replat. 
(a)  Except as provided in Wis. Stats. § 70.27(1), when it is proposed to replat a recorded subdivision or part thereof so as to change the boundaries of a recorded subdivision or part thereof, the subdivider or person wishing to replat shall vacate or alter the recorded plat as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 236.40-236.44. The subdivider or person wishing to replat shall then proceed, using the procedures for preliminary and final plats. 
(b)  The zoning administrator shall schedule a public hearing before the plan commission when a preliminary plat of a replat of lands within the village is filed and shall cause notices of the proposed replat and public hearing to be mailed to the owners of all properties within the limits of the exterior boundaries of the proposed replat and to the owners of all properties within 200 feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed replat. 
(c)  Where lots are more than double the minimum size required for the applicable zoning district, the plan commission may require that such lots be arranged so as to allow resubdivision of such parcels into normal lots in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 86-106; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-35, 11-3-1997) 
Secs. 129-97-129-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 129-121. - Preliminary plats. 
(a)  Generally. A preliminary plat shall be required for all subdivisions and shall be based upon a survey by a registered land surveyor and the plat prepared on Mylar or paper of good quality at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch and shall show correctly on its face the following information: 
(1)  The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded. The title shall not be the same or similar to a previously approved and recorded plat, unless it is in addition to a previously recorded plat and is so stated on the plat; 
(2)  Location of the proposed subdivision by government lot, quarter section, township, range, county, and state; 
(3)  Date, scale, and north point; 
(4)  Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, and land surveyor preparing the plat; 
(5)  Entire area contiguous to the proposed plat owned or controlled by the subdivider shall be included on the preliminary plat, even though only a portion of such area is proposed for immediate development. The village board, upon the plan commission's recommendation, may waive this requirement where it is unnecessary to fulfill the purposes and intent of this chapter and undue hardship would result from strict application thereof; 
(6)  The location of the land division with respect to the nearest collector or arterial streets prepared on either an insert map or a separate map sheet at a scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet. 
(b)  Plat data. All preliminary plats shall show the following: 
(1)  Exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision referenced to a corner established in the U.S. Public Land Survey and the total acreage encompassed thereby; 
(2)  Locations of all existing property boundary lines, structures, drives, streams and watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas, railroad tracks and other significant features within the tract being subdivided or immediately adjacent thereto; 
(3)  Location, right-of-way width, and names of all existing streets, alleys or other public ways, easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way, and all section and quarter section lines within the exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto; 
(4)  Location and names of adjacent subdivisions, parks and cemeteries, and owners of record of abutting unplatted lands; 
(5)  Type, width, and elevation of existing street pavements within the exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto, together with any legally established centerline elevations; 
(6)  Location, size, and invert elevation of existing sanitary or storm sewers, culverts, and drainpipes; the location of manholes, catchbasins, hydrants, and electric and communication facilities, whether overhead or underground; and the location and size of existing water and gas mains within the exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto. If no sanitary or storm sewers or water mains are located on or immediately adjacent to the tract, the nearest such sewers or water mains that might be extended to serve the tract shall be indicated by the direction and distance from the tract, size, and invert elevations; 
(7)  Corporate limit lines within the exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto; 
(8)  Existing zoning on and adjacent to the proposed subdivision; 
(9)  Type and number of dwelling units to be constructed on each lot; 
(10)  Contours within the exterior boundaries of the plat and extending to the centerline of adjacent public streets to national map accuracy standards based upon mean sea level datum at vertical intervals of not more than two feet. At least two permanent benchmarks shall be located in the immediate vicinity of the plat; the location of the benchmarks shall be indicated on the plat, together with their elevations referenced to mean sea level datum and the monumentation of the benchmarks clearly and completely described. Where, in the judgment of the village engineer, undue hardship would result because of the remoteness of the parcel from a mean sea level reference elevation, another datum may be used; 
(11)  High water elevation of all ponds, streams, lakes, flowages, and wetlands within the exterior boundaries of the plat or located within 100 feet therefrom; 
(12)  Water elevation of all ponds, streams, lakes, flowages, and wetlands within the exterior boundaries of the plat or located within 100 feet therefrom at the date of the survey; 
(13)  Floodplain and shoreland boundaries and the contour line lying a vertical distance of two feet above the elevation of the 100-year recurrence interval flood or, where such data is not available, two feet above the elevation of the maximum flood of record within the exterior boundaries of the plat or within 100 feet therefrom; 
(14)  Wetland delineation as shown on the state wetland inventory and a dashed line showing a 75-foot setback from such wetlands; 
(15)  Location, width and names of all proposed streets and public rights-of-way such as alleys and easements; 
(16)  Approximate dimensions of all lots together with proposed lot and block numbers. The area in square feet of each lot shall be provided; 
(17)  Location and approximate dimensions of sites to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds, drainageways, or other public uses; 
(18)  Approximate radii of all curves; 
(19)  Proposed lake and stream access with a small drawing clearly indicating the location of the proposed subdivision in relation to access; 
(20)  Proposed lake and stream improvement or relocation, and notice of application for approval by the division of environmental protection, department of natural resources, when applicable; 
(21)  Preliminary utility plan showing the location and size proposed of sanitary sewer and water utility lines, lift stations, or booster pumps; 
(22)  Where the plan commission or village board finds that additional information is required relative to a particular problem presented by a proposed development in order to review the preliminary plat, it shall have the authority to request in writing such information from the subdivider. Such information may include the following: 
a.  Soil types and their boundaries, as shown on the operational soil survey maps prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resource Conservation Service; 
b.  Location and results of soil boring tests within the exterior boundaries of the plat conducted in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383 and delineation of areas with three-foot and six-foot groundwater and bedrock levels where the subdivision will not be served by public sanitary sewer service. The number of such tests initially made shall not be less than one test per three acres or one test per lot, whichever is greater. The results of such tests shall be submitted along with the preliminary plat; 
c.  Location and results of percolation tests within the exterior boundaries of the plat conducted in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383 where the subdivision will not be served by public sanitary sewer service. The number of such tests initially made shall not be less than one test per three acres or one test per lot, whichever is greater. The results of such tests shall be submitted along with the preliminary plat. 
(c)  Additional information. The plan commission and village board may require a proposed subdivision layout of all or part of the contiguously owned land, even though division is not planned at the time. 
(Code 1998, § 86-136; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-40, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-122. - Final plats. 
(a)  Generally. A final plat prepared by a registered land surveyor shall be required for all subdivisions. It shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.20 and this chapter. 
(b)  Additional information. The final plat shall show correctly on its face, in addition to the information required by Wis. Stats. § 236.20, the following: 
(1)  Exact length and bearing of the centerline of all streets; 
(2)  Exact street width along the line of any obliquely intersecting street; 
(3)  Exact location and description of lighting utility easements; 
(4)  Railroad rights-of-way within and abutting the plat; 
(5)  All lands reserved for future public acquisition or reserved for the common use of property owners within the plat; 
(6)  Special restrictions required by the village board relating to access control along public ways or to the provision of planting strips; 
(7)  Setback or building lines required by village codes and ordinances; 
(8)  Utility and drainage easements. 
(c)  Deed restrictions. Restrictive covenants and deed restrictions for the proposed subdivision shall be filed with the final plat. 
(d)  Property owners' association. The legal instruments creating a property owners' association for the ownership and maintenance of common lands in the subdivision and bylaws or regulations established for such associations shall be filed with the final plat. 
(e)  Surveying and monumenting. All final plats shall meet all the surveying and monumenting requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.15. 
(f)  State plane coordinate system. Where the plat is located within a quarter section, the corners of which have been relocated, monumented, and coordinated by the village, the plat shall be tied directly to one of the section or quarter corners so relocated, monumented, and coordinated. The exact grid bearing and distance of such tie shall be determined by field measurements, and the material and state plane coordinates of the monument marking the relocated section or quarter corner to which the plat is tied shall be indicated on the plat. All distances and bearings shall be referenced to the state coordinate system, south zone, and adjusted to the village's control survey. 
(g)  Certificates. All final plats shall provide all the certificates required by Wis. Stats. § 236.21; in addition, the surveyor shall certify that the surveyor has fully complied with all sections of this chapter. 
(h)  Recording. The final plat shall be recorded within 12 months after the date of the last approval of the plat and within 36 months after the first approval. 
(Code 1998, § 86-137; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-41, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-123. - Certified survey maps. 
(a)  Generally. A certified survey map prepared by a registered land surveyor shall be required for all land divisions created by certified survey maps. It shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.34. 
(b)  Additional information. The certified survey map shall show correctly on its face, in addition to the information required by Wis. Stats. § 236.34, the following: 
(1)  All existing buildings, watercourses, drainage ditches, and other features pertinent to proper land division; 
(2)  Setbacks or building lines required by the village board and chapter 133; 
(3)  All lands reserved for future acquisition; 
(4)  Date of the map; 
(5)  Graphic scale; 
(6)  Name and address of the owner, subdivider, and surveyor; 
(7)  Square footage of each parcel; 
(8)  Present zoning for the parcels; 
(9)  Utility and drainage easements; 
(10)  Existing and proposed contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet where the slope of the ground surface is less than ten percent and of not more than five feet where the slope of the ground surface is ten percent or more. Elevations shall be marked on such contours based on National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (mean sea level). This requirement may be waived if the parcel created is fully developed; 
(11)  Entire area contiguous to the proposed certified survey map owned or controlled by the subdivider shall be included on the certified survey map, even though only a portion of such area is proposed for immediate development. The plan commission may waive this requirement where it is unnecessary to fulfill the purposes and intent of this chapter and severe hardship would result from strict application thereof; 
(12)  Location of soil boring tests, where required by Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383, made to a depth of six feet, unless bedrock is at a lesser depth. The number of such tests shall be adequate to portray the character of the soil and the depths of bedrock and groundwater from the natural undisturbed surface. To accomplish this purpose, a minimum of one test per three acres shall be made initially. The results of such test shall be submitted along with the certified survey map; 
(13)  Location of soil percolation tests, where required by Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383, conducted in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 385, taken at the location and depth in which soil absorption waste disposal systems are to be installed. The number of such tests initially made shall not be less than one test per three acres or one test per lot, whichever is greater. The results of such tests shall be submitted along with the certified survey map; 
(14)  The location of the land division with respect to the nearest collector or arterial streets prepared on either an insert map or a separate map sheet at a scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet. 
(c)  State plane coordinate system. Where the map is located within a U.S. Public Land Survey quarter section, the corners of which have been relocated, monumented, and coordinated by the village, the map shall be tied directly to one of the section or quarter corners so relocated, monumented, and coordinated. The exact grid bearing and distance of such tie shall be determined by field measurements, and the material and state plane coordinate of the monument marking the relocated section or quarter corner to which the map is tied shall be indicated on the map. All distances and bearings shall be referenced to the state coordinate system, south zone, and adjusted to the village's control survey. 
(d)  Certificates. The surveyor shall certify on the face of the certified survey map that the surveyor has fully complied with all sections of this chapter. The village board, after a recommendation by the reviewing agencies, shall certify its approval on the face of the map. 
(e)  Street dedication. Dedication of streets and other public areas shall require the owner's certificate and the mortgagee's certificate in substantially the same form as required by Wis. Stats. § 236.21(2)(a). 
(f)  Recordation. The subdivider shall record the map with the county register of deeds within 12 months after the date of the last approval of the map and within 36 months after the date of the first approval of the map. Failure to do so shall necessitate a new review and reapproval of the map by the village board. 
(g)  Requirements. To the extent reasonably practicable, the certified survey map shall comply with the sections of this chapter relating to general requirements, design standards, and required improvements. Conveyance by metes and bounds shall be prohibited where the lot involved is less than 15 acres. 
(Code 1998, § 86-138; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-42, 11-3-1997) 
State Law reference- Certified survey maps, Wis. Stats. § 236.34. 
Secs. 129-124-129-144. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 129-145. - Costs; general standards. 
(a)  Payment for improvements. The improvements prescribed in this chapter are required as a condition of approval of a land division. The required improvements described in this chapter shall be installed, furnished, and financed at the sole expense of the subdivider. However, for required improvements in a commercial, institutional, or industrial area, the cost of such improvements may, at the sole discretion of the village board, be financed through special assessments. 
(b)  General standards. The required improvements in this chapter shall be installed in accordance with the engineering standards and specifications that have been adopted by the village board. Where standards and specifications have not been adopted, the improvements shall be made in accordance with good engineering practices, approved prior to the start of construction by the village engineer. 
(Code 1998, § 86-166; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-50, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-146. - Agreement providing for proper installation of improvements. 
(a)  Contract. Prior to installation of required improvements and prior to approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall enter into a written contract with the village requiring the subdivider to furnish and construct such improvements at the subdivider's sole cost and in accordance with plans and specifications and usual contract conditions, which shall include provision for inspection of construction details by the village engineer. 
(b)  Financial guarantees. 
(1)  The agreement shall require the subdivider to make an escrow deposit or, in lieu thereof, to furnish a performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit, the amount of the deposit and the penal amount of the bond or letter of credit to be equal to 11/4 times the village engineer's estimate of the total cost of the improvements to be furnished under the contract, including the cost of inspection; 
(2)  On request of the subdivider, the contract may provide for completion of part or all of the improvements covered thereby prior to acceptance of the plat, and, in such event, the amount of the deposit or bond or letter of credit shall be reduced in a sum equal to the estimated cost of the improvements so completed prior to acceptance of the plat only. If the required improvements are not complete within the specified period, all amounts held under performance bond shall be turned over and delivered to the village and applied to the cost of the required improvements. Any balance remaining after such improvements have been made shall be returned to the owner or subdivider. The village board, at its option, may extend the bond period for additional periods not to exceed two years each period; 
(3)  The time for completion of the work and the several parts thereof shall be determined by the village board upon recommendation of the village engineer after consultation with the subdivider. The completion date shall be a component of the contract; 
(4)  The subdivider shall pay the village for all costs incurred by the village for review and inspection of the subdivision. This would include review and preparation, at the village board's discretion, of plans and specifications by the village engineer, village planner, and village attorney, as well as other costs of a similar nature. 
(Code 1998, § 86-167; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-51, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-147. - Required construction plans; village review; inspections. 
(a)  Engineering reports, construction plans, and specifications. As required by section 129-94, engineering reports, plans, and proposed specifications shall be submitted simultaneously with the filing of the final plat. At the final plat stage, construction plans for the required improvements conforming in all respects with the standards of the village engineer and the village ordinances shall be prepared at the subdivider's expense by a professional engineer who is registered in the state, and such plans shall contain the professional engineer's seal. Such plans, together with the quantities of construction items, shall be submitted to the village engineer for approval and for an estimate of the total cost of the required improvements; upon approval they shall become a part of the contract required. Simultaneously with the filing of the final plat with the zoning administrator, or as soon thereafter as practicable, copies of the construction plans and specifications shall be furnished for the following public improvements: 
(1)  Street plans and profiles showing existing and proposed grades, elevations, and cross sections of required improvements; 
(2)  Sanitary sewer plans and profiles showing the locations, grades, sizes, elevations, and materials of required facilities; 
(3)  Storm sewer and open channel plans and profiles showing the locations, direction of flow, grades, sizes, cross sections, elevations, and materials of required facilities; 
(4)  Water main plans and profiles showing the locations, sizes, elevations, and materials of required facilities; 
(5)  Erosion and sedimentation control plans showing those structures required to retard the rate of runoff water and those grading and excavating practices that will prevent erosion and sedimentation. Such plans shall comply with article III of chapter 109 pertaining to erosion control; 
(6)  Planting plans showing the locations, age, caliper, species, and time of planting of required grasses, vines, shrubs, and trees; 
(7)  Grading plan showing existing and proposed grades and spot elevations for the corners of all lots and the proposed top of foundation elevation for all proposed principal buildings; 
(8)  Additional special plans or information as required by village officials. 
(b)  Action by village engineer. The village engineer shall review or cause to be reviewed the plans and specifications for conformance with the requirements of this chapter and other pertinent village ordinances and design standards recommended by the village engineer and approved by the village board. If the village engineer rejects the plans and specifications, the village engineer shall notify the owner, who shall modify the plans or specifications or both accordingly. When the plans and specifications are corrected, the village engineer shall approve the plans and specifications for transmittal to the village board. The village board shall approve the plans and specifications before the improvements are installed and construction commenced. 
(c)  Other requirements. 
(1)  Governmental units. Governmental units to which these bond and contract sections apply may file, in lieu of such contract and bond, a letter from officers authorized to act on their behalf agreeing to comply with this section; 
(2)  Plats outside corporate limits. Before final approval by the village of any plat located outside the corporate limits of the village, but within the plat approval jurisdiction of the village, the subdivider shall give evidence that the subdivider has complied with all street and utility requirements of the town in which the land being platted is located; 
(3)  Survey monuments. Before final approval of any plat within the village or its extraterritorial jurisdictional limits, the subdivider shall install survey monuments placed in accordance with the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 236 and as may be required by the village engineer. 
(d)  Construction and inspection. 
(1)  Prior to starting any of the work covered by the plans approved in this section, written authorization to start the work shall be obtained from the village engineer upon receipt of all necessary permits and in accordance with the construction methods of this chapter. Building permits shall not be issued until all improvements required by this chapter are satisfactorily completed; 
(2)  Construction of all improvements required by this chapter shall be completed within two years from the date of approval of the final plat by the village board, unless good cause can be shown for the village board to grant an extension; 
(3)  During the course of construction, the village engineer shall make or cause to be made such inspections as the village board deems necessary to ensure compliance with the plans and specifications as approved. The owner shall pay the actual cost incurred by the village for such inspections. This fee shall be the actual cost to the village of inspectors, engineers, and other parties necessary to ensure satisfactory work. 
(e)  Record plans. After completion of all public improvements and prior to final acceptance of such improvements, the subdivider shall make or shall cause to be made three copies of record plans showing the actual location of all valves, manholes, stubs, sewers and water mains and such other facilities as the village engineer shall require. These plans shall be prepared on the original Mylars of the construction plans and shall bear the signature and seal of a professional engineer registered in the state. The presentation of the record plans shall be a condition of final acceptance of the improvements and release of the surety bond ensuring their completion. 
(Code 1998, § 86-168; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-52, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-148. - Street improvements. 
(a)  Generally. The subdivider shall construct streets, roads, and alleys as outlined on the approved plans based on the requirements of this chapter as follows: 
(1)  General considerations. The streets shall be designed and located in relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions and natural terrain features such as streams and existing tree growth, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
(2)  Construction standards. Construction of all streets shall conform to the state department of transportation's standard specifications for road and bridge construction, the state standard specifications for sewer and water, and any other construction standards or specifications which have been adopted as the village's construction specifications, including, but not limited to, the village pavement standards, and shall be subject to approval of the village engineer before acceptance. Where the village's standards may be more restrictive or require higher performance than the state standards, the village standards shall prevail. 
(b)  Conformance to official map. The arrangement, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform to the official map. 
(c)  Grading. 
(1)  With the submittal of the final plat, the subdivider shall furnish drawings that indicate the existing and proposed grades of roads, streets, and alleys shown on the plat; 
(2)  Proposed grades will be reviewed by the village engineer for conformance with village standards and good engineering practice. Street grades require the approval of the village board after receipt of the village engineer's recommendations; 
(3)  The subdivider shall grade the full width of the right-of-way of the streets and alleys proposed to be dedicated, including the vision clearance triangle on corner lots; 
(4)  When an existing street right-of-way is made a part of the plat or abuts the plat, the subdivider shall grade that portion of the right-of-way between the existing pavement and the property line; 
(5)  The bed for the roadways in the street rights-of-way shall be graded to subgrade elevation; 
(6)  The village engineer shall approve all grading within rights-of-way, and such grading shall extend for a sufficient distance beyond the right-of-way to ensure that the established grade will be preserved; 
(7)  Where electric and other communications or utility facilities are to be installed underground, the utility easements shall be graded to within six inches of the final grade by the subdivider, prior to the installation of such facilities; earth fill piles or mounds of dirt or construction materials shall not be stored on such easement areas; 
(8)  Cut and filled lands shall be graded to a maximum slope of 1:4 or the soil's angle of repose, whichever is the lesser, and covered with permanent vegetation. 
(d)  Street construction. After sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water, and other necessary utilities have been installed, the subdivider shall construct and dedicate, as part of the subdivision, streets and curbs and gutters. The subdivider shall surface roadways to the widths prescribed by village specifications. Construction shall be to village standard specifications for street improvements. 
(e)  Completion of street. 
(1)  No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any residential dwelling until sewer, water, grading, graveling, and the bituminous binder course necessary to service the property for which the permit is required are installed in the street; 
(2)  The village board may issue a waiver of these requirements in unusual or special circumstances such as excessively severe weather conditions, heavy construction temporarily in the area, or construction material shortages (i.e., cement, asphalt). The issuance of a waiver shall be at the discretion of the village board; 
(3)  The subdivider requesting a waiver shall do so in writing, presenting such information and documentation as required by the village board. The waiver shall be in written form and shall detail which improvement requirements are temporarily waived and for what period of time. 
(Code 1998, § 86-169; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-53, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-149. - Curb and gutter. 
    After the installation of all utility and stormwater drainage improvements, the subdivider shall construct concrete curbs and gutters in accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the village board, on file with the zoning administrator. Wherever possible, provision shall be made at the time of construction for driveway access curb cuts. 
(Code 1998, § 86-170; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-54, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-150. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  In all land divisions, the village board shall require the subdivider to construct five-foot wide concrete sidewalks on both sides of all local, collector, and arterial streets. Where, in the opinion of the plan commission and village board, the land division would be better served by an alternative form of pedestrian access, the village board may grant an exception to the sidewalk requirements. The construction of all sidewalks or alternative pedestrian access shall be in accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the village engineer. 
(b)  In addition, wider-than-standard sidewalks may be required by the village board in the vicinity of schools, commercial areas, and other places of public assemblage, and the village board may require the construction of sidewalks in locations other than required under this Code if such walks are necessary, in its opinion, for safe and adequate pedestrian circulation. 
(c)  For all building permits issued between May 1 and October 15, sidewalks must be installed before an occupancy permit is issued. For permits issued after October 15 and before May 1, the sidewalks must be installed by the following June 15. 
(Code 1998, § 86-171; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-55, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-151. - Sanitary sewer system. 
(a)  In a subdivision, there shall be provided a sanitary sewer system in conformity with the master plan of sewers as approved by the village board. The design plans for such sewers shall be reviewed and approved by the village engineer. Upon construction, the installed sewers shall be inspected by the village engineer and the sewer lines shall be visu-scanned by the subdivider, with the results of the scanning reviewed and approved by the village engineer. 
(b)  The subdivider shall make adequate sewage disposal systems available to each lot within the subdivision or certified survey map parcel. 
(c)  Subdivisions and certified survey map parcels shall be served by public sewer facilities. The size, type, and installation of all sanitary sewers proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the village. 
(d)  The village board shall require the installation of sewer laterals to the street right-of-way line. 
(e)  The subdivider shall assume the cost of installing all sanitary sewers 12 inches in diameter or less in size, including the bringing of the sanitary sewer from where it exists to the land division in question, as well as providing all sanitary sewer work within the land division. If greater than 12-inch-diameter sewers are required to handle the contemplated sewage flows, the costs of such larger sewers shall be prorated in proportion to the ratio of the total area of the proposed subdivision or certified survey map to the total drainage area to be served by such larger sewer and the excess cost either borne by the village or assessed against the total tributary drainage area. 
(Code 1998, § 86-172; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-56, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-152. - Water supply facilities. 
(a)  Subdivider's responsibility. The subdivider shall install water supply facilities as follows: 
(1)  When public water supply and distribution facilities are available to the land division or when it is proposed to establish a private water supply and distribution system to serve two or more lots, the subdivider shall cause such water supply and distribution facilities to be installed in such a manner as to make adequate water service available to each lot within the land division. The subdivider shall make provision for adequate private water systems as required by the village in accordance with the standards of the state department of industry, labor and human relations. 
(2)  The water pressure service standard for the village is 2,000 gallons per minute (gpm) for lots platted for commercial and multifamily development and 1,000 gallons per minute (gpm) for lots platted for single-family and duplex residential development. 
(3)  The village board may require the installation of water laterals to the street right-of-way line, upon the recommendation of the village engineer. 
(4)  The subdivider shall assume the cost of installing all water mains, water laterals, and water system appurtenances within the proposed subdivision or minor land division, except for the added cost of installing water mains greater than 12 inches in diameter. 
(b)  Approval of design specifications. The size, type and installation of all water supply facilities proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the village board, upon the recommendation of the village engineer. Subdividers shall submit for approval plans and specifications for water mains, complete with laterals and appurtenances, to the village engineer and village utilities and, if required, to the state department of industry, labor and human relations. After the village engineer and other reviewing authorities have approved the plans and specifications submitted by the subdivider, the subdivider shall, without cost to the village, construct water mains throughout that serve the land division, complete with laterals and appurtenances thereto, in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. 
(c)  Water booster stations to serve plat. 
(1)  Where deemed necessary by the village engineer, the subdivider shall install, at the subdivider's expense, a new water booster station, appurtenances, and access water mains, at a location approved by the village engineer. The village board, upon the recommendation of the village engineer, may require construction of the water booster station upon the completion of an authorized phase of the project. 
(2)  Easements for water mains within and outside the plat and the site for the new booster station shall be obtained and dedicated to the village by the subdivider. Easements for water mains shall have a minimum width of 20 feet, unless approved by the village engineer; however, any such easements located in the rights-of-way of planned future streets shall be 66 feet wide. The booster station shall be provided with reasonable access during construction, and until permanent improvements are made to the streets abutting the site. 
(d)  Connection to public water mains. The subdivider shall install water mains in accordance with this Code and specifications of the village engineer when it is determined that the proposed land division lies within a public sanitary sewer service area and water main facilities are programmed to be extended to the proposed subdivision within six years. Until such time as the public water mains within the land division can be connected to the larger community water supply system, they shall be temporarily capped. No private or public use shall be connected to the water mains within the land division until such water mains are connected to the larger community water supply system. The subdivider shall indicate on the face of the plat that the owner of private uses within the land division shall connect such uses to the water mains within the land division and that the village is held harmless for any damages or costs incurred to disconnect and abandon any on-site water supply system then in place and any costs associated with connection to the public water mains. 
(Code 1998, § 86-173; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-57, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-153. - Other utilities. 
(a)  The subdivider shall cause gas, electrical power, cable television, and telephone facilities to be installed in such a manner as to make adequate service available to each lot in the subdivision. 
(b)  All new electrical distribution, television cables and telephone lines from which lots are individually served shall be underground unless the village board specifically allows overhead poles for the following reasons: 
(1)  Topography, soil, water table, solid rock, boulders, or other physical conditions would make underground installation unreasonable or impractical; or 
(2)  The lots to be served by such facilities can be served directly from existing overhead facilities. 
(c)  Plans indicating the proposed location of all gas, electrical power, and telephone distribution and transmission lines required to service the plat shall be approved by the village board and such map shall be filed with the zoning administrator. 
(Code 1998, § 86-174; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-58, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-154. - Streetlamps. 
    The subdivider shall install streetlamps along all streets proposed to be dedicated of a design compatible with the neighborhood and type of development proposed, as determined by the village engineer. Such lamps shall be placed at each street intersection and at such interior block spacing as may be required by the village board, upon the recommendation of the village engineer. 
(Code 1998, § 86-175; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-59, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-155. - Street trees. 
    The subdivider shall install street trees in the terrace area between the sidewalk and the street along all streets proposed to be dedicated. Such street trees shall be of a species and type compatible with the neighborhood and suitable for an urban environment, as determined by the village engineer. Street trees shall be placed so that there is an average of one tree for every 60 feet of street frontage, except in those locations where the village engineer determines such planting would be unfeasible or hazardous in terms of traffic visibility. Street trees shall be set back at least ten feet from driveways, 15 feet from nonarterial street intersections, and 30 feet from arterial street intersections. Street trees shall be no smaller than two inches in diameter at the time of planting. 
(Code 1998, § 86-176; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-60, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-156. - Street signs. 
    The subdivider shall install at the intersections of all streets proposed to be dedicated a street name sign of a design and installation specified by the village engineer. 
(Code 1998, § 86-177; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-61, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-157. - Erosion control. 
(a)  Pursuant to article III of chapter 109, pertaining to construction site erosion control, the subdivider shall cause all grading, excavations, open cuts, side slopes, and other land surface disturbances to be mulched, seeded, sodded, or otherwise protected so that erosion, siltation, sedimentation, and washing are prevented. The subdivider shall submit an erosion control plan that specifies measures that will be taken to ensure the minimization of erosion problems. 
(b)  The village board may require the subdivider to provide or install certain protection and rehabilitation measures, such as fencing, sloping, seeding, riprap, revetments, jetties, clearing, dredging, snagging, drop structures, brush mats, willow poles, and grade stabilization structures. 
(c)  Tree cutting and shrubbery clearing shall not exceed 40 percent of the lot or tract and shall be so conducted as to prevent erosion and sedimentation, to preserve and improve scenic qualities, and, during foliation, to substantially screen any development from stream or lake users. 
(d)  Paths and trails in wooded and wetland areas shall not exceed ten feet in width unless otherwise approved by the plan commission and shall be so designed and constructed as to result in the least removal and disruption of trees and shrubs and the minimum impairment of natural beauty. 
(e)  Earth moving, such as grading, topsoil removal, mineral extraction, stream course changing, road cutting, waterway construction or enlargement, removal of stream or lake bed materials, excavation, channel clearing, ditching, drain tile laying, dredging, and lagooning, shall be so conducted as to prevent erosion and sedimentation and to least disturb the natural fauna, flora, watercourse, water regimen, and topography. 
(f)  Review of the conduct of such cutting, clearing, and moving may be requested of the county soil and water conservation district supervisors, the state district fish and game managers, and the state district forester by the village engineer or plan commission as they deem appropriate. 
(Code 1998, § 86-178; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-62, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-158. - Partition fences. 
    When the land included in a subdivision plat or certified survey map abuts upon or is adjacent to land used for farming or grazing purposes, the subdivider shall erect, at the request of the adjacent property owner, keep, and maintain the subdivider's portion of partition fences under state law, satisfying the requirements of the state statutes for a legal and sufficient fence, between such land and the adjacent land. A covenant binding the developer, the developer's grantees, heirs, successors, and assigns to erect and maintain such fences, without cost to the adjoining property owners, so long as the land is used for farming or grazing purposes, shall be included upon the face of the final plat or certified survey map. 
(Code 1998, § 86-179; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-63, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-159. - Easements. 
(a)  Utility easements. The village board, on the recommendation of appropriate departments and agencies serving the village, shall require utility easements in subdivisions for poles, wire, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water and head mains, or other utility lines. It is the intent of this chapter to protect all established easements so as to ensure proper grade, ensure maintenance of the established grade, prohibit construction of permanent fences or retaining walls over underground installation, and prevent the planting of trees in the easement area. 
(b)  Drainage easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream: 
(1)  There shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose and as may be necessary to comply with this section; 
(2)  The watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream may be relocated in such a manner that the maintenance of adequate drainage will be ensured and such provided with a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming to the lines of the relocated watercourse, and such further width or construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose and may be necessary to comply with this section; 
(3)  Wherever possible, it is desirable that drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume flow. In all cases, such watercourse shall be of a minimum width established at the high water mark or, in the absence of such specification, not less than 30 feet. If, in the opinion of the village engineer, the easement will be for a major drainage swale, the easement shall be of sufficient width to contain a 100-year frequency storm. If the drainage easement is located in an established floodway or flood fringe district, the entire floodplain area shall be included within the drainage easement. 
(c)  Easement locations. Utility easements shall be located only on or adjacent to side or rear property lines unless physical conditions make such location impractical. Such easements shall be of a width, not less than 12 feet, reasonably determined by the village engineer to be necessary for the intended purpose. The village shall be provided with evidence that all easement locations and provisions have been reviewed and approved by the utilities, companies or organizations whose facilities will be located in the easement. 
(Code 1998, § 86-180; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-64, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 07-02, § 5, 4-2-2007) 
Sec. 129-160. - Bicycle paths and trails. 
    When required by the village board, the subdivider shall install required bicycle paths and trails in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the village. The subdivider shall assume the entire cost of such bicycle paths and trails, except for dual bicycle paths and streets. The added cost for streets wider than those required, in order to accommodate bicycle paths and trails, shall be the responsibility of the municipality charged with the maintenance of the proposed facility. If the subdivider wishes to install dual-lane facilities, which may not be required by the village, the total cost of such improvements shall be borne by the subdivider. 
(Code 1998, § 86-181; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-65, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-161. - Extension to limit of parcel. 
    Any and all improvements or utility services required by this chapter for the land division of lands within the village or within the village's extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction shall be extended to the farthest limit of the parcel or lot upon which a building permit is requested, unless the owner is excused by the village board, the plan commission, or village utilities officials. If the improvements are required to the end of the parcel, as defined in this section, the owner shall be required to post bond with the village if improvements are not made. 
(Code 1998, § 86-182; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-66, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-162. - Stormwater management. 
    The subdivider shall comply with and make improvements consistent with article III of chapter 109, pertaining to stormwater management. 
(Code 1998, § 86-183; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-67, 11-3-1997) 
Secs. 129-163-129-192. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 129-193. - General street design standards. 
(a)  Compliance with statutes. In laying out a subdivision, the owner shall conform to the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 236 and all applicable village regulations. In all cases where the requirements of this chapter are different from the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 236, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
(b)  Dedication. The subdivider shall dedicate land and improve streets as provided in section 129-148. Streets shall be located with due regard for topographical conditions, natural features, existing and proposed streets, utilities and land uses, and public convenience and safety. Streets shall conform to official maps adopted by the village board. The subdivision, certified survey parcel, or land division shall be so designed as to provide each lot with satisfactory access to a public street or road. 
(c)  Compliance with master plan. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform to the village's master plan and to this chapter and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographical conditions, to runoff of stormwater, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the appropriate continuation at the same width of the existing streets in adjoining areas. 
(d)  Areas not covered by master plan. In areas not covered by the village master plan, the layout of streets shall conform to the plan for the most advantageous development of adjoining areas of the neighborhood. Streets shall be designed and located in relation to existing and officially planned streets, topography and natural terrain, streams and lakes and existing tree growth, public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets. 
(e)  Street classifications. Streets shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Arterial streets. Arterial streets shall be arranged to provide through traffic for a heavy volume of vehicles. 
(2)  Collector streets. Collector streets shall be arranged to provide ready collection of traffic from commercial and residential areas and conveyance of this traffic to the arterial street and highway system and shall be properly related to special traffic generators such as schools, churches, and shopping centers and other concentrations of population and to the collector and arterial streets into which they feed. 
(3)  Local streets. Local streets shall be arranged to conform to the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit the design of efficient storm and sanitary sewer systems, and to require the minimum street area necessary to provide safe and convenient access to abutting property. 
(4)  Proposed streets. Proposed streets shall extend to the boundary lines of the tract being subdivided unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions or unless, in the opinion of the village board, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision or land division or for the advantageous development of the adjacent tracts. 
(f)  Reserve strips. Reserve strips shall not be provided on any plat to control access to streets or alleys, except where control of such strips is placed with the village under conditions approved by the village board. 
(g)  Alleys. Alleys are prohibited unless they are approved and provided within planned unit developments and are owned and maintained by a private property owner or a neighborhood or condominium association. 
(h)  Continuation. Streets shall be laid out to provide for possible continuation wherever topographic and other physical conditions permit. Provision shall be made so that all proposed streets shall have a direct connection with or be continuous and in line with existing, planned, or platted streets with which they are to connect. Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless, in the opinion of the village board, upon the recommendation of the plan commission, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts. Dead-end streets not over 500 feet in length may be approved when necessitated by the topography. 
(i)  Local streets. Local streets shall be laid out so as to discourage their use by through traffic. 
(j)  Number of intersections. The number of intersections of local streets with collector and arterial streets shall be reduced to the practical minimum consistent with circulation needs and safety requirements, preferably not more than two. 
(k)  Frontage roads. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial highway, the village board may require a frontage road, nonaccess reservation along the rear of the property contiguous to such highway, or such other treatment as may be necessary to ensure safe, efficient traffic flow and adequate protection of residential properties. 
(l)  Private streets. Private streets shall not be approved nor shall public improvements be approved for any private street; all streets shall be dedicated for public use, except within condominium developments or planned unit developments approved under article IV of chapter 133. All private streets and planned unit development streets shall have a curb-to-curb pavement minimum width of 32 feet. 
(m)  Visibility. Streets shall afford maximum visibility and safety and shall intersect at right angles where practicable. As required by the village engineer, sufficient vision clearance triangles shall be provided at intersections. 
(n)  Tangents. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be required between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. 
(o)  Street grades. 
(1)  Unless necessitated by exceptional topography, subject to the approval of the village board, the maximum centerline grade of any street or public way shall not exceed the following: 
Street Type Maximum Grade 
(percent) Arterial streets 6 Collector streets 7 Local streets 8 Pedestrian ways 12, unless steps of acceptable design are provided  
The grade of any street shall in no case exceed 12 percent or be less than one-half of one percent. 
(2)  Street grades shall be established wherever practicable to avoid excessive grading, the promiscuous removal of ground cover and tree growth, and general leveling of the topography. 
(p)  Radius of curvature at centerline. When a continuous street centerline deflects at any one point by more than ten degrees, a circular curve shall be introduced having a radius of curvature on such centerline of not less than the following: 
Street Type Minimum Radius of Curvature at Centerline 
(feet) Arterial 500 Collector 300 Local 130  
Curves should be provided when centerline deflections exceed three degrees. 
(q)  Half streets. Where an existing dedicated or platted half-street is adjacent to the subdivision, the other half-street shall be dedicated by the subdivider. The platting of half-streets should be avoided where possible. 
(r)  Intersections. 
(1)  Property lines at street intersections of major thoroughfares shall be rounded with a radius of 15 feet or of a greater radius where the village engineer considers it necessary. 
(2)  Streets shall intersect each other at as nearly right angles as topography and other limiting factors of good design permit. 
(3)  The number of streets converging at one intersection shall be reduced to a minimum, preferably not more than two. 
(s)  Street names. New street names shall not duplicate the names of existing streets, but streets that are continuations of others already in existence and named shall bear the names of the existing streets. Street names shall be subject to approval by the plan commission and village board. 
(t)  Culs-de-sac. 
(1)  Dimensions. All cul-de-sac streets shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a minimum right-of-way diameter of 120 feet and a minimum outside curb diameter of 92 feet in commercial and industrial areas and a minimum right-of-way diameter of 100 feet and minimum outside curb diameter of 72 feet in residential areas. The reverse curve on a cul-de-sac shall have a 50-foot minimum radius when the bulb is centered on the street and a 100-foot minimum radius when the bulb is offset. 
(2)  Temporary termination of streets. Temporary termination of streets intended to be extended at a later date shall be accomplished with a temporary cul-de-sac in accordance with the standards set forth in subsection (t)(1) of this section or by the construction of a temporary "T" intersection 33 feet in width and 33 feet in length abutting the right-of-way lines of the access street on each side. 
(u)  Eyebrows and other circular streets. Eyebrows and other circular street alignments that are designed to provide access to residential lots that are set back from the primary street shall have a circular turnaround having a minimum right-of-way diameter of 100 feet and a minimum outside curb diameter of 72 feet. 
(v)  Planting islands. Planting islands in culs-de-sac or other public streets are only permitted when a neighborhood association or other private organization assumes responsibility for maintenance and replacement of vegetation, where the applicant submits and the village approves legal documentation specifying the private party maintenance responsibilities, and where such planting islands are specifically approved by the village board after receiving a recommendation from the village engineer. 
(w)  Limited access highway and railroad right-of-way treatment. Whenever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a limited access highway, arterial street, or railroad right-of-way, the design shall provide the following treatment: 
(1)  Subdivision lots. When lots within the proposed subdivision back upon the right-of-way of an existing or proposed limited access highway or a railroad, a planting strip at least 30 feet in depth shall be provided adjacent to the highway or railroad right-of-way in addition to the normal lot depth. This strip shall be part of the platted lots but shall have the following restriction lettered on the face of the plat: "This strip reserved for the planting of trees and shrubs, the building of structures hereon prohibited." 
(2)  Streets parallel to limited access highway. Streets parallel to a limited access highway or railroad right-of-way, when intersecting a collector or arterial street and highway or collector street that crosses such railroad or highway shall be located at a minimum distance of 250 feet from such highway or railroad right-of-way. Such distance, where desirable and practicable, shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for the future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients. 
(3)  Local streets. Local streets immediately adjacent and parallel to railroad rights-of-way shall be avoided, and location of local streets immediately adjacent to arterial streets and highways and to railroad rights-of-way shall be avoided in residential areas. 
(x)  Right-of-way and pavement width. The right-of-way and pavement width of all streets shall be of the width specified on the official map or master plan or, if no width is specified there, they shall be not less than the following specified width: 
Street Type Right-of-Way Minimum Width 
(feet) Curb-to-Curb 
Pavement 
Minimum Width 
(feet) Arterial 120 44 Collector 80 36 Local 60 32  
Where development densities adjoining a local street are less than five dwelling units per acre, the village board, upon recommendation of the plan commission, may allow minimum right-of-way widths of 56 feet and minimum pavement widths of 28 feet. Where local street widths are reduced to 28 feet, the village board may allow the outside diameter of culs-de-sac to be reduced from 72 feet to 60 feet and the minimum culs-de-sac right-of-way radius to be reduced from 100 feet to 80 feet. 
(y)  Radius of curvature at street right-of-way line. The minimum radius of curvature at the street right-of-way line shall be as follows: 
Street Type Minimum Radii of Curvature 
at Street Right-of-Way 
(feet) Arterial 300 Collector 200 Local 100  
(z)  New and replacement bridges and culverts. All new and replacement bridges and culverts over perennial waterways, including pedestrian and other minor bridges, in addition to meeting other applicable requirements, shall be designed so as to accommodate the 100-year recurrence interval flood event without raising the peak stage, either upstream or downstream, more than 0.01 foot above the peak stage for the 100-year recurrence interval flood, as established in the applicable federal flood insurance study. Larger permissible flood stage increases may be acceptable for reaches having topographic land use conditions that could accommodate the increased stage without creating additional flood damage potential upstream or downstream of the proposed structure. Such bridges and culverts shall be so designed and constructed as to facilitate the passage of ice flows and other debris. All new and replacement bridges shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable state statutes and codes and shall be submitted to the state department of natural resources to ensure compliance therewith. 
(Code 1998, § 86-211; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-70, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-16, §§ 1, 2, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 07-02, § 6, 4-2-2007) 
Sec. 129-194. - Block design standards. 
(a)  Length; arrangement. The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks in a subdivision shall be appropriate for the topography and the type of development contemplated, but block length in residential areas shall not exceed 1,500 feet nor shall they have less than sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth between street lines. As a general rule, blocks shall not be less than 500 feet in length. 
(b)  Pedestrian pathways. Pedestrian pathways, not less than ten feet wide, may be required by the village board, upon the recommendation of the plan commission, through the center of a block more than 900 feet long, where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, parks, churches, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other community facilities. 
(c)  Block width. The width of blocks shall be wide enough to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth except where otherwise required to separate residential development from through traffic. Width of lots or parcels reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial use shall be adequate to provide for off-street service and parking required by the use contemplated and the area zoning restrictions for such use. 
(d)  Utility easements. Utility easements for electrical power and telephone service shall, where practical, be placed on mid-block easements along rear lot lines. 
(Code 1998, § 86-212; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-71, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-195. - Lot design standards. 
(a)  Size. The size, shape, and orientation of subdivision lots shall be appropriate for the topography of the subdivision, the type of sewerage or septic system to be utilized, and for the type of development contemplated, provided that no lot shall be smaller in area than the minimum lot size for the appropriate zone as established by chapter 133. 
(b)  Commercial lots. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated, as required by chapter 133. 
(c)  Lots abutting state or county trunk highways. Residential lots abutting state or county trunk highways shall be platted with extra depth or design to alleviate the effect of highway traffic on residential occupancy. 
(d)  Corner lots. Corner lots for residential use shall have an extra width of ten feet to permit full building setback from both streets. 
(e)  Access to public streets. Every lot shall front or abut for a minimum distance of at least 40 feet on a public street. The village board may waive the street frontage requirement where it determines that adequate access to the lot is provided by other means consistent with public safety, welfare, and convenience. 
(f)  Side lots. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to or radial to abutting street lines. Lot lines shall follow village boundary lines. 
(g)  Double and reversed frontage lots. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(h)  Natural features. In the subdividing of any land, regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as tree growth, watercourses, historic spots, or similar conditions that, if preserved, will add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development. 
(i)  Land remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots, or a plan shown as to future use rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. 
(j)  Large lots. Where lots are created of a size larger than normal for the area, the plan commission may require that the plat be so designed as to allow for the possible future resubdivision of such lots into normal sizes compatible with the area. 
(k)  Area and dimensions. Area and dimensions of all lots shall conform to the requirements of chapter 133 for the subdivisions within the village and to the applicable county zoning ordinance within the village's extraterritorial jurisdictional limits. 
(l)  Depth. Depth of lots shall be a minimum of 100 feet. Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided, and a proportion of 2:1 shall be considered a desirable ratio under normal conditions. Depth of lots or parcels reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial use shall be adequate to provide for off-street service and parking required by the use contemplated. 
(m)  Width. Width of lots shall conform to the requirements of chapter 133 or other applicable ordinance, and in no case shall a lot be less than 60 feet in width at the building setback line. 
(Code 1998, § 86-213; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-72, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 07-02, § 7, 4-2-2007) 
Sec. 129-196. - Drainage system. 
(a)  Required. As required by section 129-162 and article III of chapter 109, pertaining to stormwater management, a drainage and stormwater detention system shall be designed and constructed by the subdivider to provide for the proper drainage of the surface water of the subdivision and the drainage area of which it is a part. A final plat shall not be approved until the subdivider shall submit plans, profiles, and specifications that have, as specified in this section, been prepared by a registered professional engineer and approved by the village board, upon the recommendations of the plan commission and village engineer. The village may require retention basins. 
(b)  Drainage system plans. 
(1)  The subdivider shall submit to the village, at the time of filing a preliminary plat, a preliminary drainage plan or engineering report on the ability of existing watercourse channels, storm sewers, culverts, and other improvements pertaining to drainage or flood control within the subdivision to handle the additional runoff that would be generated by the development of the land within the subdivision. Additional information shall be submitted to adequately indicate that provision has been made for disposal of surface water without any damage to the developed or undeveloped land downstream or below the proposed subdivision. The report shall also include the following: 
a.  Estimates of the quantity of stormwater entering the subdivision naturally from areas outside the subdivision; 
b.  Quantities of flow at each inlet or culvert; 
c.  Location, sizes, and grades of required culverts, storm drainage sewers, and other required appurtenances. 
(2)  A grading plan for the streets, blocks, and lots shall be submitted by the subdivider for the area within the subdivision. 
(3)  The design criteria for storm drainage and detention systems shall be based upon information provided by the village engineer. 
(4)  Material and construction specifications for all drainage projects (i.e., pipe, culverts, seed, sod, etc.,) shall be in compliance with specifications provided by the village engineer. 
(c)  Grading. The subdivider shall grade each subdivision in order to establish street, block and lot grades in proper relation to each other and to topography as follows: 
(1)  The subdivider shall grade the full width of the right-of-way of all proposed streets in accordance with the approved plans; 
(2)  Block grading shall be completed by one or more of the following methods: 
a.  A ridge may be constructed along the rear lot lines that provides for drainage onto the streets; 
b.  Parts of all lots may be graded to provide for drainage to the street or to a ditch along the rear lot line; 
c.  Draining across rear or side lot lines may be permitted, provided that drainage onto adjoining properties is skillfully controlled. 
(3)  The subdivider shall provide the village engineer with spot elevations on property corners. Such elevations shall be shown on the final plat as specified in this chapter. 
(d)  Drainage system requirements. The subdivider shall install all the storm drainage facilities indicated on the plans required in subsection (a) of this section. 
(1)  Street drainage. All streets shall be provided with an adequate storm drainage system. The street storm system shall serve as the primary drainage system and shall be designed to carry street, adjacent land, and building stormwater drainage. No stormwater shall be permitted to run into the sanitary sewer system within the proposed subdivision. 
(2)  Off-street drainage. The design of the off-street drainage system shall include the watershed affecting the subdivision and shall be extended to a watercourse or ditch adequate to receive the storm drainage. When the drainage system is outside of the street right-of-way, the subdivider shall make provisions for dedicating an easement to the village to provide for the future maintenance of such system. Easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet, but the village may require larger easements if more area is needed due to topography, size of watercourse, etc. 
(e)  Protection of drainage systems. The subdivider shall adequately protect all ditches to the satisfaction of the village board and village engineer. Ditches and open channels shall be seeded, sodded, or paved depending upon grades and soil types. Generally, ditches or channels with grades up to one percent shall be seeded; those with grades up to four percent shall be sodded; and those with grades over four percent shall be paved. 
(Code 1998, § 86-214; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-73, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-197. - Nonresidential subdivisions. 
(a)  Generally. If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision with respect to such land shall make such provisions as the village may require. 
(b)  Site plan approval and additional requirements. A nonresidential subdivision shall also be subject to all the requirements of site plan approval set forth in chapter 133 and the village building codes in chapter 105. A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of this chapter, as well as such additional standards required by the village, and shall conform to the proposed land use standards established by any village master plan or official map and chapter 133. 
(c)  Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in this chapter, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the village board that the street, parcel, and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
(1)  Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated. 
(2)  Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon. 
(3)  Special requirements may be imposed by the village board with respect to street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and construction. 
(4)  Special requirements may be imposed by the village board with respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer, and stormwater drainage. 
(5)  Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up to existing or potential residential development and provisions for permanently landscaped buffer strips when necessary. 
(6)  Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential residential areas. 
(Code 1998, § 86-215; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-74, 11-3-1997) 
Secs. 129-198-129-217. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PARK AND PUBLIC LAND DEDICATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 129-218. - Parkland dedications or fees in lieu of land when not part of subdivision procedure. 
(a)  While developers of all residential subdivisions have been required to dedicate land or pay fees in lieu of land at the point of division of the land into lots, lots exist in the village that either came into existence prior to adoption of the land dedication or fee in lieu of land payment requirements or were divided by a means that did not require dedication of land or payment of fees in lieu of land. Such lands impact community resources in the same manner as other new residential development. In particular, the additional population density places demands upon village parks, public open spaces, and recreation areas. Accordingly, each dwelling unit established upon lands not previously required to dedicate land or provide fees in lieu of land shall be required to dedicate land or provide fees in lieu of land, with the choice of land or fees being made by the village board upon the recommendation of the plan commission. 
(b)  If the village determines to require dedication of land, such dedication shall be an amount of land equal to ten percent of the total area proposed to be developed, including lots, public street rights-of-way, detention basins, and drainageways. Whenever a proposed playground, park, or other public open space or recreation area, other than streets or drainageways, designated in the master plan or master plan component of the village is embraced, all or in part, in the tract of land to be developed, these lands shall be made part of the required land dedication. The village board, upon the recommendation of the plan commission, shall have sole authority to determine the suitability and adequacy of lands proposed for dedication; drainageways, detention basins, wetlands, or areas reserved for streets shall not be considered as satisfying land dedication requirements. 
(c)  Where, in the opinion of the village board, there is no land suitable for parks or other public open space or recreation uses within the proposed land division or the dedication of land would not be compatible with the village's master plan or park plan or village officials determine that a cash contribution would better serve the public interest, the village board may require the developer to contribute fees in lieu of land. The fees collected shall be held in a nonlapsing fund to be used for purchase of land for parks, trails, open spaces and other public recreation purposes. 
(d)  The amount of fees in lieu of land required per dwelling unit shall be as established in section 133-49. Such fees are based on the estimated market value of development land in the village and may be periodically revised to reflect current land market conditions. 
(Code 1998, § 106-15; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-16, 11-3-1997) 
Secs. 129-219-129-244. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SUBDIVISION APPROVAL PREREQUISITES 

Sec. 129-245. - General requirements. 
(a)  In order that adequate open spaces and sites for other public uses may be properly located and reserved and in order that the cost of providing public areas, such as, but not limited to, parks, recreation areas, and public schools, may be equitably apportioned on the basis of additional need created by the subdivision development, each subdivider shall be required to reserve land, dedicate land, or pay fees in lieu of land for park or other public uses. Each subdivider of land in the village and extraterritorial plat jurisdiction area shall, at the discretion and direction of the village board, either dedicate lands designated on the village master plan or plan component or reserve such future public lands and pay a public site fee or, where no proposed public lands are directly involved, pay a public site fee. 
(b)  The village board shall, at the time of reviewing the preliminary plat or certified survey map, select the land dedication option, fees in lieu of land option, or reservation of additional land option and shall record such selection in the minutes of the meeting at which the preliminary plat is presented for approval. The village board shall designate the specific land area to be dedicated. 
(c)  In the design of a condominium development or land division, provision shall be made for suitable sites of adequate area for schools, parks, playgrounds, open spaces, drainageways, and other public purposes. Such sites are to be shown on the preliminary plat and final plat and shall comply with the village master plan or component of such plan. Consideration shall be given to the preservation of scenic and historic sites, stands of trees, marshes, lakes, ponds, streams, watercourses, watersheds, ravines and woodlands, prairie and wetlands, and plant and animal communities. 
(Code 1998, § 86-246; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-80, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-246. - Land dedication. 
(a)  Dedication calculation. All subdividers shall be required to dedicate developable land to the village for park or other public open space or recreational uses, other than streets or drainageways, an amount of land equal to ten percent of the total area proposed to be subdivided, including lots, public street rights-of-way, detention basins, and drainageways. Whenever a proposed playground, park, or other public open space or recreation area, other than streets or drainageways, designated in the master plan or master plan component of the village is embraced, all or in part, in the tract of land to be subdivided, these lands shall be made part of the required land dedication. The village board, upon the recommendation of the plan commission, shall have sole authority to determine the suitability and adequacy of lands proposed for dedication; drainageways, detention basins, wetlands, or areas reserved for streets shall not be considered as satisfying land dedication requirements. 
(b)  Shoreland. 
(1)  Lake and stream shore plats. All subdivisions abutting on a navigable lake or stream shall provide public access at least 60 feet wide providing access to the low water mark so that there will be public access, which is connected to existing public roads, at not more than one-half-mile intervals as measured along the lake or stream shore except where greater intervals and wider access is agreed upon by the state department of natural resources and the state department of commerce, and excluding shore areas where public parks or open-space streets or roads on either side of a stream are provided. No public access established under this chapter may be vacated except by circuit court action. This subsection does not require the village to improve land provided for public access. 
(2)  Lake and stream shore plats. The lands lying between the meander line established in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 236.20(2)(g) and the water's edge, and any otherwise unplattable lands that lie between a proposed subdivision and the water's edge shall be included as part of lots, outlots, or public dedications in any plat abutting a lake or stream. This subsection applies not only to lands proposed to be subdivided but also to all lands under option to the subdivider or in which the subdivider holds any interest that are contiguous to the lands proposed to be subdivided and abut a lake or stream. 
(c)  Deed to village. Land dedicated for public purposes shall be deeded to the village at the time the plat, certified survey, or condominium is approved. 
(d)  Access to dedicated land. All dedicated land shall have frontage on a public street and shall have unrestricted public access. 
(e)  Utility extensions. The subdivider shall install or provide for installation of water and sanitary sewer lines to the property line of all dedicated land, where such services are to be provided to the adjacent properties. 
(Code 1998, § 86-247; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-81, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-247. - Reservation of additional land. 
    When public parks and sites for other public areas as shown on the master plan or master plan component lie within the proposed area for development and are greater in area than required by section 129-246, the owner shall reserve for acquisition by the village, through agreement, purchase, or condemnation, the remaining greater public area for a period of one year of final plat approval unless extended by mutual agreement. 
(Code 1998, § 86-248; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-82, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-248. - Development of park and public land area. 
(a)  When parklands or other public lands are dedicated, the subdivider is required to: 
(1)  Properly grade and contour for proper drainage; 
(2)  Provide a surface contour suitable for anticipated use of the area; and 
(3)  Cover areas to be seeded with a minimum of four inches of quality topsoil, seed as specified by the director of public works, fertilized with 16-6-6 at a rate of seven pounds per 1,000 square feet, and mulched. The topsoil furnished for the park site shall consist of the natural loam, sandy loam, silt loam, silty clay loam, or clay loam humus bearing soils adapted to the sustenance of plant life, and such topsoil shall be neither excessively acid nor excessively alkaline. 
(b)  The village board may require certification of compliance by the village engineer. The cost of such report shall be paid by the subdivider. 
(c)  Development of public lands is to be completed as soon as ten percent of the planned lots in the subdivision are sold, as determined by the village board. 
(d)  If the subdivider fails to satisfy the requirements of this section, the village board may contract such completion and bill such costs to the subdivider, following a public hearing and written notice to the subdivider of noncompliance. Failure to pay such costs may result in the immediate withholding of all building permits until such costs are paid. 
(Code 1998, § 86-249; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-83, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 129-249. - Fees in lieu of land. 
(a)  Method of calculation. For the purposes of this article, the method of calculation of fees in lieu of land shall be as follows: 
(1)  Fees. Where, in the opinion of the village board, there is no land suitable for parks or other public open space or recreation uses within the proposed land division or condominium plat or the dedication of land would not be compatible with the village's master plan or park plan, or village officials determine that a cash contribution would better serve the public interest, the village board may require the subdivider to contribute a payment in the amount established by resolution per single-family dwelling, duplex or multifamily dwelling unit within the plat, certified survey map, or condominium development in lieu of land. If the number and type of dwelling units is not specified in a developer agreement between the subdivider and the village, the total fee shall be computed on the basis of the maximum residential use of each parcel permitted in the particular zoning district under chapter 133; 
(2)  Exemptions. Where a lot or parcel for which payment has once been made is further divided, payment shall be required only for the additional lots or parcels created. 
(3)  Time of payment. Payment shall be made before certification of approval is affixed to the final plat, certified survey map, or condominium plat. As an alternative, payment of 50 percent of the fee may be made prior to certification, if the portion which is deferred is guaranteed by surety bond or other financial guarantee satisfactory to the village. 
(b)  Dedication criteria. The village board shall determine whether the subdivider shall be required to dedicate land or pay a fees-in-lieu-of-land dedication. The village board shall also determine the location of sites dedicated to such public uses and the types of uses to which such sites shall be put. In making these determinations, consideration shall be given to the needs of the community in general and of the residents of the proposed subdivision or other land division, correlation with existing and planned sites and facilities dedicated for such public uses, feasibility and practicality of requiring dedication of land, zoning regulations, and compatibility with the village's master plan or park and open space plan. 
(c)  Park fund for fees collected. Funds paid to the village under the fees-in-lieu-of-land dedication provision are to be placed in a separate account designated for park and public land acquisition. Such account shall be a continuing account and shall not lapse at the end of a budget period. 
(d)  Park facilities impact fee. In addition to other requirements and fees imposed under this article, all applicable park facilities impact fees shall be paid prior to issuance of any residential building permits in accordance with article III of chapter 105. 
(Code 1998, § 86-250; Ord. No. 97-12, § 14-1-84, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 01-16, § 1, 11-19-2001) 
Chapter 133 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning generally, Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35, 62.23(7). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 133-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as, referred to and cited as the Zoning Ordinance, Village of Waunakee, Wisconsin, and may be referred to as the "code" or "ordinance" or "chapter." 
(Code 1998, § 106-2; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-2, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abutting means having a common property line or district line. 
    Accessory use or structure means a use or detached structure subordinate to the principal use of a structure, parcel of land, or water and located on the same lot or parcel serving a purpose incidental to the principal use or the principal structure. 
    Acre, net, means the actual land devoted to the land use, excluding public streets, public lands or unusable lands, and school sites contained within 43,560 square feet. 
    Alley means a public way not more than 21 feet wide that affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    Apartment means a room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure that is arranged, designed, used, or intended to be used as a single housekeeping unit. Complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed, must always be included for each apartment. 
    Apartment, efficiency. See Dwelling, efficiency. 
    Apartment, one-bedroom, means an apartment with either a single room that serves as a combined living sleeping area, commonly referred to as an efficiency or studio apartment, a single room with a sleeping loft, or an apartment with a single separate bedroom. 
    Arterial street means a public street or highway used or intended to be used primarily for a large volume of traffic or heavy through traffic. Arterial streets shall include freeways and expressways as well as arterial streets, highways, and parkways. 
    Basement means that portion of any structure located partly below the average adjoining lot grade which is not designed or used primarily for year-round living accommodations. 
    Bedroom means a room in an apartment or single-family house intended for sleeping and having a door that would enable the room to serve as a private quarters. 
    Block means a tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public parks or other recognized lines of demarcation. 
    Boardinghouse means a building other than a hotel or restaurant where meals or lodging are regularly furnished by prearrangement for compensation for three or more persons not members of a family, but not exceeding 12 persons and not open to transient customers. 
    Buildable lot area means the portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided. 
    Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, equipment, machinery, or materials. When a building is divided into separate parts by unpierced walls extending from the ground up, each part shall be deemed a separate building. 
    Building, detached, means a building surrounded by open space on the same lot. 
    Building, height of, means the vertical distance from the average finished grade at the building line facing the street, to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of a gambrel, hip, or pitch roof. 
    Building, principal, means a building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is located is conducted. 
    Building setback line means a line parallel to the lot line at a distance parallel to it, regulated by the yard requirements set up in this chapter. 
    Business means an occupation, employment or enterprise that occupies time, labor and materials, or wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or where services are offered. 
    Channel means those floodlands normally occupied by a stream of water under average annual high water flow conditions while confined within generally well-established banks. 
    Communication facilities means transmitting towers, receiving towers, cellular tower facilities, relay facilities and microwave stations. 
    Community living arrangement means the following facilities licensed or operated or permitted under the authority of state law: child welfare agencies, group foster homes for children, and community-based residential facilities, but the term "community living arrangement" does not include day care centers, nursing homes, general hospitals, special hospitals, prisons, and jails. The establishment of a community living arrangement shall be in conformance with applicable sections of the state statutes and applicable Wisconsin Administrative Codes. 
    Conditional uses means uses of a special nature as to make impractical their predetermination as a principal use in a district. 
    Controlled access arterial street means the condition in which the right of owners or occupants of abutting land or other persons to access, light, air, or view in connection with an arterial street is fully or partially controlled by public authority. 
    Conservation standards means guidelines and specifications for soil and water conservation practices and management enumerated in the technical guide, prepared by the USDA Soil Conservation Service for Dane County, adopted by the county soil and water conservation district supervisors, and containing suitable alternatives for the use and treatment of land based upon its capabilities, from which the landowner selects that alternative which best meets the landowner's needs in developing the landowner's soil and water conservation. 
    Corner lot means a parcel of property abutting on two or more streets at their intersection, providing that the interior angle of such intersection is less than 135 degrees. On corner lots, the setback shall be measured from the street line on which the lot fronts. The setback from the side street shall be equal to 75 percent of the setback required on residences fronting on the side street, but the side yard setback shall in no case restrict the buildable width to less than 30 feet. Corner lots shall meet front yard setback requirements for all street sides. 
    Dependency living arrangement means a living arrangement which permits a person with a physical or mental disability to live in a temporary separate living area within a dwelling unit or permits a relative or paid attendant of a person with such a disability to live in a temporary separate living area within a dwelling unit. Such living area may include a separate bath and separate kitchen which permit a degree of independence. Ingress and egress for such a living area shall be from within the principal dwelling unit. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, construction of or additions or substantial improvements to buildings, other structures, or accessory uses; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; or disposition of materials. 
    District, basic, means a part of the village for which the regulations of this chapter governing the use and location of land and building are uniform. 
    District, overlay, means overlay districts, also referred to in this chapter as regulatory areas, which provide for the possibility of superimposing certain additional requirements upon a basic zoning district without disturbing the requirements of the basic district. For conflicting requirements, the more strict of the conflicting requirements shall apply. 
    Duplex condominium means a condominium development consisting of a commonly owned lot and a building with two separately owned dwelling units. 
    Dwelling means a building designed or used exclusively as a residence or sleeping place, but does not include boardinghouses or lodginghouses, motels, hotels, tents, cabins, or recreational vehicles. 
    Dwelling, efficiency, means a dwelling unit consisting of one principal room with no separate sleeping rooms. 
    Dwelling, multifamily, means a residential building designed for or occupied by three or more families, with the number of families in residence not to exceed the number of dwelling units provided. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a detached building or manufactured home designed for or occupied by one family. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a detached building containing two separate dwelling or living units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families. 
    Dwelling unit means a group of rooms constituting all or part of a dwelling that is arranged, designed, used, or intended for use exclusively as living quarters for one family. 
    Essential services means services provided by public and private utilities, necessary for the exercise of the principal use or service of the principal structure. These services include underground, surface, or overhead gas; electrical; steam; water; sanitary sewerage; stormwater drainage; and communication systems and accessories thereto, such as poles, towers, wires, mains, drains, vaults, culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catchbasins, water storage tanks, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, pumps, lift stations, and hydrants, but not including buildings. 
    Fall zone means the area over which a commercial structure as defined in section 133-12(l) is designed to collapse. 
    Family means the body of persons who live together in one dwelling unit as a single housekeeping entity. 
    Farming, general, means floriculture; forest and game management; orchards; raising of grain, grass, mint and seed crops; raising of fruits, nuts and berries; sod farming; and vegetable farming. General farming includes the operating of such an area for one or more of the uses listed in this definition with the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal farming activities. 
    Farmstead means a single-family residential structure located on a parcel of land, which primary land use is associated with agriculture. 
    Floor area, business and manufacturing buildings, means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors of the building. This area shall include elevators and stairways; accessory storage areas located within selling or working space occupied by counters, racks or closets; and any basement floor area devoted to retailing activities, to the production, processing, or storage of goods, or to business or professional offices. 
    Foster family home means the primary domicile of a foster parent that has four or fewer foster children and is licensed under Wis. Stats. § 48.62. 
    Front yard. See Yard, front. 
    Frontage means all the property butting on one side of a street between two intersecting streets or all of the property abutting on one side of a street between an intersecting street and the dead end of a street. 
    Garage, private, means a detached accessory building or portion of the principal building, designed, arranged, used, or intended to be used for storage of automobiles of the occupant of the premises. 
    Garage, public, means any building or portion thereof, not accessory to a residential building or structure, used for equipping, servicing, repairing, leasing, or public parking of motor vehicles. 
    Green area means nonimpervious surface covered with grass or other landscape materials and maintained as open space. 
    Group foster home means any facility operated by a person required to be licensed by the state under Wis. Stats. § 48.62 for the care and maintenance of five to eight foster children. 
    Home occupation means any occupation for gain or support conducted entirely within buildings, which is customarily incidental to the principal use of the premises. 
    Hotel means a building in which lodging, with or without meals, is offered to transient guests for compensation and in which there are more than five sleeping rooms with no cooking facilities in any individual room or apartment. 
    Institution means a building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit establishment for public use. 
    Junk means any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or not stored or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage, storage, baling, disposal or other use or disposition. The term "junk" includes, but is not limited to, vehicles, tires, vehicle parts, equipment, paper, rags, metal, glass, building materials, household appliances, brush, wood, and lumber. 
    Junkyard means any area, lot, land, parcel, building or structure or part thereof used for the storage, collecting, processing, purchase, sale, or abandonment of wastewater, rags, scrap metal or other scrap or discarded goods, materials, machinery, or two or more unregistered, inoperable motor vehicles or other type of junk. 
    Loading area means a completely off-street space or berth on the same lot for the loading or unloading of freight carriers, having adequate ingress and egress to a public street or alley. 
    Lodginghouse means a building where lodging only is provided for compensation for not more than three persons not members of the family. 
    Lot means a parcel of land having frontage on a public street, or other officially approved means of access, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal structure or use and sufficient in size to meet the lot width, lot frontage, lot area, and other open space provisions of this chapter as pertaining to the district wherein located. 
    Lot coverage (except residential) means the area of a lot occupied by the principal building and accessory buildings, including any driveways, parking areas, loading areas, storage areas, and walkways. 
    Lot coverage (residential) means the area of a lot occupied by the principal building and accessory building. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot situated on a single street and bounded by adjacent lots along each of its other lines and that is not a corner lot. 
    Lot line means a property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership, except that where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the abutting street or alley right-of-way line. 
    Lot line, front, means the front lot line in the case of a lot abutting upon only one street, shall mean the line separating such lot from such street. In the case of a corner lot, the owner shall, for the purpose of this ordinance, have the privilege of electing either street lot line as the front lot line, providing that such choice, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, will not be injurious to the existing, or to the desirable future development of the adjacent properties. 
    Lot line, rear, means that lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of an irregular or triangular-shaped lot, a line ten feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and most distant from the front lot line shall be considered to be the rear lot line for the purpose of determining depth or rear yard. In cases where none of these definitions is applicable, the zoning administrator shall designate the rear lot line. 
    Lot line, side, means any lot line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
    Lot lines and area means the peripheral boundaries of a parcel of land and the total area lying within such boundaries. 
    Lot, substandard, means a parcel of land held in separate ownership having frontage on a public street or other approved means of access, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or structure, together with accessory buildings and uses, having insufficient size to meet the lot width, lot area, yard, off-street parking areas, or other open space provisions of this chapter as pertaining to the district wherein located. 
    Lot, through, means a lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two substantially parallel streets and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines. 
    Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the building setback line. 
    Manufactured home means a dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying that it is built in compliance with Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards (HUD code). Manufactured homes that meet the federal laws and have certification of compliance with federal standards shall be treated in this chapter as single-family homes. 
    Minor structures means any small movable accessory erection or construction such as birdhouses, tool houses, pet houses, play equipment, arbors and walls and fences under four feet in height. 
    Mobile home means a transportable structure, being eight feet or more in width, not including the overhang of the roof, built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. When such a transportable structure does not meet the definition of a manufactured home and is built in compliance with Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards (HUD code), such transportable structures shall be considered recreational vehicles or equipment and regulated accordingly. 
    Modular unit means a factory-fabricated transportable building unit designed to be used by itself or to be incorporated with similar units at a building site into a modular structure to be used for residential, commercial, educational, or industrial purposes. 
    Nonconforming lot means a legally platted lot that was existing on the effective date of this Code or amendments to this chapter and that is not in conformance with this chapter. 
    Nonconforming use means any structure, use of land, use of land and structure in combination or characteristic of use, such as yard requirement or lot size, which was existing on the effective date of this Code or amendments to this chapter and which is not in conformance with this chapter. Any such structure conforming in respect to use but not in respect to frontage, width, height, area, yard, parking, loading, or distance requirements shall not be considered a nonconforming use, but shall be considered nonconforming with respect to those characteristics. 
    Nursing home means an establishment used as a dwelling place by the aged, infirm, chronically ill, or incurably afflicted, in which not less than three persons live or are kept or provided for on the premises for compensation, excluding clinics and hospitals and similar institutions devoted to the diagnosis, treatment, or care of the sick or injured. 
    Owner means the holder of record of an estate in possession in fee simple or for life, in land or real property, or a vendee of record under a land contract for the sale of an estate in possession in fee simple or for life but does not include the vendor under a land contract. A tenant in common or joint tenant shall be considered such owner to the extent of the tenant's interest. The personal representative of at least one owner shall be considered the owner. 
    Parking lot means a structure or premises containing five or more parking spaces open to the public. 
    Parties in interest means all abutting property owners, all property owners within 100 feet, and all property owners of opposite frontages. 
    Public airport means any airport that complies with the definition contained in Wis. Stats. § 114.013(3), or any airport that serves or offers to serve common carriers engaged in air transport. 
    Rear yard. See Yard, rear. 
    Retail means the sale of goods, wares, or merchandise directly to the ultimate consumer or persons without a resale license. For purposes of interpretation, retail businesses shall include businesses listed with a two-digit SIC classification of 53 through 59 in the most recent edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget. 
    Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the foundation of that portion of the building to be enclosed. The overhang cornices shall not exceed 24 inches. Any overhang of the cornice in excess of 24 inches shall be compensated by increasing the setback by an amount equal to the excess of cornice over 24 inches. Uncovered steps shall not be included in measuring the setback. 
    Side yard. See Yard, side. 
    Sign means any medium, including its structure, words, letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names, or trademarks by which anything is made known and that is used to advertise or promote an individual, firm, association, corporation, profession, business, commodity, or product and that is visible from any public street or highway. 
    Street means property other than an alley or private thoroughfare or travelway that is subject to public easement or right-of-way for use as a thoroughfare and that is 21 feet or more in width. 
    Street yard. See Yard, street. 
    Structural alterations means any change in the supporting members of a structure, such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground. 
    Temporary structure means a movable structure not designed for human occupancy or for the protection of goods or chattels and not forming an enclosure, such as billboards. 
    Use means the purpose or activity for which the land or building thereof is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained. 
    Use, accessory, means a subordinate building or use that is located on the same lot on which the principal building or use is situated and that is reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of such building or main use, when permitted by district regulations. 
    Use, principal, means the main use of land or building as distinguished from subordinate or accessory use. 
    Utilities means public and private facilities, such as water wells, water and sewage pumping stations, water storage tanks, electrical power substations, static transformer stations, telephone and telegraph exchanges, microwave radio relays, and gas regulation stations, inclusive of associated transmission facilities, but not including sewage disposal plants, municipal incinerators, warehouses, shops, storage yards, and power plants. 
    Vision clearance means an unoccupied triangular space at the street corner of a corner lot that is bounded by the street lines and a setback line connecting points specified by measurement from the corner on each street line. 
    Yard means an open space on the same lot with a structure, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except by vegetation. The street and rear yards extend the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, front, means a yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the front line of the lot and the nearest line of the building, excluding uncovered steps. In the case of corner lots, both yards adjoining a public street right-of-way shall comply with minimum front yard and setback requirements. For purposes of determining which yards are rear and side yards the property owner shall designate, subject to zoning administrator approval, one of the street yards as the front yard. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the principal building. 
    Yard, side, means that part of the yard lying between the main building and a side lot line, and extending from the required front yard (or from the front lot line, if there is no required front yard) to the required rear yard. 
    Yard, street, means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the existing street or highway right-of-way line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point of the principal structure. Corner lots shall have two street yards. 
    Zero lot line means the concept whereby two respective dwelling units within a building shall be on separate and abutting lots and shall meet on the common property line between them, thereby having zero space between such units. 
    Zoning permit means a permit issued by the zoning administrator to certify that the use of lands, structures, air, and waters subject to this chapter are or shall be in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 106-18; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-200, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 05-06, §§ 1, 2, 6-20-2005; Ord. No. 07-02, §§ 10-13, 4-2-2007) 
Sec. 133-3. - Authority. 
    This chapter is adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35 and 62.23(7), and amendments thereto. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-1, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 16-5, § 2(106-18), 5-2-2016) 
Sec. 133-4. - General purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote the comfort, health, safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of the people of the village. 
(Code 1998, § 106-3; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-3, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-5. - Intent and purposes in view of chapter. 
    The general intent and purposes in view of this chapter are to regulate and restrict the use of all structures, lands and waters and to: 
(1)  Promote and protect the comfort, public health, safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of the people; 
(2)  Divide the village into zones or districts restricting and regulating therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of buildings, structures and land for residence, business and manufacturing and other specified uses; 
(3)  Protect the character and the stability of the residential, business, manufacturing and other districts within the village and promote the orderly and beneficial development thereof; 
(4)  Regulate lot coverage, the intensity of use of lot areas, and the size and location of all structures to prevent overcrowding and to provide adequate sunlight, air, sanitation and drainage; 
(5)  Regulate population density and distribution to avoid sprawl or undue concentration and to facilitate the provision of adequate public services, utilities and other public requirements; 
(6)  Regulate parking, loading and access to lessen congestion in and promote the safety and efficiency of streets and highways; 
(7)  Secure safety from fire, panic, flooding, pollution, contamination and other dangers; 
(8)  Stabilize and protect existing and potential property values and encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the village; 
(9)  Preserve and protect the beauty of the village; 
(10)  Prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of development or intended uses within specified zoning districts; 
(11)  Provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures that are adversely affecting the character and value of desirable development in each district; 
(12)  Prevent and control erosion, sedimentation and other pollution of the surface and subsurface waters; 
(13)  Further the maintenance of safe and healthful water conditions; 
(14)  Prevent flood damage to persons and property and minimize expenditures for flood relief and flood control projects; 
(15)  Provide for and protect a variety of suitable commercial and industrial sites; 
(16)  Protect the traffic-carrying capacity of existing and proposed arterial streets and highways; 
(17)  Implement municipal, county, watershed and regional comprehensive plans or components of such plans adopted by the village; 
(18)  Provide for the administration and enforcement of this chapter, and provide penalties for the violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 106-4; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-4, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-6. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations or permits adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the restrictions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1998, § 106-5; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-5, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-7. - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the village and shall not be construed to be a limitation or repeal of any other power possessed by the village. 
(Code 1998, § 106-6; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-6, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-8. - Severability; liability of village. 
(a)  If any application of this chapter to a particular structure, land or water is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not be applicable to any other structure, land or water not specifically included in such judgment. 
(b)  The village does not guarantee, warrant or represent that only those areas designated as floodplains will be subject to periodic inundation and asserts that there is no liability on the part of the village, its agencies or employees for any flood damages, sanitation problems or structural damages that may occur as a result of reliance upon and conformance with this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 106-7; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-7(b), (c), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-9. - Repeal. 
    All other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the village inconsistent or conflicting with this chapter, to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict only, are repealed. 
(Code 1998, § 106-8; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-8, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-10. - Jurisdiction and compliance. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of this chapter shall apply to all structures, lands, water and air within the corporate limits of the village. 
(b)  Compliance. No new structure, new use of land, water or air or change in the use of land, water or air shall be permitted and no structure or part thereof shall be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered without a zoning permit and without full compliance with this chapter and all other applicable local, county and state regulations. 
(c)  District regulations. Except as otherwise provided, the use and height of buildings erected, converted, moved, enlarged or structurally altered and the use of any land shall be in compliance with the regulations established in this chapter for the district in which such building or land is located. 
(Code 1998, § 106-9; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-10, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-11. - Use regulations. 
    Only the following uses and their essential services may be allowed in any zoning district: 
(1)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses, being the principal uses, specified for a district. 
(2)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and structures are permitted only if the principal use or structure is present or under construction. The total gross square footage of accessory structures in residential districts shall not exceed 800 square feet. The plan commission may approve accessory structures larger than 800 square feet in residential districts as conditional uses in accordance with article V of this chapter. All accessory uses shall comply with section 133-1132. 
(3)  Conditional uses. 
a.  Conditional uses as special uses. Conditional uses and their accessory uses are considered as special uses requiring, for their authorization, review, public hearing and approval by the plan commission in accordance with article V of this chapter, except those existent at time of adoption of the Zoning Ordinance; 
b.  Existing conditional uses. Those existing uses that are classified as "conditional uses" for the district in which they are located at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter derives require no action by the plan commission for them to continue as valid conditional uses; 
c.  Changes from permitted uses to conditional uses. A proposed change from a permitted use in a district to a conditional use shall require review, public hearing and approval by the plan commission in accordance with article V of this chapter; 
d.  Termination of conditional uses. Conditional uses, when replaced by permitted uses, shall terminate. In such cases, the reestablishment of any previous conditional uses or establishment of new conditional uses shall require review, public hearing and approval by the plan commission in accordance with article V of this chapter; 
e.  Change of ownership of conditional uses. Conditional uses, either allowed by action of the plan commission or existent at time of adoption of this ordinance, shall be nonlapsing and shall survive vacancies of less than 12 months and change of ownership, providing the use remains unchanged. Change of use shall require either compliance with the district zoning or issuance of a new conditional use permit in accordance with article V of this chapter. 
(4)  Uses not specified. 
a.  Uses not specified in this chapter that are found by the plan commission to be sufficiently similar to specified permitted uses for a district shall be allowed by the zoning administrator. 
b.  Uses not specified in this chapter and which are found sufficiently similar to specified conditional uses permitted for a district may be permitted by the plan commission after public hearing and approval in accordance with article V of this chapter. 
(5)  Duplex condominiums. Duplex condominiums, as defined in this chapter, are permitted in any district that allows two-family residences, provided that all duplex condominiums meet the requirements of chapter 129 of this Code and Wis. Stats. ch. 703. 
(Code 1998, § 106-10; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-11, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 11-2-1998; Ord. No. 99-12, § 1, 7-19-1999) 
Sec. 133-12. - Site regulations. 
(a)  Street frontage. To be buildable, a lot shall comply with the frontage requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(b)  Principal structures. All principal structures shall be located on a lot. Only one principal structure shall be located, erected or moved onto a lot. The plan commission may permit as a conditional use more than one principal structure per lot in any district where more than one such structure is needed for the orderly development of the parcel or when a condominium or planned unit development is planned. Where additional structures are permitted, the plan commission may impose additional yard requirements, landscaping requirements or parking requirements or may require a minimum separation distance between principal structures. 
(c)  Dedicated street. Zoning permits shall only be issued for a lot that abuts a public street dedicated to its proposed width, except within planned unit developments or condominium projects where private streets are specifically permitted. 
(d)  Lots abutting more restrictive districts . 
(1)  Lots abutting more restrictive district boundaries shall provide side and rear yards not less than those required in the more restrictive abutting district. The street yard setbacks in the less restrictive district shall be modified for a distance of not less than 60 feet from the more restrictive district boundary line so such street yard setbacks shall be no less than the average of the street yards required in each district. 
(2)  Lots abutting or directly across a public street or alley right-of-way from a zoning district that has more restrictive building height regulations are subject to the following: 
a.  Except as provided in subsection b., the maximum height of the building located in the less restrictive zoning district shall be no greater than the maximum height in the more restrictive district. 
b.  The maximum height of the building located in the less restrictive district may equal the maximum height as allowed by right in the district so long as the portion of the building that exceeds the maximum height in the more restrictive district is stepped back at least one more foot from the primary building façade for each additional foot in height. The maximum height of the building located in the less restrictive district may not be increased by a conditional use permit process. 
(e)  Site suitability. No land shall be used or structure erected where the land is held unsuitable for such use or structure by the village board, upon the recommendation of the plan commission, because of flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography, low percolation rate or bearing strength, erosion susceptibility or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of this community. The plan commission, in applying this section, shall, in writing, recite the particular facts upon which it bases its conclusion that the land is not suitable for certain uses. The applicant shall have an opportunity to present evidence contesting such unsuitability if the applicant so desires. Thereafter, the plan commission may affirm, modify or withdraw its determination of unsuitability when making its recommendation to the village board. 
(f)  Preservation of topography. In order to protect the property owner from possible damage due to change in the existing grade of adjoining lands and to aid in preserving and protecting the natural beauty and character of the landscape, no change in the existing topography of any land shall be made that would result in increasing any portion of the slope to a ratio greater than 11/2 horizontal to one vertical, within a distance of 20 feet from the property line, except with the written consent of the owner of the abutting property and with the approval of the plan commission, or that would alter the existing drainage or topography in any way as to adversely affect the adjoining property. In no case shall any slope exceed the normal angle of slippage of the material involved, and all slopes shall be protected against erosion. Retaining walls may be permitted on a site-specific basis as allowed by the director of public works. 
(g)  Decks. For purposes of this chapter, decks and porches shall be considered a part of a building or structure. 
(h)  Corner lots. With corner lots, both yards facing streets shall comply with front yard setback requirements. 
(i)  Required side yards. Required side yards shall be measured from the building setback line. 
(j)  Lots abutting public alleys. All principal and accessory buildings on lots abutting public alleys shall be setback at least five feet from the alley right-of-way line. 
(k)  Utility easements. If not located in streets, all water mains, sanitary sewer mains, storm sewers, electric transmission lines, telephone lines, cable television lines, and other facilities for the transmission of electricity, information, electric signals, heat, power or light and other similar facilities shall be located only in easements along side or rear lot lines. 
(1)  This subsection does not apply to a lateral or service line extending from the main or transmission line to serve only the lot on which it is located. 
(2)  Exceptions to permit mains or transmission facilities in other parts of a yard may be permitted as a conditional use where locating them in the street or along side or rear lot lines is impractical. 
(l)  Commercial structure fall zone . For purposes of this section 133-12(l), a "commercial structure" is a structure that is not a building, is an accessory structure on the property, and is greater than 25 feet in height. A commercial structure shall be located not closer to a property boundary than a distance equal to its height. 
(Code 1998, § 106-11; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-12, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 07-02, § 8, 4-2-2007; Ord. No. 16-5, § 1(106-11), 5-2-2016; Ord. No. 18-19, § 10, 10-15-2018) 
Sec. 133-13. - Height, setback and area exceptions. 
(a)  Height. The zoning district height limitations stipulated in this chapter may be exceeded, but such modification shall be in accord with the following: 
(1)  Architectural projections such as spires, belfries, parapet walls, cupolas, domes and flues are exempt from the height limitations of this chapter; 
(2)  Special structures such as elevator penthouses, gas tanks, grain elevators, radio and television receiving antennas, manufacturing equipment and necessary mechanical appurtenances, cooling towers, fire towers, substations, smoke stacks and flagpoles are exempt from the height limitations of this chapter; 
(3)  Essential services, utilities, water towers, electric power and communication transmission lines are exempt from the height limitations of this chapter; 
(4)  Communication structures such as radio and television transmission and relay towers, aerials and observation towers shall not exceed in height three times their distance from the nearest lot line, except insofar as the Federal Communication Act of 1996 may limit the ability of the village to regulate the height of such communication structures; 
(5)  Architectural structures such as barns, silos and windmills shall not exceed in height twice their distance from the nearest lot line; 
(6)  Public or semipublic facilities, such as schools, churches or other places of indoor religious assembly, hospitals, monuments, sanitariums, libraries, governmental offices and stations, may be erected to a height of 60 feet, provided all required yards are increased not less than one foot for each foot the structure exceeds the district's maximum height requirement; 
(7)  Airplane hangars adjacent to the Waunakee Airport, following review and approval of the plan commission, may be allowed to exceed height limitations of this chapter up to 20 feet in height; 
(8)  The village retains sole discretion to restrict the height of an architectural projection or other structure that pursuant to this subsection (a) is exempt from the height limitations of this chapter. 
(b)  Yards. The yard requirements stipulated in this chapter may be modified as follows: 
(1)  Uncovered stairs, landings, uncovered decks, and fire escapes may project into any yard but may not exceed six feet and may not be closer than three feet to any lot line; 
(2)  Architectural decorations, such as flues, sills, eaves, belt courses and ornaments, may project into any required yard, but such projection shall not exceed two feet; 
(3)  Essential services, utility electric power and communication transmission lines are exempt from the yard and distance requirements of this chapter; 
(4)  Landscaping and vegetation are exempt from the yard requirements of this chapter, with the exception that any landscaping or vegetation shall be subject to the restrictions in section 133-993 related to traffic visibility; 
(5)  Required street yards may be decreased to the average of the existing street yards of the abutting structures on each side, but in no case less than 15 feet; 
(6)  The plan commission may grant exceptions to the setback and yard requirements in any district for structures or facilities of the village, Waunakee School District or other governmental entity where the plan commission determines such exceptions to be in the public interest. 
(c)  JPA/expanded ETZ area highway setback. In the joint planning area (JPA) and expanded ETZ area, as defined in section 133-18, the following shall be the setbacks from the particular highways as stated below. This shall be the distance buildings and other structures shall be setback from said highways in the JPA and expanded ETZ area. This setback shall prevail over any other lesser setback from such highways for a particular zoning classification in the JPA/expanded ETZ area. 
(1)  State and federal highways. The setback line for all state and federal highways shall be 100 feet from the centerline of the abutting highway rights-of-way, or 41 feet from the right-of-way line, whichever is greater; 
(2)  County trunk highways. The setback line for all county trunks shall be 75 feet from the centerline of the abutting highway rights-of-way, or 42 feet from the right-of-way line, whichever is greater; 
(3)  Amendment. The provisions of this subsection shall not be amended unless and until approval of such amendment has been recommended by a majority vote of the entire membership of the joint planning committee. 
(Code 1998, § 106-12; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-13, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 98-2, § 5, 3-30-1998; Ord. No. 99-10, § 1, 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 07-02, § 9, 4-2-2007; Ord. No. 07-04, § 4, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 12-3, § 1, 5-7-2012) 
Sec. 133-14. - Reduction or joint use. 
    No lot, yard, parking area, building area or other space shall be reduced in area or dimensions so as not to meet the provisions of this chapter. No part of any lot, yard, parking area or other space required for a structure or use shall be used for any other structure or use. 
(Code 1998, § 106-13; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-14, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-15. - Screens and buffers. 
(a)  Required screens and buffers. Where screens or buffers are required by this chapter or by the plan commission to reduce the impact of proposed uses on adjacent properties, the standards of this section shall be followed. Buffer yards and screens may be required jointly or separately. 
(b)  Buffer yards. Buffer yards are horizontal separations along lot lines that are intended to increase the physical separation between incompatible uses. Where buffer yards are required, the width of the required buffer yard shall be determined by the plan commission. The minimum width shall be ten feet. 
(c)  Screens. Screens are barriers located in a limited space, ten feet or less in height, intended to perform a buffering effect, particularly for noise reduction or visual screening. Screens may consist of existing or planted vegetation, fences, walls, earth berms or similar techniques. Plant screens shall be sufficient to provide a year-round screen within three years of installation. Walls or earth berms shall be required where noise reduction is necessary. Screen plantings shall be permanently maintained by the owner of the property, and any plant materials that do not live shall be replaced within six months. 
(Code 1998, § 106-14; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-15, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-16. - Restriction on rezoning for multifamily use. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the village by limiting the total number of multifamily units, defined as three or more attached dwelling units, available for occupancy in the village so that there will continue to be a predominance of the population living in detached single- or two-family residences. 
(b)  Determination for rezoning. No additional rezoning to R-4, R-5, or PUD with multifamily units shall be allowed which would have the effect of allowing more than 25 percent of the total dwelling units to be multifamily units. Dwelling units designed and approved as owner-occupied condominiums for which the condominium declaration under Wis. Stats. § 703.09 prohibits the rental thereof shall not be considered single-, two- or multifamily residences for purposes of the determination under this subsection. Any other condominium dwelling units shall be considered multifamily dwelling units under this subsection. In implementing this subsection, the plan commission may either deny or modify a proposed zoning amendment or conditional use permit or direct the building inspector to not issue additional building permits, unless such issuance would be consistent with the intent of this section. 
(c)  Applicability. This section shall not apply to properties that were rezoned to R-4, R-5 or PUD with multifamily units prior to December 31, 1997. 
(Code 1998, § 106-16; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-17, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 98-10, § 1, 9-8-1998; Ord. No. 98-14, § 1, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 133-17. - Minimum dwelling unit sizes. 
    The minimum dwelling unit sizes in the village shall be as follows: 
(1)  Efficiency dwelling unit, 600 square feet. 
(2)  One-bedroom dwelling unit, 600 square feet. 
(3)  Two-bedroom dwelling unit, 800 square feet. 
(4)  More than two-bedroom dwelling unit, 1,000 square feet. 
(Code 1998, § 106-17; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-18, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-18. - Waunakee/Westport joint planning area; expanded ETZ area. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Waunakee/Westport joint planning area. The Waunakee/Westport joint planning area or JPA is that area of land within the Village of Waunakee and Town of Westport as defined in the Boundary Stipulation and Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement between the Village of Waunakee and the Town of Westport dated September 19, 1996, or as amended by the village and the town. 
(2)  Expanded ETZ area. The Waunakee expanded ETZ area is that area of land where the Village of Waunakee has extended its ETZ powers, but which lies outside of the JPA. 
(b)  General purpose of this section. In the above areas, the Village of Waunakee and Town of Westport governing bodies have agreed to delegate certain review and approval abilities over land use decisions to the joint planning committee (JPC) created by that agreement. By this section, it is the intent of the village to specify those powers of the JPC in this area under this chapter. No action of the JPC is effective unless approved by a majority vote of the entire membership of the JPC. 
(c)  Applicable provisions. 
(1)  Zoning review for JPA. The JPC shall act as the village plan commission for any rezonings in the JPA, whether located in the village or the town. The JPC shall conduct all public hearings on rezonings requested in the JPA. Consistent with Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7a), the village board may not approve any rezoning in the JPA until and unless such rezoning has been approved by a majority of the members of the entire JPC after public hearing. 
(2)  Appeals and variances for JPA. The JPC shall act as the zoning board of appeals under division 2 of article II of this chapter for appeals and variances requested in the JPA. All other provisions of division 2 of article II of this chapter not in conflict herein shall apply and shall be followed by the JPC acting as the zoning board of appeals in the JPA. 
(3)  Site plan review for JPA. The JPC shall act as the plan commission under section 133-47 for site plan approvals requested in the JPA. An appeal of any such decision by the JPC shall not be to the village board, but shall be direct to circuit court by remedy of certiorari. All other provisions of that section not in conflict herein shall apply and shall be followed by the JPC acting as the plan commission as to site plan reviews in the JPA. 
(4)  Conditional uses for JPA. The JPC shall act as the plan commission under article V of this chapter for conditional use permits requested in the JPA. An appeal of any such decision by the JPC shall not be to the village board, but shall be directly to circuit court by remedy of certiorari. All other provisions of that article not in conflict herein shall apply and shall be followed by the JPC acting as the plan commission as to conditional uses in the JPA. 
(5)  Remaining sections. The remaining sections of this chapter, to the extent they do not conflict with the provisions of this section, shall apply in the JPA and expanded ETZ area. 
(d)  Reserved. Reserved for future provisions. 
(e)  Amendment. The provisions of this section shall not be amended unless and until approval of such amendment has been recommended by a majority vote of the entire membership of the JPC after following the procedures for amendment under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7a). 
(Code 1998, § 106-19; Ord. No. 98-2, § 3, 3-30-1998; Ord. No. 99-5, § 1, 3-1-1999; Ord. No. 07-04, § 2, 5-21-2007) 
State Law reference- Extraterritorial zoning, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7a). 
Sec. 133-19. - Retail building size. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no single building used for retail business shall have more than 50,000 square feet of floor area. 
(b)  A single building used for retail business may have up to 75,000 square feet of floor area pursuant to a conditional use permit granted in accordance with article V of this chapter. In addition to the provisions of article V of this chapter, the following shall be requirements of such a conditional use permit: 
(1)  Stormwater best management practices that minimize runoff and maximize on-site infiltration. Publications of the state department of natural resources, United States Environmental Protection Agency and equivalent sources may be relied on to determine best management practices. 
(2)  Impervious building and pavement areas shall not exceed 70 percent of the total site area. 
(3)  Landscaping islands and perimeter plantings that screen and buffer large parking areas 1.5 times the number of landscaping points required under section 133-996 shall be required. 
(4)  The design of, and materials used in, the building shall reflect the architectural styles and character of landmark buildings in the village. 
a.  The intent of this requirement is to require architecturally designed structures that reflect both the character of landmark or historic buildings in the village and the topographic and natural characteristics of the site; 
b.  Stock or standard building designs that are used repetitively in other communities should be avoided; 
c.  Prefabricated metal or vinyl siding, common concrete block, or structural cement shall not be used as a primary building material for any building facade. This restriction shall not exclude the use of architectural concrete block or the decorative use of metal as an architectural element. 
(5)  A traffic impact analysis (TIA) shall be prepared to specifications established by the village engineer and the applicant shall be required to demonstrate that the project will not create congestion or cause other traffic problems within the village. 
(Code 1998, § 106-20; Ord. No. 05-06, § 3, 6-20-2005; Ord. No. 05-11, 9-6-2005) 
Secs. 133-20-133-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 133-42. - General administrative system. 
    This chapter contemplates an administrative and enforcement officer entitled the "zoning administrator" to administer and enforce this chapter. Certain considerations, particularly with regard to granting of permitted conditional uses, PUD conditional uses, changes in zoning districts and zoning maps, and amending the text of this chapter, require review and recommendation by the plan commission and ultimate action by the village board. A zoning board of appeals is provided to ensure proper administration of this chapter and to avoid arbitrariness. 
(Code 1998, § 106-46; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-170, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-43. - Zoning administrator. 
    The village board shall designate a village official to serve as the zoning administrator and as the administrative enforcement officer for this chapter. The duty of the zoning administrator shall be to interpret and administer this chapter and to issue, after on-site inspection, all permits required by this chapter. The zoning administrator shall further: 
(1)  Maintain records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved, and other official actions; 
(2)  Establish that all necessary permits that are required for floodplain uses by state and federal law have been secured; 
(3)  Inspect all structures, lands, and waters as often as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter; 
(4)  Investigate all complaints made relating to the location of structures and the use of structures, lands, and waters; give notice of all violations of this chapter to the owner, resident, agent, or occupant of the premises; and report uncorrected violations to the village attorney in a manner specified by the village attorney; 
(5)  Prohibit the use or erection of any structure, land, or water until the zoning administrator has approved such use or erection; 
(6)  Request assistance and cooperation from the police department, village engineer, and village attorney as deemed necessary. 
(Code 1998, § 106-47; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-171, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-44. - Role of specific village officials in zoning administration. 
(a)  Plan commission. Under this chapter, the plan commission, together with its other statutory duties, shall make reports and recommendations relating to the plan and development of the village to the village board, other public officials, and other interested organizations and citizens. In general, the plan commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote municipal planning. Under this chapter, its functions are primarily advisory to the village board pursuant to guidelines set forth in this chapter as to various matters and, always, being mindful of the intent and purposes of this chapter. Recommendations shall be in writing. A recording thereof in the commission's minutes shall constitute the required written recommendation. The commission may, in arriving at its recommendation, on occasion of its own volition, conduct its own public hearing. The plan commission shall hold all public hearings for conditional use permit requests. 
(b)  Village board. The village board, the governing body of the village, subject to recommendations by the plan commission and the holding of public hearings by the village board, has authority to make changes and amendments in zoning districts, the zoning map, and supplementary floodplain zoning map and to amend the text of this chapter. The village board may delegate to the plan commission the responsibility to hold some or all public hearings as required under this chapter. 
(c)  Zoning board of appeals. A zoning board of appeals is established to provide an appeal procedure for persons who deem themselves aggrieved by decisions of administrative officers in enforcement of this chapter. See division 3 of this article for additional provisions. 
(Code 1998, § 106-48; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-172, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-45. - Zoning permit. 
(a)  Required. No new structure; new use of land, water, or air; or change in the use of land, water, or air shall be permitted, and no structure or part thereof shall be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, or structurally altered without a zoning permit. Such permit may be consolidated with a building permit request and issuance. 
(b)  Application. Applications for a zoning permit shall be made to the zoning administrator and shall include the following where pertinent and necessary for proper review: 
(1)  Names and addresses of the applicant, the owner of the site, the architect, the professional engineer, and the contractor; 
(2)  Description of the subject site by lot, block, and recorded subdivision or by metes and bounds; the address of the subject site; the type of structure; the existing and proposed operation or use of the structure or site; the number of employees; and the zoning district within which the subject site lies; 
(3)  Plat of survey prepared by a land surveyor registered in the state or other map drawn to scale and showing such of the following as may be required by the zoning administrator: the location, boundaries, dimensions, uses, and size of the subject site; existing and proposed structures; existing and proposed easements, streets, and other public ways; public utilities; off-street parking, loading areas, and driveways; existing highway access restrictions; high water, channel floodways, and floodplain boundaries; and existing and proposed street, side, and rear yards; 
(4)  Additional information as may be required by the zoning administrator or the plan commission or village board. 
(c)  Issuance or denial; term; revocation. 
(1)  A zoning permit shall be granted or denied in writing by the zoning administrator within 30 days of application, and the applicant shall post such permit in a conspicuous place at the site. 
(2)  The zoning permit shall expire within six months unless substantial work has commenced or within 18 months after the issuance of the permit if the structure for which a permit is issued is not substantially completed. If a zoning permit is expired, the applicant shall reapply for a zoning permit before commencing work on the structure. 
(3)  Any permit issued in conflict with this chapter shall be null and void. 
(Code 1998, § 106-49; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-173, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-46. - Certificate of compliance. 
(a)  Required. No vacant land developed; no building erected, relocated, moved, reconstructed, or structurally altered; and no floodlands filled, excavated or developed shall be occupied or used until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the zoning administrator. Such certificate shall show that the structure, premises, or use is in conformity with this chapter. 
(b)  Application. Application shall be made in the same manner as for a zoning permit pursuant to section 133-45 and may be made coincidental with application for a zoning or building permit. Application for a certificate of compliance in a floodplain district shall include certification by a registered professional engineer or land surveyor that the structure fully complies with the floodplain regulations set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  Existing uses. Upon written request from the owner, the zoning administrator shall issue a certificate of compliance for any building or premises existing on November 3, 1997, certifying, after inspection, the extent and kind of use made of the building or premises and whether or not such use conforms to this chapter. 
(d)  Nonconforming uses. 
(1)  No nonconforming use shall be maintained, renewed or changed until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the zoning administrator. 
(2)  Certificates of compliance for the continued occupancy of nonconforming uses existing on November 3, 1997, shall be issued by the zoning administrator, and the certificate shall state that the use is nonconforming and does not conform with this chapter. The zoning administrator shall notify the owner of the property being used as a nonconforming use. 
(Code 1998, § 106-50; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-174, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-47. - Site plan approval. 
(a)  Required. All applications for zoning permits for any construction, reconstruction, expansion, or conversion, except for single-family residences, shall require site plan approval by the plan commission in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Site plans shall include the following: 
(1)  Twenty copies of the site plan and attached narrative, and one electronic copy in PDF format of the site plan and attached narrative. Ten copies of the plan must be full scale plans at a scale of no less than one inch equals 40 feet. The remaining ten copies of the plan can be reproducible 11 inch by 17 inch reductions; 
(2)  Twenty renderings of the front facade showing proposed colors, and one electronic copy in PDF format of the front facade showing proposed colors. Ten of the renderings must be full size at a scale of no less than one inch equals 40 feet. The remaining ten copies can be reproducible 11 inch by 17 inch reductions; 
(3)  Owner's and developer's names and addresses noted; 
(4)  Where applicable, architect's and engineer's names and addresses noted; 
(5)  Date of plan submittal; 
(6)  Scale of drawing, site size (area in square feet or acres), and building area and coverage noted on plan; 
(7)  Existing and proposed topography shown at a contour interval of not less than two feet at National Geodetic Vertical Datum, indicating proposed grade on a preliminary grading plan and location of improvements; 
(8)  All building and yard setback lines indicated; 
(9)  Where applicable, both the 100-year recurrence interval floodplain and the floodway indicated; 
(10)  Where applicable, wetlands as delineated in the WDNR Wetland Inventory and a 75-foot setback line from such wetlands; 
(11)  All drives, curb cuts, and both ingress and egress locations indicated; 
(12)  The location and type of all outdoor lighting proposed to illuminate the site; 
(13)  Total number of parking spaces noted; 
(14)  The type, construction materials, size, and location of all structures with all building dimensions shown; 
(15)  Indicate height of buildings; 
(16)  Existing and proposed street names indicated; 
(17)  Indicate existing and proposed public street rights-of-way and reservations and widths; 
(18)  Indicate and locate all easements on the subject property; 
(19)  North arrow shown; 
(20)  Locate existing and general location of proposed sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains and fire hydrants (existing and proposed), and proposed electrical service easements. In addition, all locations for the proposed connections to such utilities should be indicated on the site plan; 
(21)  Location of any proposed stormwater management facilities, including detention/retention areas; 
(22)  Location of existing trees over six inches in diameter; 
(23)  Note location, extent, and type of proposed landscaping and landscape plantings as well as any proposed buffer areas for adjoining properties; 
(24)  Location of pedestrian sidewalks and walkways; 
(25)  A graphic outline of any development staging that is planned; 
(26)  If the development abuts an existing or planned arterial street or highway, as identified on the village master plan or component thereof, all driveway locations of all adjoining property within 200 feet of the subject property shall be indicated on the site plan; 
(27)  Written project summary including operational information, building schedule, and estimate of project value including all site improvement costs; 
(28)  Architectural front elevation drawings and a description of building materials; 
(29)  Sign plan showing the location, design, and dimensions of all outside signage. Applicants for multi-tenant commercial buildings must provide the key elements of unified signage system for entire building showing the general locations, design and dimensions of future tenant signage; 
(30)  Other data that may be required by either the village staff or village plan commission to review the site plan. 
(b)  Application. The applicant for a zoning permit shall also submit 20 copies of the site plan to the village engineer at least 28 days prior to action by the plan commission, and shall submit one electronic copy in PDF format of the site plan. Plans submitted under this section shall include a minimum of ten plan sets of full-scale plan sheets with sufficient detail to provide all required dimensions and other pertinent information. The remaining ten plan sets may be reductions printed on 11 inch by 17 inch sheets. 
(c)  Reimbursement of consulting and legal fees. The applicant shall reimburse the village for its actual cost of consulting fees associated with the review of the proposed project, including, but not limited to, review by the consulting engineer, planning consultant and legal counsel. 
(d)  Requirements. In acting on any site plan, the plan commission shall consider the following: 
(1)  The appropriateness of the site plan and buildings in relation to the physical character of the site and the usage of adjoining land areas; 
(2)  The layout of the site with regard to entrances and exits to public streets; the arrangement and improvement of interior roadways; the location, adequacy and improvement of areas for parking and for loading and unloading and shall, in this connection, satisfy itself that the traffic pattern generated by the proposed construction or use shall be developed in a manner consistent with the safety of residents and the community, and the applicant shall so design the construction or use as to minimize any traffic hazard created thereby; 
(3)  The adequacy of the proposed water supply, drainage facilities, and sanitary and waste disposal; 
(4)  The landscaping and appearance of the completed site. The plan commission may require that those portions of all front, rear, and side yards not used for off-street parking shall be attractively planted with trees, shrubs, plants, or grass lawns and that the site be effectively screened so as not to impair the value of adjacent properties or impair the intent or purposes of this section; 
(5)  All buildings and structures, except piers and hoists, shall be set back at least 75 feet from the ordinary high water mark of any navigable body of water. Other setbacks may be permitted by the board of appeals in accordance with section 133-98; 
(6)  In acting on any site plan for conversion of a single-family residence to a residential structure for two or more families, the plan commission shall consider the following: 
a.  Provision adequate on-site parking, pursuant to section 133-998; 
b.  Handling of trash and recycling materials; 
c.  Impact on the character of any adjoining single-family residence; 
d.  Impact on the overall neighborhood; 
(7)  Recommendations from an architectural review committee, whose purpose includes promoting orderly and harmonious development in the village and promoting visual environments of high aesthetic quality and variety and which, at the same time, are considerate of each other. 
(e)  Effect on municipal service. Before granting any site approval, the plan commission may, besides obtaining advice from consultants, secure such advice as may be deemed necessary from the village engineer or other municipal officials, with special attention to the effect of such approval upon existing municipal services and utilities. If additional facilities are needed, the plan commission shall forward its recommendations to the village board and shall not issue final approval until the village board has entered into an agreement with the applicant regarding the development of such facilities. 
(f)  Application fee. All applications for site plan review shall be accompanied by payment of a site plan review fee as specified in section 133-49. 
(g)  "Sunset" provision. If a building permit has not been approved for the structure within two years of the date of plan commission approval of the site plan, the site plan approval shall be considered null and void. 
(h)  Exceptions. The zoning administrator may require fewer copies of the site plan and exempt the applicant from providing a colored rendering or other items required in this section for two-family residences and other projects that the zoning administrator deems as minor construction. 
(Code 1998, § 106-51; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-175, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-10, § 2, 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 01-04, §§ 1, 3, 4-2-2001; Ord. No. 03-04, §§ 1-3, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 05-07, § 2, 6-20-2005; Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 09-06, § 11, 7-20-2009; Ord. No. 12-3, §§ 1-5, 5-7-2012) 
Sec. 133-48. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful to use or improve any structure or land or to use water or air in violation of any of the sections of this chapter. For any violation, the village board, the zoning administrator, the plan commission or any property owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation may cause appropriate action or proceedings to be instituted to enjoin a violation of this chapter or cause a structure to be vacated or removed. 
(b)  Remedial action. Whenever an order of the zoning administrator has not been complied with within 30 days after written notice has been mailed to the owner, resident agent, or occupant of the premises, the village board, the zoning administrator, or the village attorney may institute appropriate legal action or proceedings. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with this chapter or any order of the zoning administrator issued in accordance with this chapter or who resists enforcement shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture and such additional penalties as provided for in section 1-32. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. The village shall have any and all other remedies afforded by the state statutes in addition to the forfeitures and costs of prosecution provided for in section 1-32. 
(Code 1998, § 106-52; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-176, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-49. - Fees. 
(a)  Generally. Required fees shall be determined from time to time by the village board. 
(b)  Fees waived for the village. There shall be no fee in the case of proceedings initiated in the public interest by the village board or the plan commission, other agency, or official of the village. 
(c)  Payment of fees. Fees shall be payable at the time applications are filed with the appropriate officer of the village (per the requirements of this title) and are not refundable. 
(Code 1998, § 106-53; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-177, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 11-20-2006; Ord. No. 07-02, § 14, 4-2-2007) 
Secs. 133-50-133-71. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning amendments, Wis. Stats. § 62.07(7)(d)2, (7)(d)2m, (7)(d)3, (7)(d)4. 

Sec. 133-72. - Authority. 
    Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practice requires, the village board may, by ordinance, change the district boundaries established by this chapter and the zoning map incorporated in this chapter and the supplementary floodplain zoning map incorporated in this chapter or may amend, change, or supplement the text of the regulations established by this chapter or amendments thereto. Such change or amendment shall be subject to the review and recommendation of the plan commission. 
(Code 1998, § 106-81; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-180, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-73. - Application. 
    The village board, the plan commission, the zoning board of appeals, and other government bodies and any private petitioners may apply for an amendment to the text of this chapter to the district boundaries hereby established or by amendments to this chapter in the accompanying zoning map made a part of this chapter and the supplementary floodplain zoning map to be made a part of this chapter by reference. 
(Code 1998, § 106-82; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-181, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-74. - Procedure for changes or amendments. 
(a)  Request for changes. Petitions for any change to the zoning district boundaries and maps or amendments to the text shall be addressed to the village board and shall be filed with the zoning administrator. Applicants requesting a change in zoning district boundaries shall submit 20 copies of all required maps, plot plans and other information required by the plan commission, and shall submit one electronic copy in PDF format of the required maps, plot plans and other information required by the plan commission. Maps and plot plans may be submitted in 17 inch by 11 inch format provided that all dimensions and required information is clearly readable. The petition shall describe the premises to be rezoned or the portions of the text to be amended, shall list the reasons justifying the petition, shall specify the proposed use, if applicable, shall specify the proposed use, if applicable, and shall have attached the following, if the petition is for change of district boundaries: 
(1)  Plot plan, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, showing the area proposed to be rezoned, its location, its dimensions, the location and classification of adjacent zoning districts, and the location and existing use of all properties within 300 feet of the area proposed to be rezoned. 
(2)  Owners' names and addresses of all properties lying within 100 feet of the area proposed to be rezoned. 
(3)  Additional information as may be required by the plan commission or village board. 
(b)  Recommendations. The village board or the zoning administrator shall cause the petition to be forwarded to the plan commission for its consideration and recommendation. The plan commission shall review all proposed amendments to the text and zoning maps within the corporate limits and shall recommend in writing that the petition be granted as requested, modified, or denied. A recording of the recommendation in the plan commission's official minutes shall constitute the required written recommendation. In arriving at its recommendation, the commission may on occasion, of its own volition, conduct its own public hearing on proposed amendments. 
(c)  Hearings. 
(1)  The village board, following receipt of recommendation of the plan commission, shall hold a public hearing upon each proposed change or amendment, giving notice of the time, place, and the change or amendment proposed by publication of a class 2 notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985. At least ten days' prior written notice shall also be given to the clerk of any municipality within 1,000 feet of any land to be affected by the proposed change or amendment. Failure to comply with this subsection shall not, however, invalidate any previous or subsequent action on the application. 
(2)  The village board shall hold public hearings as required under this section. 
(d)  Board's action. Following such hearing and after consideration of the plan commission's recommendations, the village board shall vote on the proposed ordinance effecting the proposed change or amendment. 
(e)  Fee. Applications for a zoning district change or an amendment shall be accompanied by payment of a zoning amendment application fee as specified in section 133-49. 
(Code 1998, § 106-83; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-182, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-10, § 3, 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 12-3, § 6, 5-7-2012) 
Sec. 133-75. - Protest. 
    In case of a protest against an amendment proposed to this chapter, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent or more either of the areas of the land included in such proposed amendment, or by the owners of 20 percent or more of the area of the land immediately adjacent extending 100 feet therefrom, or by the owners of 20 percent or more of the land directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of the members of the council voting on the proposed change. 
(Code 1998, § 106-84; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-183, 11-3-1997) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2m. 
Secs. 133-76-133-93. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - APPEALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Appeals, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e)4-(7)(e)8, (7)(e)10, (7)(e)14, (7)(e)15. 

Sec. 133-94. - Appeals to zoning board of appeals. 
(a)  Scope of appeals. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the village affected by any decision of the administrative officer made pursuant to this chapter. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board of appeals by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, together with payment of a board of appeals filing fee as specified in section 133-49. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board of appeals all papers constituting the record of appeals upon which the action appeals from was taken. 
(b)  Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of appeals that, because of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the officer's opinion, cause immediate peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board of appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(c)  Meetings. 
(1)  Open to public. All meetings and hearings of the board of appeals shall be open to the public, except that the board may go into executive session to deliberate after a hearing or an appeal. The final vote on an appeal shall be taken in open session by roll call vote, recorded and open for public inspection in the board's office. Public notice of all regular and special meetings shall be given to the public and news media as required by the state open meeting law. 
(2)  Special meetings. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson and at such other times as the board of appeals may determine. Notice of a special meeting shall be mailed to each member at least 48 hours prior to the time set for the meeting, or announcement of the meeting shall be made at any meeting at which all members are present. 
(3)  Hearings. Hearings may be held at any regular or special meeting at the time set by the chairperson. 
(d)  Powers of board. In addition to the powers enumerated elsewhere in this Code, the board of appeals shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Errors. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator, building inspector, or other administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter or any ordinance adopted under Wis. Stats. § 62.23 or Wis. Stats. ch. 91 (farmland preservation). 
(2)  Variances. To hear and rule on appeals for variances as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, the spirit and purposes of this chapter shall be observed and the public safety, welfare and justice secured. 
(3)  Use of nonconforming lots. To hear and decide applications for use of legal nonconforming lots. 
(4)  Interpretations. To hear and decide application for interpretations of this chapter and the boundaries of the zoning districts after the plan commission has made a review and recommendation. 
(5)  Substitutions. To hear and grant applications for substitution of more restrictive nonconforming uses for existing nonconforming uses, provided no structural alterations are to be made and the plan commission has made a review and recommendation. Whenever the board permits such a substitution, the use may not thereafter be changed without application. 
(6)  Unclassified uses. To hear and grant applications for unclassified and unspecified uses, provided that such uses are similar in character to the principal uses permitted in the district and the plan commission has made a review and recommendation. 
(7)  Temporary uses. To hear and grant applications for temporary uses in any district, provided that such uses are of a temporary nature, do not involve the erection of a substantial structure, and are compatible with the neighboring uses and the plan commission has made a review and recommendation. The permit shall be temporary, revocable, subject to any condition required by the board of zoning appeals, and shall be issued for a period not to exceed 12 months. Compliance with all other sections of this chapter shall be required. 
(e)  Board action. In exercising the powers under subsection (d) of this section, the board of appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. 
(f)  Voting. 
(1)  Personal interest. No board of appeals member shall participate in the decision of or vote upon any case in which the member is financially interested, directly or indirectly, but the chairperson shall direct an alternate member to act instead. Disqualification of a member for interest shall not decrease the number of votes required for acting upon any matter, but such member may be counted in determining whether a quorum is present for the transaction of business. 
(2)  Record of vote. The secretary shall record the vote of each member on every question in the minutes or, if the member is absent or fails to vote, shall indicate such fact in the record of the proceedings. 
(Code 1998, § 106-111; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-190, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-95. - Applications for hearings. 
(a)  Time of appeal. The date of receipt of a decision shall not be counted in delineating the time for filing of the appeal to the board of appeals. Sundays and holidays shall be counted, except if the last day falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the time for filing shall be extended to the next secular day. 
(b)  Persons who may appeal. Appeals or applications to the board of appeals may be made by: 
(1)  The owner, mortgagee, purchaser under a land contract, optionee or occupant under a written lease for one year or more of the property for which relief is sought; 
(2)  Any officer (other than the zoning administrator), department, board, or bureau affected by a decision or order of the zoning administrator; 
(3)  Any person aggrieved and whose use and enjoyment of property within the village is directly and adversely affected by a decision or order of the building inspector, zoning administrator, or the requested board action. 
(c)  Appeal and application forms. Every appeal or application shall be made upon forms furnished by the village administrator that have been approved by the board of appeals. A scale drawing shall accompany each form showing the location and size of the property, existing improvements, all abutting properties and improvements thereon, and change or addition requested. The applicant or appellant shall provide all information requested on the form and any additional information requested in writing by the chairperson or secretary of the board of appeals that is necessary to inform the board of the facts of the appeal. Failure to supply such information shall be grounds for dismissal of the appeal or application. 
(d)  Filing appeal or application. The appellant or applicant shall file the required appeal form in duplicate with the village administrator. The village administrator shall deliver one copy to the zoning administrator or other officer or body from whose decision an appeal is taken. Upon receipt of an appeal, the zoning administrator or other officer or body responsible for the original determination shall transmit to the secretary of the board of appeals all notes or papers relating to the order or decision from which the appeal is being taken. 
(e)  Election to have appeal or application handled as contested case. The applicant or appellant may elect to have the appeal or application handled as a contested case. The appeal or application form shall explain that a contested case includes the right of all parties to cross examine witnesses, to object to improper evidence, and to have a record of the proceedings made by a court reporter or qualified stenographer or by tape recording. Election to have the matter treated as a contested case must be made in writing at the time of filing of the appeal or application. 
(f)  Fee. All appeals and applications filed with the village administrator shall be accompanied by payment of the board of appeals filing fee as specified in section 133-49. If the appellant or applicant elects the contested-case method, the appellant or applicant shall also pay the amount determined by the board of appeals to cover the additional administrative costs involved. 
(Code 1998, § 106-112; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-191, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-96. - Hearings. 
(a)  Notice of hearing. Under this chapter notice of the time, date and place of the hearing of an appeal or application shall be given in the following manner: 
(1)  By mail or personal service to the appellant or applicant and to the zoning administrator or other administrative official or body from whose decision an appeal is taken and to the secretary of the plan commission not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing; 
(2)  In every case involving a variance, conditional use, exception, PUD, or public utility exception, the village administrator shall mail notice to the owners of record of all land within the area included in the application and within 100 feet of any part of the building or premises affected not less than ten days prior to the hearing. Names and last known addresses of such owners shall be furnished by the applicant at the time of filing the appeal or application; 
(3)  By publication of a class 2 notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985; 
(4)  Notice of an application for construction of a building in the bed of a future street, highway, or parkway shall be published in the official newspaper not less than 15 days prior to the hearing; 
(b)  Time of hearing docketing. Each appeal or application properly filed shall be numbered serially, docketed in a special book provided therefor, and placed upon the calendar by the secretary of the board of appeals. Cases docketed more than 15 days preceding a regular meeting shall be set for hearing at such meeting. Cases docketed seven days or less prior to a regular meeting shall be scheduled by the secretary or the secretary's designee for a hearing on the second regular meeting day thereafter, unless otherwise directed by the chairperson. 
(c)  Appearances. The appellant or applicant may appear in person or by the appellant's or applicant's agent or attorney. In the absence of an appearance for or against an appeal or application, the board of appeals may dismiss the appeal or application or may dispose of the matter on the record before it. 
(d)  Oath. Unless waived by the appellant or applicant and the chairperson, all witnesses shall be sworn before testifying by the chairperson or presiding officer. 
(e)  Compelling attendance of witness. The chairperson or, in the chairperson's absence, the presiding officer may compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. Written request for subpoenas shall be filed with the secretary of the board of appeals not less than two days prior to the hearing except by special permission of the chairperson. 
(f)  Order of hearing. Appeals and applications shall be heard in numerical order except for good cause shown. 
(g)  Order of business. 
(1)  General hearing. At the hearing, the order of business shall be as follows: 
a.  Statement of the nature of the case by the chairperson; 
b.  Appellant's side of the case; 
c.  Questions by board members; 
d.  Zoning administrator's side of the case; 
e.  Questions by board members; 
f.  Statements by interested persons such as neighbors or abutting landowners; 
g.  Questions by board members; 
h.  Appellant's or applicant's rebuttal. 
(2)  Contested cases. If the applicant or appellant elects to have the applicant's or appellant's appeal or application treated as a contested case, the order of business shall be as follows: 
a.  Call to order by the chairperson; 
b.  Appellant's or applicant's opening statement; 
c.  Zoning administrator's opening statement; 
d.  Opening statement of persons aggrieved and other interested parties. The right to make an opening statement is limited to persons who will present evidence; 
e.  Applicant's or appellant's case-in-chief; 
f.  Questions by board members; 
g.  Cross examination. No more than one person for each party shall cross examine witnesses. The chairperson may limit the number of parties who may cross examine; 
h.  Zoning administrator's case-in-chief; 
i.  Questions by board members; 
j.  Cross examination as under subsection (g)(2)g of this section; 
k.  Case-in-chief of other parties; 
l.  Questions by board members; 
m.  Rebuttal by appellant or applicant. Rebuttal is limited to matters raised by the adverse parties by way of evidence or argument; 
n.  Statements of opinion of neighbors or abutting landowners, not subject to cross examination; 
o.  Closing statements of those who made or waived opening statements. 
(h)  Evidence and official notice. Except in contested case hearings, written and oral testimony will be received. In contested case hearings, no hearsay evidence will be allowed or relied upon as the sole evidence of any factual determination. The board of appeals may take official notice of the village ordinances, the zoning and location of the subject property, and geographical features or other facts that are common knowledge in the village or can be verified by reference to public record. In contested case hearings, all witnesses shall be sworn, and no person shall be permitted to testify unless such person submits to cross examination. 
(i)  Adjournments. When all appeals or applications cannot be disposed of on the day set, the board of appeals may adjourn from day to day or to a day certain, as it may order, and such adjourned day shall be construed as a continuance of the hearing. Notice of such adjournment shall be given to the absent members of the board of appeals. 
(j)  Withdrawal. An appellant or applicant may withdraw an appeal at any time prior to the decision, but a pending motion to grant or dismiss the appeal shall have precedence over withdrawal. Withdrawal of the appeal shall not entitle the appellant or applicant to remission of the filing fee. 
(Code 1998, § 106-113; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-192, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-97. - Decision and disposition of cases. 
(a)  Time of decision. Under this division, the board of appeals shall render its decision either at the termination of the hearing or within 30 days thereafter and shall notify the parties in interest and the zoning administrator in writing of its decision. 
(b)  Form of decision. The final disposition of an appeal or application shall be in the form of a written decision or order signed by the chairperson and secretary of the board of appeals. Such decision shall state the reasons for the board's determination with findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part; dismiss the appeal; or grant or deny the special exception, conditional use or variance. Copies of the decision shall be sent to the applicant, the village administrator, the secretary of the plan commission and any village committee involved. 
(c)  Basis of decision; findings. At the conclusion of a hearing, the board should reduce to writing its findings of fact and conclusions of law regarding the proper interpretation and application of this chapter. 
(d)  Conditions. Variances or conditions imposed in any permit shall be stated in the decision or order embodying the board's decision and shall also be set forth in the building, conditional use, or occupancy permit issued under that order by the zoning administrator. A permit shall be valid only as long as the conditions upon which it is granted are observed. Whenever the board grants an application or appeal affecting the use of any premises, such authorization shall be deemed revoked unless the owner, occupant or the owner's or occupant's agent shall, upon request, file with the board secretary a written report certifying that all conditions or limitations imposed by the board have been conformed to and maintained. Variances, substitutions, or conditional use permits approved by the board shall expire in six months after issuance if the performance of work is required and substantial work has not commenced. 
(e)  Filing of decision. Every order or decision of the board of appeals shall be immediately filed with the secretary, who shall thereupon forward the decision to the village administrator and mail a copy to the applicant or appellant. Copies of decisions granting conditional uses or variances in a floodplain district shall be mailed to the district office of the state department of natural resources. 
(f)  Reconsideration. 
(1)  Resubmission. No appeal or application that has been dismissed or denied shall be considered again without material alteration or revision within one year of the board's decision, except pursuant to court order or by motion to reconsider made by a member voting with the majority or as provided in subsection (f)(2) of this section; 
(2)  Rehearing. No rehearing shall be held except upon the affirmative vote of four or more members of the board upon finding that substantial new evidence is submitted that could not reasonably have been presented at the previous hearing. Requests for rehearing shall be in writing, shall state the reasons for the request, and shall be accompanied by necessary data and diagrams. Rehearing shall be subject to the same notice requirements as original hearings. 
(Code 1998, § 106-114; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-193, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-98. - Variances. 
(a)  Purpose. A request for a variance to this chapter may be made when an aggrieved party can submit proof that strict adherence to this chapter would cause such aggrieved party undue hardship or create conditions causing greater harmful effects than the initial condition. A variance granted to a nonconforming use brings that use into conformance with the district and zoning requirements. 
(b)  Application and procedure for variances. 
(1)  The application for a variance shall be filed pursuant to section 133-95; 
(2)  The board of appeals may authorize, in specific cases, such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done. No variance shall have the effect of allowing any uses prohibited in that district or permit standards lower than those required by state law. 
(c)  Public hearing of application. The public hearing for a variance shall be conducted pursuant to section 133-96. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Action of the board of appeals; standards. For the board of appeals, it must find that: 
(1)  Denial of variance may result in hardship to the property owner due to physical conditions unique to the site. There must be exceptional, extraordinary, or unusual circumstances or conditions applying to the lot or parcel, structure, use, or intended use that do not apply generally to other properties or uses in the same district and the granting of the variance would not be of so general or recurrent nature as to suggest that this chapter should be changed; 
(2)  The conditions upon which a petition for a variance is based are unique to the property for which variance is being sought and that such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by other properties in the same district and same vicinity; 
(3)  The purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a desire to increase the value or income potential of the property; 
(4)  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located; 
(5)  The proposed variance will not undermine the spirit and general and specific purposes of this chapter, specifically the standards of section 133-936. 
(f)  Conditions. The board of appeals may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variance as may be necessary to comply with the standards established in this section. 
(Code 1998, § 106-115; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-194, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 01-02, §§ 1, 2, 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 12-3, § 7, 5-7-2012) 
Sec. 133-99. - Review by court of record. 
    Any person, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board of appeals, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the village, may, within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board of appeals, commence an action seeking the remedy available by certiorari. The court shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but may, on application, on notice to the board of appeals and on due cause shown, grant a restraining order. The board of appeals shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it, but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof. If necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, the court may take evidence, or appoint a referee to take evidence and report findings of fact and conclusions of law as it directs, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the court shall be made. The court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify, the decision brought up for review. 
(Code 1998, § 106-116; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-195, 11-3-1997) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e)10. 
Secs. 133-100-133-126. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 133-127. - Establishment of districts. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, provision is made for the division of the village into the following basic zoning districts: 
A-1E Exclusive agriculture district A-1 Agricultural/holding district R-1 Single-family residential district R-2 Single-family residential district R-3 Two-family residential district R-3D Downtown residential district R-4 Limited multifamily residential district R-5 Multifamily residential district O-1 Limited office-residence district O-2 Business and professional office district O-3 Administrative office and research and development district C-1D Downtown commercial district C-1 General commercial district C-2 Highway commercial district I-1 Light industrial district I-2 Heavy industrial district AP-1 Airport district CON Conservancy district PUD Planned unit development district G-1 Institutional district CR-5ac Countryside residential district ER-1 Estate residential district SR-4 Suburban residential district S-1 Senior housing district  
(Code 1998, § 106-146; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-20, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 10-10, §1, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 133-128. - Effect of vacation of streets; annexations. 
(a)  Vacation of streets. Vacation of public streets and alleys shall cause the land vacated to be automatically placed in the same zoning district as the abutting side to which the vacated land reverts. 
(b)  Annexations. Annexations to or consolidations with the village subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derived shall be placed in the A-1 Agricultural/Holding District, unless the annexation ordinance places the land in another district. 
(Code 1998, § 106-147; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-21, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-129. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  The village is divided into zoning districts as shown upon a map designated as the official zoning map of the village and made a part of this chapter. The official zoning map dated November 5, 2010, and all of the notations, references and other information shown thereon are a part of this chapter and shall have the same force and effect as if the matters and information set forth by such map were fully described in this section. The official zoning map shall be properly attested and kept on file along with the text of the official zoning regulations in the office of the zoning administrator. 
(b)  The district boundaries shall be determined by measurement from and as shown on the official zoning map, and if any question occurs as to the interpretation of such boundary lines, the plan commission shall interpret the map according to the reasonable intent of this chapter. Unless otherwise specifically indicated or dimensioned on the map, the district boundaries are normally lot lines; section, quarter section or sixteenth section lines; or the centerlines of streets, highways, railways or alleys. 
(Code 1998, § 106-148; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-22, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-22, § 1, 12-6-1999; Ord. No. 10-10, § 4, 8-16-2010) 
Secs. 133-130-133-156. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - A-1E EXCLUSIVE AGRICULTURE DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-157. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purposes of the A-1E Exclusive Agriculture District are to preserve productive agricultural land for food and fiber production; preserve productive farms by preventing land use conflicts between incompatible uses and controlling public service costs; maintain a viable agricultural base to support agricultural processing and service industries; prevent conflicts between incompatible uses; reduce costs for providing service to scattered nonfarm uses; pace and shape urban growth; implement the provisions of the county agricultural plan when adopted and periodically revised; and comply with the provisions of the farmland preservation law to permit eligible landowners to receive tax credits under Wis. Stats. § 71.09(11). 
(b)  The A-1E district is generally intended to apply to lands in productive farm operations including lands historically exhibiting good crop yields or capable of such yields; lands that have been demonstrated to be productive for dairying, livestock raising, and grazing; other lands that are integral parts of such farm operations; land used for the production of specialty crops such as mint, sod, fruits and vegetables; and lands that are capable of productive use through economically feasible improvements such as irrigation. 
(Code 1998, § 106-176; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-23(a), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-158. - Permitted uses and structures. 
    Permitted uses and structures in the A-1E Exclusive Agriculture District are as follows: 
(1)  Apiculture; 
(2)  Dairying; 
(3)  Floriculture; 
(4)  Forestry; 
(5)  General farming; 
(6)  Grazing; 
(7)  Greenhouses; 
(8)  Hatcheries; 
(9)  Horticulture; 
(10)  Livestock raising; 
(11)  Nurseries; 
(12)  Orchards; 
(13)  Paddocks; 
(14)  Pasturage; 
(15)  Poultry raising; 
(16)  Stables; 
(17)  Truck farming; 
(18)  Viticulture; 
(19)  Utility services and small-scale electric generating stations not requiring approval under Wis. Stats. § 196.941; 
(20)  Structures and improvements consistent with agricultural uses; 
(21)  Residence for farm owner/operator. Substantial income must be derived from the farm operation; 
(22)  Secondary farm residences that are occupied by a person who, or a family at least one member of which, earns a substantial part of such member's livelihood from farm operations on the farm; 
(23)  Rental of existing or secondary residences no longer utilized in the operation of the farm; 
(24)  Day care for not more than eight children; 
(25)  The seasonal storage of recreational equipment and motor vehicles owned by private individuals other than those residing on the premises, such storage to be in existing accessory farm buildings. The storage of a dealer's inventory or the construction of any new buildings for storage shall be considered a commercial use and subject to the commercial zoning provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 106-177; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-23(b), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-159. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the A-1E Exclusive Agriculture District are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings occupied by parents or children of the farm operator, and including dependency living arrangements; 
(2)  Golf courses; 
(3)  Governmental uses; 
(4)  Communications transmitting towers, receiving towers, relay or microwave towers; 
(5)  Utilities facilities and substations; 
(6)  Agricultural buildings and high density animal enclosures within 300 feet of any residential district. High density shall be defined as such concentrations of animals that will not allow usual plant (sod) growth in a fenced area; 
(7)  Roadside produce stands, where such produce is produced on the farm premises; 
(8)  Home occupations as defined in section 133-943. 
(Code 1998, § 106-178; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-23(c), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-160. - Height and area requirements. 
    Height and area requirements in the A-1E Exclusive Agriculture District are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. The maximum building height for the principal residential building shall be 35 feet; for a detached nonagricultural accessory building, the height shall be 15 feet. Detached agricultural accessory buildings or structures do not have a height limitation; 
(2)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 35 acres; 
(3)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 150 feet; 
(4)  Setbacks. Setbacks shall be as follows: 
a.  Front yard setback, 40 feet; 
b.  Rear yard setback, principal building, 100 feet; 
c.  Side yard setback, principal building, 100 feet; 
d.  Side and rear yard, accessory building, three feet on each side. 
(Code 1998, § 106-179; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-23(d), 11-3-1997) 
Secs. 133-161-133-188. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - A-1 AGRICULTURAL/HOLDING DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-189. - Intent. 
    The A-1 Agricultural/Holding District is intended to provide a district for the continuation of general farming and related uses in those areas of the village that are not yet committed to urban development. It is further intended for this district to protect lands contained therein from urban development until their orderly transition into urban-oriented districts is required. 
(Code 1998, § 106-206; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-24(a), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-190. - Permitted uses. 
    Permitted uses in the A-1 Agricultural/Holding District are general farming, including agriculture, floriculture, forestry, grazing, hay, orchards, truck farming and viticulture (grape growing); provided, however, that farm buildings housing animals, barnyards and feedlots shall be located at least 100 feet from any navigable water or district boundary. 
(Code 1998, § 106-207; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-24(b), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-191. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    Permitted accessory uses in the A-1 Agricultural/Holding District are as follows: 
(1)  Attached or detached private garages and carports accessory to permitted uses; 
(2)  General farm buildings including barns, silos, sheds, storage bins and including not more than one in-season roadside stand for the sale of farm products produced on the premises. Any such stand shall conform to the setback, sign and other provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 106-208; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-24(c), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-192. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the A-1 Agricultural/Holding District are as follows: 
(1)  Airports, airstrips and landing fields provided that the site is not less than 20 acres; 
(2)  Commercial feedlots, livestock sales facilities and fur farms; 
(3)  Drive-in establishments selling fruits and vegetables throughout the year; 
(4)  Bed and breakfast establishments; 
(5)  Housing for farm laborers and seasonal or migratory farm workers; 
(6)  Communications transmitting towers, receiving towers, relay or microwave towers; 
(7)  Utilities facilities and substations; 
(8)  Veterinary clinics, provided that no structure or animal enclosure shall be located closer than 100 feet to a property boundary; 
(9)  Home occupations pursuant to section 133-943; 
(10)  Dog kennels; 
(11)  Golf courses; 
(12)  Churches or other places of indoor religious assembly; 
(13)  Non-metallic mining, subject to village review and approval pursuant to chapter 26, article IV, if applicable; 
(14)  Landscape and nursery products, with no outside storage except for plant materials and nursery stock; 
(15)  Building and construction contractors, provided all supplies and equipment are stored indoors. 
(Code 1998, § 106-209; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-24(d), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-10, § 4, 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 10-14, § 1, 12-20-2010) 
Sec. 133-193. - Height and area requirements. 
    Height and area requirements in the A-1 Agricultural/Holding District are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. The maximum building height of the principal residential building shall be 35 feet; for a detached nonagricultural accessory building, the height shall be 15 feet. Detached agricultural accessory buildings or structures do not have a height limitation; 
(2)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be five acres; 
(3)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 150 feet; 
(4)  Setbacks. Setbacks shall be as follows: 
a.  Front yard setback, 35 feet; 
b.  Rear yard setback, principal building, 25 feet; 
c.  Side yard, principal building, nine feet on each side; 
d.  Side and rear yard, accessory building, three feet on each side. 
(Code 1998, § 106-210; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-24(e), 11-3-1997) 
Secs. 133-194-133-224. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-225. - Intent. 
    The R-1 Single-Family Residential District is intended to provide a district for low-density single-family residential development and to restrict the development of uses that generate high volumes of noise and traffic. The R-1 district is intended to provide a quiet, pleasant and relatively spacious living area protected from traffic hazards and intrusion of incompatible land uses. This district is particularly well-suited for newly platted lots. 
(Code 1998, § 106-241; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-25(a), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-226. - Permitted uses. 
    Permitted uses in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings, including dependency living arrangements; 
(2)  Community living arrangements serving eight or fewer persons and which are located at least 2,500 feet from the nearest community living arrangement facility; 
(3)  Family day care home, unlicensed, as permitted by law, or licensed up to eight children at any one time, with no employees. 
(Code 1998, § 106-242; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-25(b), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-227. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Communications transmitting towers, receiving towers, relay or microwave towers; 
(2)  Utilities facilities and substations; 
(3)  Boardinghouses; 
(4)  Cemeteries; 
(5)  Churches or other places of indoor religious assembly; 
(6)  Community living arrangement facilities serving eight or fewer persons and which are located closer than 2,500 feet from the nearest community living arrangement facility; 
(7)  Farms; 
(8)  Golf courses; 
(9)  Landscape nursery or orchard, provided no office or store is maintained on the premises; 
(10)  Single-family attached dwellings; 
(11)  Bed and breakfast establishments; 
(12)  Home occupations pursuant to section 133-943; 
(13)  One airplane hangar when the property adjoins an airport and has direct access to a runway. 
(Code 1998, § 106-243; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-25(c), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-228. - Permitted accessory buildings and uses. 
    Permitted accessory buildings and uses in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District, subject to section 133-11(2), are as follows: 
(1)  One private garage; 
(2)  One accessory building; 
(3)  Any of the following accessory uses: 
a.  One private swimming pool; 
b.  One private tennis court; 
c.  One children's play structure; 
d.  One detached satellite antenna/dish; 
e.  One detached solar structure. 
(Code 1998, § 106-244; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-25(d), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 98-15, § 2, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 133-229. - Height and area requirements. 
    Height and area requirements in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. The maximum building height of the principal building shall be 35 feet; for a detached accessory building, the height shall be 15 feet. 
(2)  Setbacks. Setbacks shall be as follows: 
a.  Front yard, 20 feet; 
b.  Rear yard, principal building, 20 feet; 
c.  Side yard, principal building, six feet on each side; 12 feet total; 
d.  Side and rear yard, accessory building, three feet on each side. 
(3)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be 9,500 square feet. 
(4)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 90 feet. 
(5)  Minimum floor area. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall be 1,200 square feet. 
(Code 1998, § 106-245; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-25(e), 11-3-1997) 
Secs. 133-230-133-251. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-252. - Intent. 
    The R-2 Single-Family Residential District is intended to provide a district for residential development for single-family homes similar in character to the R-1 district but of higher density and permitting small lots and smaller homes. This district may be used for zoning older areas of the village. 
(Code 1998, § 106-276; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-26(a), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-253. - Permitted uses. 
    Permitted uses in the R-2 Single-Family Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings, including dependency living arrangements; 
(2)  Community living arrangements serving eight or fewer persons and which are located at least 2,500 feet from the nearest community living arrangement facility; 
(3)  Family day care homes, unlicensed, as permitted by law, or licensed up to eight children at any one time, with no employees. 
(Code 1998, § 106-277; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-26(b), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-254. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the R-2 Single-Family Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Communications transmitting towers, receiving towers, relay or microwave towers; 
(2)  Utilities facilities and substations; 
(3)  Cemeteries; 
(4)  Boardinghouses; 
(5)  Churches or other places of indoor religious assembly; 
(6)  Community living arrangement facilities serving eight or fewer persons and which are located closer than 2,500 feet from the nearest community living arrangement facility; 
(7)  Farms; 
(8)  Golf courses; 
(9)  Landscape nurseries or orchards, provided no office or store is maintained on the premises; 
(10)  Single-family attached dwellings; 
(11)  Bed and breakfast establishments; 
(12)  Home occupations pursuant to section 133-943; 
(13)  One satellite antenna/dish. 
(Code 1998, § 106-278; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-26(c), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-255. - Permitted accessory buildings and uses. 
    Permitted accessory buildings and uses in the R-2 Single-Family Residential District, subject to section 133-11(2), are as follows: 
(1)  One private garage; 
(2)  One accessory building; 
(3)  Any of the following accessory uses: 
a.  One private swimming pool; 
b.  One private tennis court; 
c.  One children's play structure; 
d.  One detached satellite antenna/dish; 
e.  One detached solar structure. 
(Code 1998, § 106-279; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-26(d), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 98-15, § 3, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 133-256. - Height and area requirements. 
    Height and area requirements in the R-2 Single-Family Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. The maximum building height for the principal building shall be 35 feet; for a detached accessory building, the height shall be 15 feet. 
(2)  Setbacks. Setbacks shall be as follows: 
a.  Front yard, 20 feet; 
b.  Rear yard, principal building, 20 feet; 
c.  Side yard, principal building, six feet on each side; 12 feet total; 
d.  Side and rear yard, accessory building, three feet on each side. 
(3)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be 8,500 square feet. 
(4)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 70 feet. 
(Code 1998, § 106-280; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-26(e), 11-3-1997) 
Secs. 133-257-133-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - R-3 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-276. - Intent. 
    The purpose of the R-3 Two-Family Residential District is to provide a district for low-density development containing single-family and two-family dwelling units. It is also intended that uses generating noise and high traffic volumes be restricted. 
(Code 1998, § 106-311; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-27(a), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-277. - Permitted uses. 
    Permitted uses in the R-3 Two-Family Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings, including dependency living arrangements; 
(2)  Two-family dwelling units; 
(3)  Community living arrangements serving eight or fewer persons and which are located at least 2,500 feet from the nearest community living arrangement facility; 
(4)  Family day care homes. 
(Code 1998, § 106-312; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-27(b), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-278. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the R-3 Two-Family Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Communications transmitting towers, receiving towers, relay or microwave towers; 
(2)  Utilities facilities and substations; 
(3)  Cemetery; 
(4)  Boardinghouses; 
(5)  Churches or other places of indoor religious assembly; 
(6)  Community living arrangement facilities serving eight or fewer persons and which are located closer than 2,500 feet from the nearest community living arrangement facility; 
(7)  Day care center/preschool, provided that the maximum capacity per building shall not exceed 20, and in addition to other conditions that may be stipulated upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance or operation of such a facility pursuant to article V of this chapter, the facility shall include safe and adequately sized parking and loading/unloading areas, fences and play areas; 
(8)  Farm; 
(9)  Golf course; 
(10)  Landscape nursery or orchard, provided no office or store is maintained on premises; 
(11)  Home occupations pursuant to section 133-943; 
(12)  One satellite antenna/dish. 
(Code 1998, § 106-313; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-27(c), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-279. - Permitted accessory buildings and uses. 
    Permitted accessory buildings and uses in the R-3 Two-Family Residential District, subject to section 133-11(2), are as follows: 
(1)  One private garage; 
(2)  One accessory building; 
(3)  Any of the following accessory uses: 
a.  One private swimming pool; 
b.  One private tennis court; 
c.  One children's play structure; 
d.  One detached satellite antenna/dish; 
e.  One detached solar structure. 
(Code 1998, § 106-314; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-27(d), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 98-15, § 4, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 133-280. - Height and area requirements. 
    Height and area requirements in the R-3 Two-Family Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. The maximum building height for the principal building shall be 35 feet; for a detached accessory building, the height shall be 15 feet. 
(2)  Setbacks. Setbacks shall be as follows: 
a.  Front yard, 20 feet; 
b.  Rear yard, principal building, 20 feet; 
c.  Side yard, principal building, six feet on each side; 12 feet total; 
d.  Side and rear yard, accessory building, three feet on each side. 
(3)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be 6,000 square feet. 
(4)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 80 feet. 
(Code 1998, § 106-315; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-27(e), 11-3-1997) 
Secs. 133-281-133-308. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - R-3D DOWNTOWN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-309. - Intent. 
    The purpose of the R-3D Downtown Residential District is to provide a district for low-density development containing single-family dwelling units and, as conditional uses, two-family dwelling units. It is also intended that uses generating noise and high traffic volumes be restricted. 
(Code 1998, § 106-331; Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 133-310. - Permitted uses. 
    Permitted uses in the R-3D Downtown Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings, including dependency living arrangements; 
(2)  Community living arrangements serving eight or fewer persons and which are located at least 2,500 feet from the nearest community living arrangement facility; 
(3)  Family day care homes. 
(Code 1998, § 106-332; Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 133-311. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the R-3D Downtown Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Two-family dwelling units; 
(2)  Communications transmitting towers, receiving towers, relay or microwave towers; 
(3)  Utilities facilities and substations; 
(4)  Cemetery; 
(5)  Boardinghouses; 
(6)  Churches or other places of indoor religious assembly; 
(7)  Community living arrangement facilities serving eight or fewer persons and which are located closer than 2,500 feet from the nearest community living arrangement facility; 
(8)  Day care center/preschool, provided that the maximum capacity per building shall not exceed 20, and in addition to other conditions that may be stipulated upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance or operation of such a facility pursuant to article V of this chapter, the facility shall include safe and adequately sized parking and loading/unloading areas, fences and play areas; 
(9)  Farm; 
(10)  Golf course; 
(11)  Landscape nursery or orchard, provided no office or store is maintained on premises; 
(12)  Home occupations pursuant to section 133-943; 
(13)  One satellite antenna/dish. 
(Code 1998, § 106-333; Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 133-312. - Permitted accessory buildings and uses. 
    Permitted accessory buildings and uses in the R-3D Downtown Residential District, subject to subsection 133-11(2), are as follows: 
(1)  One private garage; 
(2)  One accessory building; 
(3)  Any of the following accessory uses: 
a.  One private swimming pool; 
b.  One private tennis court; 
c.  One children's play structure; 
d.  One detached satellite antenna/dish; 
e.  One detached solar structure. 
(Code 1998, § 106-334; Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 133-313. - Height and area requirements. 
    Height and area requirements in the R-3D Downtown Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. The maximum building height for the principal building shall be 35 feet; for a detached accessory building, the height shall be 15 feet. 
(2)  Setbacks. Setbacks shall be as follows: 
a.  Front yard, 20 feet; 
b.  Rear yard, principal building, 20 feet; 
c.  Side yard, principal building, six feet on each side; 12 feet total; 
d.  Side and rear yard, accessory building, three feet on each side. 
(3)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be 6,000 square feet. 
(4)  Minimum lot width. The minimum width shall be 80 feet. 
(Code 1998, § 106-335; Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 8-16-2010) 
Secs. 133-314-133-344. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - R-4 LIMITED MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-345. - Intent. 
    The purpose of the R-4 Limited Multifamily Residential District is to provide a district for multifamily residences in buildings with no more than eight dwelling units. Such areas are generally located on the fringes of one-family and two-family residential neighborhoods. Uses that generate high volumes of traffic, noise and other disruptions are generally restricted. 
(Code 1998, § 106-346; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-28(a), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-346. - Permitted uses. 
    Permitted uses in the R-4 Limited Multifamily Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Multifamily dwellings not to exceed more than eight units in size; 
(2)  Community living arrangement serving 15 or fewer persons and which are located at least 2,500 feet from the nearest community living arrangement facility. 
(Code 1998, § 106-347; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-28(b), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-347. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the R-4 Limited Multifamily Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Communications transmitting towers, receiving towers, relay or microwave towers; 
(2)  Utilities facilities and substations; 
(3)  Boardinghouses; 
(4)  Churches or other places of indoor religious assembly; 
(5)  Community living arrangement facilities serving more than 15 persons or other community living arrangements which are located closer than 2,500 feet from the nearest community living arrangement; 
(6)  Day care center/preschool, provided that, in addition to other conditions that may be stipulated upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance or operation of such a facility pursuant to article V of this chapter, the facility shall include safe and adequately sized parking and loading/unloading areas, fences and play areas; 
(7)  Hospitals; 
(8)  One satellite antenna/dish; 
(9)  Efficiency apartments. 
(Code 1998, § 106-348; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-28(c), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-348. - Permitted accessory buildings and uses. 
    Permitted accessory buildings and uses in the R-4 Limited Multifamily Residential District, subject to section 133-11(2), are as follows: 
(1)  One private garage; 
(2)  One accessory building; 
(3)  Any of the following accessory uses: 
a.  One private swimming pool; 
b.  One private tennis court; 
c.  One children's play structure; 
d.  One detached satellite antenna/dish; 
e.  One detached solar structure. 
(Code 1998, § 106-349; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-28(d), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 98-15, § 5, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 133-349. - Height and area requirements. 
    Height and area requirements in the R-4 Limited Multifamily Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. The maximum building height for the principal building shall be 45 feet; for a detached accessory building, the height shall be 20 feet. 
(2)  Setbacks. Setbacks shall be as follows: 
a.  Front yard setback, 30 feet; 
b.  Rear yard setback, 40 feet; 
c.  Side yards, principal building, shall be as follows: 
1.  Twelve feet on each side for a building 20 feet or under in height; 
2.  Eighteen feet on each side for a building over 20 feet and less than 35 feet in height; 
3.  Thirty feet on each side for a building 35 feet or over in height; 
d.  Side and rear yard, accessory building, three feet on each side. 
(3)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 8,000 square feet: 
a.  First unit, 4,000 square feet; 
b.  Each additional one-bedroom unit, 1,000 square feet; 
c.  Each additional two-bedroom unit, 2,000 square feet; 
d.  Each additional three-bedroom unit, 3,000 square feet. 
(4)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 80 feet. 
(5)  Minimum separation distance. On lots with more than one building, there shall be a minimum separation distance between buildings equal to the sum of the required side yards for each building. 
(6)  Minimum green area. Minimum green area shall be 40 percent. 
(Code 1998, § 106-350; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-28(e), 11-3-1997) 
Secs. 133-350-133-371. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - R-5 MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-372. - Intent. 
    The purpose of the R-5 Multifamily Residential District is to provide a district for high-density residential development that is readily accessible to thoroughfares, shopping and employment. The R-5 district is intended to provide a multifamily residential area that is pleasant but that allows buildings with over eight dwelling units. 
(Code 1998, § 106-381; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-29(a), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-373. - Permitted uses. 
    Permitted uses in the R-5 Multifamily Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Multifamily dwellings; 
(2)  Charitable institutions and private, nonprofit clubs and lodges; 
(3)  Community living arrangement facilities serving 15 or fewer persons and which are located at least 2,500 feet from the nearest community living arrangement facility. 
(Code 1998, § 106-382; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-29(b), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-374. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the R-5 Multifamily Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Communications transmitting towers, receiving towers, relay or microwave towers; 
(2)  Utilities facilities and substations; 
(3)  Boardinghouses; 
(4)  Churches or other places of indoor religious assembly; 
(5)  Community living arrangement facilities serving more than 15 persons or other community living arrangements which are located closer than 2,500 feet from the nearest community living arrangement; 
(6)  Day care centers/preschools, provided that, in addition to other conditions that may be stipulated upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance or operation of such a facility pursuant to article V of this chapter, the facility shall include safe and adequately sized parking and loading/unloading areas, fences, and play areas; 
(7)  Hospitals; 
(8)  Efficiency apartments; 
(9)  Nursing homes and assisted living centers; 
(10)  One accessory building per lot, provided it must be at least 75 feet away from the front lot line and 30 feet away from the side lot lines and provided that there must be at least 2,000 square feet of lot area for each vehicle stored; 
(11)  Buildings taller than the maximum height permitted in section 133-376. In addition to the standards set forth in section 133-936, a building taller than the maximum height permitted in section 133-376 is subject to the following standards: 
a.  The height of the building shall not exceed 55 feet, which 55 feet is an absolute cap on the height of the building that cannot be exceeded for any reason, including, but not limited to, the exceptions set forth in section 133-13. 
b.  All part(s) of the building that are above 45 feet in height shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from any road right-of-way. 
c.  The total surface square footage of the part(s) of the building that is above 45 feet cannot exceed 25 percent of the total square footage of the first floor of the building. 
d.  The part(s) of the building that are above 45 feet in height shall be used only for purposes that are accessory to the primary use(s) of the building. 
(Code 1998, § 106-383; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-29(c), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 18-19, § 1, 10-15-2018) 
Sec. 133-375. - Permitted accessory buildings and uses. 
    Permitted accessory buildings and uses in the R-5 Multifamily Residential District, subject to section 133-11(2), are as follows: 
(1)  One private swimming pool; 
(2)  One private tennis court; 
(3)  One children's play structure; 
(4)  One detached satellite antenna/dish; 
(5)  One detached solar structure. 
(Code 1998, § 106-384; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-29(d), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 98-15, § 6, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 133-376. - Height and area requirements. 
    Height and area requirements in the R-5 Multifamily Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height . The maximum building height shall be 45 feet for the principal building and shall be 20 feet for a detached accessory building, except where taller buildings are approved as conditional uses. 
(2)  Setbacks. Setbacks shall be as follows: 
a.  Front yard, 30 feet; 
b.  Rear yard, principal building, 40 feet; 
c.  Side yards, principal building, shall be: 
1.  Twelve feet on each side for a building 20 feet or under in height; 
2.  Eighteen feet on each side for a building over 20 feet and less than 35 feet in height; 
3.  Thirty feet on each side for a building 35 feet or over in height; 
d.  Side and rear yard, accessory building, three feet on each side. 
(3)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 8,000 square feet. 
a.  First unit, 4,000 square feet; 
b.  Each additional one-bedroom unit, 1,000 square feet; 
c.  Each additional two-bedroom unit, 2,000 square feet; 
d.  Each additional three-bedroom unit, 3,000 square feet. 
(4)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 80 feet. 
(5)  Minimum separation distance. On lots with more than one building, there shall be a minimum separation distance between buildings equal to the sum of the required side yards for each building; 
(6)  Minimum green area. The minimum green area shall be 30 percent. 
(Code 1998, § 106-385; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-29(e), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 18-19, § 2, 10-15-2018) 
Secs. 133-377-133-395. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - O-1 LIMITED OFFICE-RESIDENCE DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-396. - Intent. 
    The O-1 Limited Office-Residence District is established to allow professional and business office uses that are highly compatible with residential uses to locate adjacent to residentially zoned properties and is intended to promote more efficient transportation patterns, decrease motor vehicle traffic, and provide neighborhoods with convenient access to services provided by professional and business offices. O-1 districts are intended to be dispersed zones of 0.5 to 2.5 acres total size that support small clusters of business and professional office uses and are located only in neighborhoods where other properties that may be utilized for professional or business offices are not easily accessed. 
(Code 1998, § 106-416; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-30(a), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-397. - Restriction on rezoning for O-1 use. 
    In order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the village through appropriate land use patterns, reclassification of parcels to an O-1 designation shall be limited to, those parcels that are consistent with the intent and meet the requirements of the O-1 Limited Office-Residence District and general purposes of zoning and whose boundary line, unless adjacent to a zoning district that allows business and professional office uses, is not less than five-tenths mile from a boundary line of a nonresidential district that allows business and professional office uses. 
(Code 1998, § 106-417; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-30(b), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-398. - General conditions. 
    All uses in the O-1 Limited Office-Residence District are subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Restricted uses. 
a.  Principal O-1 district uses shall be limited to professional and business office uses that are reasonably likely to provide regular service to the neighborhood in which it is located; 
b.  An authorized O-1 district use may utilize motor vehicles in the conduct of its business or service so long as the majority of the substantive work or labor is conducted at the O-1 site; 
c.  All business and servicing, except for temporary off-street parking and off-street loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings; 
(2)  Size of permitted vehicles. All motor vehicles used in the conduct of a permitted or conditional use listed under this division shall have a licensed gross vehicle weight capacity not greater than 8,000 pounds; 
(3)  Parking. All motor vehicles, other than automobiles, used in the conduct of a permitted or conditional use listed under this division shall be parked in a completely enclosed building when such parking is for a period greater than one hour. Parking areas shall be fully screened from abutting residentially zoned properties and shall be separated from abutting residentially zoned properties by a green space buffer equal to or greater than ten feet; 
(4)  Signs. All illuminated, neon or flashing signs of any type are prohibited. All sign materials and finishes shall be compatible with residential properties. All signs shall be equal to or less than 30 square feet. Detached signs shall be less than eight feet in height; 
(5)  Accessory buildings. Detached accessory buildings of any size are prohibited in the O-1 district. 
(Code 1998, § 106-418; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-30(c), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-399. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are allowed as permitted uses in the O-1 Limited Office-Residence District: 
(1)  Legal services; 
(2)  Investment counseling services; 
(3)  Residential real estate sales and management services; 
(4)  Direct medical, dental or optical patient care services; 
(5)  Insurance services; 
(6)  Tax and accounting services; 
(7)  Financial services, excluding drive-in banking, check cashing and similar services; 
(8)  Accessory uses customary with and incidental to an authorized principal use; 
(9)  Other professional and business office uses that are not enumerated but are closely similar thereto, as determined in part by the intent of the O-1 district, provided that they are not specified elsewhere in this chapter as requiring a special or conditional use permit. 
(Code 1998, § 106-419; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-30(d), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-400. - Conditional uses. 
    The following are allowed as conditional uses in the O-1 Limited Office-Residence District, subject to review under article V of this chapter: 
(1)  Communications transmitting towers, receiving towers, relay or microwave towers; 
(2)  Utilities facilities and substations; 
(3)  Family counseling services. 
(Code 1998, § 106-420; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-30(e), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-401. - Height and area requirements. 
    Height and area requirements for the O-1 Limited Office-Residence District are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. The maximum building height for the principal building shall be 35 feet; for a detached accessory building, the height shall be 15 feet. 
(2)  Setbacks. Setbacks shall be as follows: 
a.  Front yard, 20 feet; 
b.  Rear yard, 35 feet; 
c.  Side yard shall be as follows: 
1.  Twelve feet on each side for a building 20 feet or under in height; 
2.  Eighteen feet on each side for a building over 20 feet and less than 35 feet in height; 
3.  Thirty feet on each side for a building 35 feet or over in height. 
(3)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet. 
(4)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 80 feet. 
(5)  Maximum gross floor area. The maximum gross floor area per principal building shall be 8,500 square feet. 
(6)  Maximum floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.30. 
(7)  Minimum separation. On lots with more than one principal building, buildings shall be separated by a minimum separation distance equal to the sum of the required side yard for each building. 
(Code 1998, § 106-421; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-30(f), 11-3-1997) 
Secs. 133-402-133-430. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - O-2 BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL OFFICE DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-431. - Intent. 
    The O-2 Business and Professional Office District is established to provide for the development of business and professional office areas that will be open to or visited by the general public for the purpose of receiving or disbursing goods and services and shall serve as a transition district between residential and commercial land uses. 
(Code 1998, § 106-451; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-31(a), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-432. - General conditions. 
    All uses in the O-2 Business and Professional Office District are subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Restricted uses. All business and servicing, except for temporary off-street parking and off-street loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings; 
(2)  Parking. All parking of trucks used in the conduct of a permitted or conditional use listed under this division shall be within a completely enclosed building when such parking is for a period greater than one hour and such parking is within 150 feet of a residence district boundary line. Parking areas shall be fully screened from abutting residentially zoned properties and shall be separated from abutting residentially zoned properties by a green space buffer of at least ten feet; 
(3)  Accessory buildings. Any building greater than 750 square feet shall be considered a principal building. 
(Code 1998, § 106-452; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-31(b), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-433. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are allowed as permitted uses in the O-2 Business and Professional Office District: 
(1)  Any use allowed as a permitted use in the O-1 district; 
(2)  Other professional and business office uses, provided that they are not specified elsewhere in this chapter as requiring a special or conditional use permit. 
(Code 1998, § 106-453; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-31(c), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-434. - Conditional uses. 
    The following are allowed as conditional uses in the O-2 Business and Professional Office District subject to review under article V of this chapter: 
(1)  Any use allowed as a conditional use in the O-1 district; 
(2)  Financial institution drive-in facilities; 
(3)  Day care centers or preschools, provided that, in addition to other conditions that may be placed upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance or operation of such a facility pursuant to article V of this chapter, the facility shall include safe and adequately sized parking and loading/unloading areas, fences and play areas; 
(4)  Dwelling units located within a building used for office purposes other than on the ground floor; 
(5)  Churches or other places of indoor religious assembly; 
(6)  Hospitals, clinics or nursing homes; 
(7)  Communications transmitting towers, receiving towers, relay or microwave towers; 
(8)  Utilities facilities and substations. 
(Code 1998, § 106-454; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-31(d), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-435. - Height and area requirements. 
    Height and area requirements in the O-2 Business and Professional Office District are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. The maximum building height for the principal building shall be 45 feet; for a detached accessory building, the height shall be 20 feet. 
(2)  Setbacks. Setbacks shall be as follows: 
a.  Front yard, 20 feet; 
b.  Rear yard, 35 feet; 
c.  For the principal building, the side yard shall be as follows: 
1.  Twelve feet on each side for a building 20 feet or under in height; 
2.  Eighteen feet on each side for a building over 20 feet and less than 35 feet in height; 
3.  Thirty feet on each side for a building 35 feet or over in height; 
d.  Side and rear yard, detached accessory building, three feet on each side. 
(3)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 80 feet. 
(4)  Minimum separation. On lots with more than one building, there shall be a minimum separation distance between buildings equal to the sum of the required side yard for each building. 
(5)  Floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.40. 
(Code 1998, § 106-455; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-31(e), 11-3-1997) 
Secs. 133-436-133-453. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - O-3 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE AND RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-454. - Intent. 
    The O-3 Administrative Office and Research and Development District is established to provide for large administrative office and research and development activities and testing laboratories, all of which are integrated in a planned development. To maintain compatibility between individual sites and consistency within a district, large sites, yards and landscaped areas are required, together with development standards. 
(Code 1998, § 106-486; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-32(a), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-455. - General conditions. 
    All uses in the O-3 Administrative Office and Research and Development District are subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Restricted uses. All business and servicing, except for temporary off-street parking and off-street loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings; 
(2)  Parking. All parking of trucks used in the conduct of a permitted or conditional use listed under this division shall be within a completely enclosed building when such parking is for a period greater than one hour and the parking is within 150 feet of a residence district boundary line. Parking areas shall be fully screened from abutting residentially zoned properties and shall be separated from abutting residentially zoned properties by a green space buffer equal to or greater than ten feet; 
(3)  Accessory buildings. All buildings greater than 750 square feet shall be considered a principal building. 
(Code 1998, § 106-487; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-32(b), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-456. - Development standards. 
    In the O-3 Administrative Office and Research and Development District, the following development standards shall be applied in order to provide for planned integrated development and due consideration of pedestrian circulation, preservation and linkage of open space areas, location of future buildings, and the clustering of amenities: 
(1)  Building design and landscaping and site development. The exterior appearance of every building constructed within this district shall be compatible with that of adjoining structures, especially as it relates to rooflines and building materials. All lots shall be landscaped, including the provision of canopy-type shade trees. Where possible, all existing mature, healthy trees shall be retained. Except for woodlots, marshes and other lands maintained in a natural state, all land areas not covered by buildings, structures, storage areas, parking lots, loading areas and driveways shall be landscaped and maintained. Landscaping shall mean decorative plazas, mounds, pools, or the planting of grass, trees, shrubs and other plant materials or comparable surface cover. 
(2)  Accessory off-street parking and loading. Accessory off-street parking lots, loading berths and access driveways shall be located, designed, and improved so as to provide for safe and convenient access from adjoining streets, as well as safe and convenient circulation upon the site. Access driveways and parking lots shall be separated from principal pedestrian walkways and recreational areas by pavement markings, curbs, planting areas, fences or other appropriate materials to ensure pedestrian safety. Access driveways shall be designed and located so that they do not provide a direct unlandscaped view from the street to a loading berth or storage area. 
(3)  Storage areas. All storage, except for licensed motor vehicles in operable condition, shall be within completely enclosed buildings or shall be effectively screened with screening not less than six feet in height, and no storage shall exceed the height of such screening. All outside storage areas shall be located to diminish visibility from any street and shall be limited to no more than five percent of the total lot area. 
(4)  Illumination. Electrical reflectors, spotlights, floodlights and other sources of illumination may be used to illuminate buildings, landscaping, street graphics and parking and loading areas only if they are equipped with lenses or other devices that concentrate the illumination upon such items. All lighting shall be reflected away from residences and public streets. 
(Code 1998, § 106-488; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-32(c), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-457. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are allowed as permitted uses in the O-3 Administrative Office and Research and Development District: 
(1)  Administrative offices, provided such offices shall not be opened to or visited by the general public for the purpose of receiving or disbursing goods and services. Service personnel visits, business calls, deliveries and other activities normal to an administrative function are allowed; 
(2)  Data processing centers; 
(3)  Research and development activities, and testing laboratories, provided no manufacturing, fabrication, assembly or production of articles other than prototypes or models used for experimentation or research shall be allowed; 
(4)  Accessory uses customary with and incidental to an authorized principal use. 
(Code 1998, § 106-489; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-32(d), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-458. - Conditional uses. 
    The following are allowed as conditional uses in the O-3 Administrative Office and Research and Development District subject to review under article V of this chapter: 
(1)  Hotels or motels; 
(2)  Heliports; 
(3)  Hospitals and clinics; 
(4)  Communications transmitting towers, receiving towers, relay or microwave towers; 
(5)  Utilities facilities and substations; 
(6)  Buildings taller than the maximum height permitted in section 133-459. In addition to the standards set forth in section 133-936, a building taller than the maximum height permitted in section 133-459 is subject to the following standards: 
a.  The height of the building shall not exceed 55 feet, which 55 feet is an absolute cap on the height of the building that cannot be exceeded for any reason, including, but not limited to, the exceptions set forth in section 133-13. 
b.  All part(s) of the building that are above 45 feet in height shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from any road right-of-way. 
c.  The total surface square footage of the part(s) of the building that is above 45 feet cannot exceed 25 percent of the total square footage of the first floor of the building. 
d.  The part(s) of the building that are above 45 feet in height shall be used only for purposes that are accessory to the primary use(s) of the building. 
(Code 1998, § 106-490; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-32(e), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 18-19, § 3, 10-15-2018) 
Sec. 133-459. - Height and area requirements. 
    Height and area requirements in the O-3 Administrative Office and Research and Development District are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height . The maximum building height shall be 45 feet for the principal building and shall be 20 feet for a detached accessory building, except where taller buildings are approved as conditional uses. 
(2)  Setbacks. Setbacks shall be as follows: 
a.  Front yard, 20 feet; 
b.  Rear yard, 35 feet or 30 percent of the height of the building, whichever is greater; 
c.  For a principal building, the side yard shall be as follows: 
1.  Twelve feet on each side for a building 20 feet or under in height; 
2.  Eighteen feet on each side for a building over 20 feet and less than 35 feet in height; 
3.  Thirty feet on each side for a building 35 feet or over in height; 
4.  Thirty-six feet or 20 percent of the height of the building on each side, whichever is greater, for a building equal to or greater than four stories; 
d.  Side and rear yard, detached accessory building, 12 feet on each side. 
(3)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet. 
(4)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. 
(5)  Floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.50. 
(6)  Minimum separation. On lots with more than one building, there shall be a minimum separation distance between buildings equal to the sum of the required side yard for each building. 
(Code 1998, § 106-491; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-32(f), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 18-19, § 4, 10-15-2018) 
Secs. 133-460-133-486. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - C-1D DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-487. - Intent. 
    The purpose of the C-1D Downtown Commercial District is to provide a special district for commercial uses in the older portion of the downtown. The district is intended to retain the mixture of business uses and development character of the older Downtown Commercial District. 
(Code 1998, § 106-521; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-33(a), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-488. - Permitted uses. 
    Except as provided in subsection 133-524(2), the permitted uses in the C-1D Downtown Commercial District are the same as those permitted in the C-1 General Commercial District, plus residences on upper floors, including efficiency apartments. 
(Code 1998, § 106-522; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-33(b), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 08-08, § 1, 5-5-2008) 
Sec. 133-489. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  The conditional uses in the C-1 General Commercial District are conditional uses in the C-1D Downtown Commercial District. 
(b)  Any use permitted in the C-1 General Commercial District that requires a Class "B", "Class B" or "Class C" license for the sale of alcohol beverages is a conditional use in the C-1D Downtown Commercial District. 
(c)  Buildings taller than the maximum height permitted in section 133-491. In addition to the standards set forth in section 133-936, a building taller than the maximum height permitted in section 133-491 is subject to the following standards: 
(1)  The height of the building shall not exceed 55 feet. 
(2)  All part(s) of the building that are above 45 feet in height shall be setback a minimum of 30 feet from any road right-of-way. 
(3)  The total surface square footage of the part(s) of the building that is above 45 feet cannot exceed 25 percent of the total square footage of the first floor of the building. 
(4)  The part(s) of the building that are above 45 feet in height shall be used only for purposes that are accessory to the primary use(s) of the building. 
(Code 1998, § 106-523; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-33(c), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 08-08, § 1, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 18-5, § 1, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 133-490. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
    The accessory buildings and uses in the C-1D Downtown Commercial District are the same as those conditionally permitted in the C-1 General Commercial District. 
(Code 1998, § 106-524; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-33(d), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-491. - Height and area requirements. 
    Height and area requirements in the C-1D Downtown Commercial District are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height . The maximum building height shall be 45 feet for the principal building and shall be 20 feet for a detached accessory building, except where taller buildings are approved as conditional uses. 
(2)  Setbacks. Setbacks shall be as follows: 
a.  Front yard setback, none; 
b.  Side yard setbacks, none; 
c.  Rear yard setback, 20 feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 50 feet. 
(4)  Dwelling unit density . The lot area per dwelling unit shall be 1,200 square feet. For purposes of this subsection, lot area may include a parcel or parcels that are within 500 feet of the parent parcel (i.e., the parcel on which the principal building is located), and which parcel or parcels contain improvements (e.g., storm water, parking) necessary for the development of the parent parcel paid for by the owner of the parent parcel. If the owner of the parent parcel does not own the adjacent parcel or parcels, the owner of the parent parcel must have a written agreement with the parcel owner giving the parent parcel owner the right to place improvements on the adjacent parcel, the village must be a party to the written agreement in a form approved by the village, and the agreement shall be recorded on the subject property. Notwithstanding the preceding sentences, the adjacent parcel or parcels shall not be located in a residential zoning district. 
(Code 1998, § 106-525; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-33(e), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 18-5, § 2, 3-12-2018; Ord. No. 18-19, § 9, 10-15-2018) 
Sec. 133-492. - Parking requirements. 
    The plan commission may grant applicants in the C-1D Downtown Commercial District exceptions from the parking requirements as set forth in section 133-995 where the provision of the required number of parking stalls would not be feasible due to the size or configuration of the lot and where there are sufficient municipal or other off-site parking stalls in the area. 
(Code 1998, § 106-526; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-33(f), 11-3-1997) 
Secs. 133-493-133-522. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - C-1 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-523. - Intent. 
    The purpose of the C-1 General Commercial District is to accommodate a wide range of retail, commercial service and product establishments. It is also intended to accommodate the development of mixed land uses that will allow the combination of commercial and residential uses in the same structure. 
(Code 1998, § 106-556; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-34(a), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-524. - Permitted uses. 
    Permitted uses in the C-1 General Commercial District are as follows: 
(1)  Retail sale and repair services, including the following: 
a.  Animal hospitals and pet shops; 
b.  Antique shops; 
c.  Audio and video equipment and merchandise; 
d.  Automotive accessory stores.; 
e.  Bakeries; 
f.  Barbershops; 
g.  Beauty shops; 
h.  Bicycle sales; 
i.  Book/stationery stores; 
j.  Candy and ice cream stores; 
k.  Carpet stores; 
l.  Camera and photographic supply stores; 
m.  Catering services; 
n.  Clocks and watches; 
o.  Clothing and apparel stores; 
p.  Computer and computer accessory stores; 
q.  China and glassware stores; 
r.  Coin stores; 
s.  Custom dressmaking; 
t.  Drugstores; 
u.  Dry cleaning and laundry; 
v.  Electronic and housewares appliance stores; 
w.  Flower shops; 
x.  Furniture and home furnishings stores; 
y.  Gift shops; 
z.  Grocery stores; 
aa.  Hardware and paint stores; 
bb.  Hobby stores; 
cc.  Jewelry stores; 
dd.  Landscape nurseries; 
ee.  Leather goods and luggage stores; 
ff.  Locksmiths; 
gg.  Major department stores; 
hh.  Meat markets; 
ii.  Musical instrument stores; 
jj.  Office supply stores; 
kk.  Optical goods stores; 
ll.  Orthopedic sales and supply stores; 
mm.  Pet grooming shops; 
nn.  Pet stores; 
oo.  Photo studios; 
pp.  Picture frame shops; 
qq.  Schools for music, dance and the martial arts; 
rr.  Sewing machine shops; 
ss.  Shoe stores; 
tt.  Sporting goods stores; 
uu.  Tailor shops; 
vv.  Tobacco shops; 
ww.  Travel bureaus. 
(2)  Other establishments, institutions and uses, including the following: 
a.  Banks and financial institutions (except drive-in facilities); 
b.  Clinics or medical offices requiring less than 40 parking stalls; 
c.  Professional offices and similar establishments; 
d.  Restaurants (except drive-ins); 
e.  Taverns. 
(Code 1998, § 106-557; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-34(b), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-525. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the C-1 General Commercial District are as follows: 
(1)  Airport/heliport; 
(2)  Automobile and truck washes; 
(3)  Automotive rentals, sales and service; 
(4)  Bowling alleys; 
(5)  Clinic or medical office requiring 40 or more parking stalls; 
(6)  Commercial greenhouse and nurseries; 
(7)  Communications transmitting towers, receiving towers, relay or microwave towers; 
(8)  Convenience stores; 
(9)  Dancehalls; 
(10)  Day care center/preschool, provided that, in addition to other conditions that may be stipulated upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance or operation of such a facility pursuant to article V of this chapter, the facility shall include safe and adequately sized parking and loading/unloading areas, fences and play areas; 
(11)  Dog kennels; 
(12)  Drive-in restaurants; 
(13)  Financial institution drive-in facility; 
(14)  Fruit and produce stands; 
(15)  Garden supply stores; 
(16)  Gasoline stations (self-service and full service); 
(17)  Hospital; 
(18)  Hotels/motels; 
(19)  Indoor commercial recreational facilities; 
(20)  Light manufacturing and assembly of hand-crafted products, such as pottery, quilts, jewelry, roasted coffee, and hand-crafted furniture, that is incidental to a permitted commercial use, providing that the light manufacturing and assembly processes occupy no more than 50 percent of the total floor area; 
(21)  Manufactured home sales; 
(22)  Meeting/assembly halls; 
(23)  Milk, cheese and ice cream processing and facilities; 
(24)  Buildings taller than the maximum height permitted in section 133-527. In addition to the standards set forth in section 133-936, a building taller than the maximum height permitted in section 133-527 is subject to the following standards: 
a.  The height of the building shall not exceed 55 feet, which 55 feet is an absolute cap on the height of the building that cannot be exceeded for any reason, including, but not limited to, the exceptions set forth in section 133-13. 
b.  All part(s) of the building that are above 45 feet in height shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from any road right-of-way. 
c.  The total surface square footage of the part(s) of the building that is above 45 feet cannot exceed 25 percent of the total square footage of the first floor of the building. 
d.  The part(s) of the building that are above 45 feet in height shall be used only for purposes that are accessory to the primary use(s) of the building. 
(25)  Outdoor commercial recreational and facility; 
(26)  Produce terminal, wholesale; 
(27)  Radio, microwave or television towers; 
(28)  Railroad rights-of-way and uses essential to railroad operation; 
(29)  Recreational vehicle sales/rentals; 
(30)  Residential, single-family or multifamily; 
(31)  Small equipment rental; 
(32)  Stadium or auditorium; 
(33)  Theaters (indoor); 
(34)  Theaters (outdoor); 
(35)  Truck rentals; 
(36)  Truck sales and service; 
(37)  Utilities facilities and substations; 
(38)  Video arcades. 
(Code 1998, § 106-558; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-34(c), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 01-10, § 1, 7-2-2001; Ord. No. 18-19, § 5, 10-15-2018) 
Sec. 133-526. - Permitted accessory buildings and uses. 
    Permitted accessory buildings and uses in the C-1 General Commercial District are as follows: 
(1)  Accessory buildings and uses customary with and incidental to the principal use, unless otherwise excluded by this chapter; 
(2)  Warehousing customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses or special uses in this division. 
(Code 1998, § 106-559; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-34(d), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-527. - Height and area requirements. 
    Height and area requirements in the C-1 General Commercial District are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height . The maximum building height shall be 45 feet for the principal building and shall be 20 feet for a detached accessory building, except where taller buildings are approved as conditional uses. 
(2)  Setbacks. Setbacks shall be as follows: 
a.  Front yard setback, 15 feet; 
b.  Rear yard setback, 25 feet; 
c.  Side yard, principal building, nine feet on each side; 
d.  Side and rear yard, accessory building, three feet on each side. 
(3)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet. 
(4)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 70 feet. 
(Code 1998, § 106-560; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-34(e), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 18-19, § 6, 10-15-2018) 
Secs. 133-528-133-547. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - C-2 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-548. - Intent. 
    The C-2 Highway Commercial District is intended to provide an area for those business and commercial activities that especially have to do with motor vehicles or highway transportation, that provide goods or services primarily to travelers on a highway, or for which location adjacent to a major thoroughfare or highway is a compelling practical consideration, or for which it is especially appropriate for some other reason to be located adjacent to a major thoroughfare or highway. 
(Code 1998, § 106-591; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-35(a), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-549. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the C-2 Highway Commercial District: 
(1)  Gasoline service stations, provided that all gasoline pumps, storage tanks and accessory equipment must be located at least 30 feet from any existing or officially mapped street; 
(2)  Stores for the sale of tires, batteries or other automotive accessories; 
(3)  Establishments for the washing, cleaning or polishing of automobiles, including self-service carwashes; 
(4)  Establishments engaged in the retail sale of automobile passenger trailers, manufactured homes or campers; 
(5)  Establishments engaged in daily or extended-term rental or leasing of passenger automobiles, limousines or trucks, without drivers, or of truck trailers or utility trailers; 
(6)  Establishments engaged in the daily or extended-term rental or leasing of recreational vehicles or campers; 
(7)  Hotels, motor hotels, motels, tourist courts, tourist rooms, etc.; 
(8)  Restaurants, lunchrooms and other eating places, including drive-in type establishments; 
(9)  Commercial parking lots, parking garages, parking structures; 
(10)  Tourist-oriented retail shops, including souvenir and curio shops; 
(11)  Grocery stores; 
(12)  Banks and financial institutions, including drive-up facilities and ATMs. 
(Code 1998, § 106-592; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-35(b), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-10, § 5, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 133-550. - Conditional uses. 
    The following are permitted as conditional uses within the C-2 Highway Commercial District; such uses shall be subject to the consideration of the plan commission with regard to such matters as the creation of nuisance conditions for the public or for the users of nearby areas, the creation of traffic hazards, the creation of health hazards or other factors: 
(1)  Seasonal roadside stands for the sale of vegetables, fruit or other farm products, but not other types of products or merchandise; 
(2)  Establishments or facilities for the sale, rental, service, repair, testing, demonstration or other use of motorcycles, motorized bicycles, go-carts, snowmobiles, aircraft or other motorized vehicles or their components; 
(3)  Establishments or facilities for the sale, rental, service, repair, testing, demonstration or other use of motorboats, other watercraft, marine supplies, motors for watercraft or their components; 
(4)  Wholesale merchandise establishments; 
(5)  Warehouses; 
(6)  Motor carrier facilities; 
(7)  Drive-in and convenience establishments serving food and beverages; 
(8)  Automobile sales and service shops, including shops for general mechanical repairs, automobile body repair, and repair of tires, but not including establishments for rebuilding, retreading, recapping, vulcanizing or manufacturing tires, and not including establishments for painting automobiles; 
(9)  Establishments primarily engaged in specialized automobile repair such as electrical, battery, and ignition repair; radiator repair; glass replacement and repair; carburetor repair; and wheel alignment service; 
(10)  Communications transmitting towers, receiving towers, relay or microwave towers; 
(11)  Utility facilities and substations; 
(12)  Light manufacturing and assembly of hand-crafted products, such as pottery, quilts, jewelry, roasted coffee, and hand-crafted furniture, that is incidental to a permitted commercial use, providing that the light manufacturing and assembly processes occupy no more than 50 percent of the total floor area. 
(Code 1998, § 106-593; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-35(c), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 01-10, § 2, 7-2-2001) 
Sec. 133-551. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    Permitted accessory uses in the C-2 Highway Commercial District are accessory uses allowed in the C-1 General Commercial District. 
(Code 1998, § 106-594; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-35(d), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-552. - Height and area requirements. 
    Height and area requirements for the C-2 Highway Commercial District are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. The maximum building height shall be 45 feet; for a detached accessory building, the height shall be 20 feet. 
(2)  Setbacks. Setbacks shall be as follows: 
a.  Front yard, 25 feet; 50 feet if parking is permitted in front; 
b.  Rear yard, 20 feet; 
c.  Side yard, principal building, 20 feet on each side; 
d.  Side and rear yard, accessory building, three feet on each side. 
(3)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be one acre. 
(4)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. 
(Code 1998, § 106-595; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-35(e), 11-3-1997) 
Secs. 133-553-133-582. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 16. - I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-583. - Intent. 
    The I-1 Light Industrial District is intended to provide space for industrial and manufacturing uses at appropriate locations in the village, except those that are dangerous or that generate noise, smoke, traffic or air or water pollution that would create a public or private nuisance. Any storage areas should be enclosed by a suitable screen of fencing or vegetation. Emphasis is placed on providing land for warehousing and light assembly industries. 
(Code 1998, § 106-626; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-36(a), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-584. - Permitted uses. 
    Permitted uses in the I-1 Light Industrial District include the following uses that are within buildings that are less than 50,000 square feet in area: 
(1)  Contractors; 
(2)  Food processing and distribution; 
(3)  Laboratories; 
(4)  Storage and sale of machinery and equipment; 
(5)  Trade and contractors' offices; 
(6)  Wholesaling; 
(7)  Warehousing; 
(8)  Light assembly industries; 
(9)  Office; 
(10)  Research facilities. 
(Code 1998, § 106-627; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-36(b), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-10, § 6, 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 01-05, § 2, 4-2-2001; Ord. No. 09-06, § 12, 7-20-2009) 
Sec. 133-585. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the I-1 Light Industrial District are as follows: 
(1)  Communications transmitting tower, receiving tower, relay or microwave towers; 
(2)  Utility facilities and substations; 
(3)  Day care centers; 
(4)  Ancillary commercial uses that serve primarily neighboring light industries and offices; 
(5)  Buildings taller than the maximum height permitted in section 133-586. In addition to the standards set forth in section 133-936, a building taller than the maximum height permitted in section 133-586 is subject to the following standards: 
a.  The height of the building shall not exceed 55 feet, which 55 feet is an absolute cap on the height of the building that cannot be exceeded for any reason, including, but not limited to, the exceptions set forth in section 133-13. 
b.  All part(s) of the building that are above 45 feet in height shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from any road right-of-way. 
(6)  Buildings greater than 50,000 square feet in area. 
(7)  Business dormitories as an ancillary use pursuant to section 133-946. 
(Code 1998, § 106-628; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-36(c), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 09-06, § 13, 7-20-2009; Ord. No. 18-6, § 1, 3-12-2018; Ord. No. 18-19, § 7, 10-15-2018) 
Sec. 133-586. - Height and area requirements. 
    Height and area requirements in the I-1 Light Industrial District are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. The maximum building height shall be 45 feet for the principal building and shall be 20 feet for a detached accessory building, except where taller buildings are approved as conditional uses. 
(2)  Setbacks. Setbacks shall be as follows: 
a.  Front yard, 40 feet; 
b.  Rear yard, 25 feet; 
c.  Side yard, principal building, 20 feet on each side; 
d.  Side and rear yard, accessory building, five feet on each side. 
(3)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be one acre. 
(4)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. 
(Code 1998, § 106-629; Ord. No. 09-06, § 14, 7-20-2009) 
Secs. 133-587-133-605. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 17. - I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-606. - Intent. 
    The I-2 General Industrial District provides land for those industries that normally include the use of heavy machinery and may require outdoor storage areas for raw materials or finished products, provided such storage is enclosed by a suitable screen of fencing or vegetation. 
(Code 1998, § 106-661; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-37(a), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-607. - Permitted uses. 
    Permitted uses in the I-2 General Industrial District include the following uses that are within buildings that are less than 50,000 square feet in area: 
(1)  Automobile body repairs; 
(2)  Automotive upholstery; 
(3)  Commercial greenhouses; 
(4)  Distributors; 
(5)  Farm machinery; 
(6)  Food locker plants; 
(7)  Machine shops; 
(8)  Manufacturing and bottling of beverages; 
(9)  Painting; 
(10)  Printing; 
(11)  Publishing; 
(12)  Warehousing; 
(13)  Manufacture, fabrication, packing, packaging and assembly of products. 
(Code 1998, § 106-662; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-37(b), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 09-06, § 15, 7-20-2009) 
Sec. 133-608. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the I-2 General Industrial District are as follows: 
(1)  Communications transmitting towers, receiving towers, relay or microwave towers; 
(2)  Utility facilities and substations; 
(3)  Day care centers; 
(4)  Buildings taller than the maximum height permitted in section 133-609. In addition to the standards set forth in section 133-936, a building taller than the maximum height permitted in section 133-609 is subject to the following standards: 
a.  The height of the building shall not exceed 55 feet, which 55 feet is an absolute cap on the height of the building that cannot be exceeded for any reason, including, but not limited to, the exceptions set forth in section 133-13. 
b.  All part(s) of the building that are above 45 feet in height shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from any road right-of-way. 
(5)  Buildings greater than 50,000 square feet in area. 
(Code 1998, § 106-663; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-37(c), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 09-06, § 16, 7-20-2009; Ord. No. 18-19, § 8, 10-15-2018) 
Sec. 133-609. - Height and area requirements. 
    Height and area requirements for the I-2 General Industrial District are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. The maximum building height shall be 45 feet for the principal building and shall be 20 feet for a detached accessory building, except where taller buildings are approved as conditional uses. 
(2)  Setbacks. Setbacks shall be as follows: 
a.  Front yard, 50 feet; 
b.  Rear yard, 40 feet; 
c.  Side yard, principal building, 20 feet on each side; 
d.  Side and rear yard, accessory building, five feet on each side. 
(3)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be one acre. 
(4)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. 
(Code 1998, § 106-663.1; Ord. No. 09-06, § 17, 7-20-2009) 
Secs. 133-610-133-636. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 18. - AP-1 AIRPORT DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-637. - Intent. 
    The AP-1 Airport District is intended to provide a district for the Waunakee Airport and limited ancillary uses that would not be incompatible with the surrounding residential neighborhoods. 
(Code 1998, § 106-664; Ord. No. 08-01, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 133-638. - Permitted uses. 
    Permitted uses in the AP-1 Airport District are as follows: Airport landing field. 
(Code 1998, § 106-665; Ord. No. 08-01, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 133-639. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the AP-1 Airport District are as follows: 
(1)  Communications transmitting towers, receiving towers, relay or microwave towers that do not interfere with approach areas and landing area for the airport or aviation communications; 
(2)  Utilities facilities and substations; 
(3)  Attached or detached hangars which have direct access to a runway. All hangars shall be considered accessory buildings; 
(4)  Ancillary office uses directly related to the operation of the airport or use of airport facilities. 
(Code 1998, § 106-666; Ord. No. 08-01, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 133-640. - Height and area requirements. 
    Height and area requirements for all buildings in the AP-1 Airport District are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. The maximum building height of the all buildings shall be 35 feet. 
(2)  Setbacks. Setbacks for all buildings shall be as follows: 
a.  Front yard: 20 feet; 
b.  Rear yard: 20 feet; 
c.  Side yard: 20 feet 
(Code 1998, § 106-667; Ord. No. 08-01, 1-7-2008) 
Secs. 133-641-133-668. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 19. - CON CONSERVANCY DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-669. - Intent. 
    The CON Conservancy District is intended to protect natural resources. Generally, this district may include steep slopes and bluffs, ravines, wetlands, river and lake shores, and other land of natural aesthetic value. 
(Code 1998, § 106-691; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-38(a), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-670. - Permitted uses. 
    Permitted uses in the CON Conservancy District are as follows: 
(1)  General farming, provided no drainage, filling or dredging takes place and no farm buildings are constructed; 
(2)  The harvesting of any wild crop such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds; 
(3)  Sustained yield forestry, open spaces; 
(4)  Telephone, and power distribution poles and lines and necessary appurtenant equipment and structures; 
(5)  Fishing; 
(6)  Preservation of scenic, historic and scientific areas; wildlife preserves; 
(7)  Nonresident buildings used solely in conjunction with the raising of waterfowl, minnows and other similar lowland animals, fowl or fish, pursuant to chapter 113; 
(8)  Hiking trails and bridle paths; 
(9)  Public and private parks. 
(Code 1998, § 106-692; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-38(b), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-671. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the CON Conservancy District are as follows: 
(1)  Nonresidential farm structures; 
(2)  Dams, power plants, flowages; 
(3)  Ponds; 
(4)  Relocation of watercourses; 
(5)  Removal of topsoil or peat; 
(6)  Piers, docks, boathouses not for human occupancy; 
(7)  Communications transmitting towers, receiving towers, relay or microwave towers; 
(8)  Utility facilities and substations; 
(9)  Parking lots for uses permitted in the Conservancy District. 
(Code 1998, § 106-693; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-38(c), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-672. - Area requirements. 
    There are no setback, lot size or other dimensional requirements for the CON Conservancy District. 
(Code 1998, § 106-694; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-38(d), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-673. - Accessory buildings. 
    In the CON Conservancy District, accessory buildings shall be as permitted under applicable sections of chapter 113 pertaining to floodplain and shoreland-wetland zoning. 
(Code 1998, § 106-695; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-38(e), 11-3-1997) 
Secs. 133-674-133-704. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 20. - PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-705. - Scope. 
    The requirements for property in the PUD Planned Unit Development District shall be as provided in article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 106-726; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-39, 11-3-1997) 
Secs. 133-706-133-723. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 21. - G-1 INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-724. - Intent. 
    The G-1 Institutional District is intended to provide an area for public and semipublic facilities and institutions. 
(Code 1998, § 106-756; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-40(a), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-725. - Permitted uses. 
    Permitted uses in the G-1 Institutional District are as follows: 
(1)  Cemeteries; 
(2)  Churches and other places of indoor religious assembly; 
(3)  Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes and clinics; 
(4)  Libraries, museums, aquariums, planetariums, and art galleries; 
(5)  Municipal parking lots; 
(6)  Public administrative offices and public service buildings, including fire and police stations; 
(7)  Public or private schools, colleges and universities; 
(8)  Public utility offices; 
(9)  Utilities; 
(10)  Water storage tanks, towers and wells; 
(11)  Public amphitheaters, areas, stadiums and athletic fields; 
(12)  Public auditoriums; 
(13)  Public botanical gardens and arboretums; 
(14)  Exhibition halls; 
(15)  Fairgrounds; 
(16)  Forest reserves and public conservancy areas; 
(17)  Libraries; 
(18)  Parks, playgrounds, and other public outdoor recreation areas; 
(19)  Public recreation/community centers. 
(Code 1998, § 106-757; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-40(b), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-726. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the G-1 Institutional District are as follows: 
(1)  Archery and shooting ranges; 
(2)  Athletic clubs, gymnasiums, fitness clubs, and health resorts; 
(3)  Communications transmitting towers, receiving towers, relay or microwave towers; 
(4)  Fraternal organizations, clubs, or other private membership organizations; 
(5)  Golf courses with country club/restaurant facilities; 
(6)  Private golf ranges and miniature golf; 
(7)  Public emergency shelters; 
(8)  Roller skating rinks; 
(9)  Skeet and trap shooting ranges, provided that the firing of rifle arms and shotgun slugs shall not be permitted directly toward or over any highway, road or navigable water; toward any building or structure; or toward any population concentration within 11/2 miles of the site; 
(10)  Utility facilities and substations. 
(Code 1998, § 106-758; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-40(c), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-727. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    Permitted accessory uses in the G-1 Institutional District are as follows: 
(1)  Essential services; 
(2)  Garages for storage of vehicles or materials used in conjunction with the operation of a permitted use; 
(3)  Off-street parking and loading areas; 
(4)  Residential quarters for administrators, caretakers or clergy; 
(5)  Service buildings and facilities normally accessory to the permitted uses; 
(6)  Service-oriented offices or shops located within institutional buildings. 
(Code 1998, § 106-759; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-40(d), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-728. - Lot area and width. 
    In the G-1 Institutional District, there are no minimum lot requirements. 
(Code 1998, § 106-760; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-40(e), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-729. - Building height. 
    In the G-1 Institutional District, no building or part of a building shall exceed 45 feet in height. 
(Code 1998, § 106-761; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-40(f), 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-730. - Setback and yards. 
(a)  In the G-1 Institutional District, a minimum building setback of 25 feet from the right-of-way line of all public streets shall be required. 
(b)  There shall be a minimum side yard of ten feet, except that the principal and accessory structures for any of the uses listed in this division shall be 50 feet from any abutting lot line in an R-1, R-2, or R-3 zoning district. 
(c)  There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet. 
(Code 1998, § 106-762; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-40(g), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 01-03, § 1, 4-2-20012) 
Secs. 133-731-133-758. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 22. - CR-5ac COUNTRYSIDE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-759. - General intent, uses and requirements. 
(a)  Intent. The CR-5ac Countryside Residential District is intended to permit development which has a very low density, countryside community character. Unlike the case for the agricultural use districts, the land use standards for this district permit primarily single-family detached residential development and a variety of related land uses, and are not oriented to a wide range of agricultural activities. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that the CR-5ac Countryside Residential District shall serve as a designation which preserves and protects the countryside community character of its area. This district is used to provide for the permanent protection of a very low density residential area for those who want to live in a countryside environment and who retain enough land with their residence, or in their development, to ensure that the countryside community character is maintained as long as the CR-5ac Countryside Residential District designation is retained, regardless of how much development occurs within that area. This district is designed to accommodate existing subdivisions of this character and to allow such future development of this character and density consistent with adopted comprehensive land use plans of the town and village. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the CR-5ac Countryside Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Permitted uses in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District; 
(2)  Selective tree cutting; 
(3)  Passive outdoor public recreational activities. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the CR-5ac Countryside Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Permitted uses in the A-1 Agricultural/Holding District; 
(2)  Conditional uses in the A-1 Agricultural/Holding District; 
(3)  All accessory buildings and uses allowed in the A-1 Agricultural/Holding District, and any additional accessory buildings and uses other than those permitted by subsection (b)(3) of this section, shall be allowed only as conditional accessory uses in the CR-5ac Countryside Residential District, and shall require a conditional use permit in compliance with other provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Accessory buildings and uses. Accessory buildings and uses in the CR-5ac Countryside Residential District are those accessory buildings and uses permitted in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District. 
(e)  Height and area requirements. Height and area requirements for the CR-5ac Countryside Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height: 
a.  Principal residential building: 35 feet; 
b.  Detached permitted accessory building: 15 feet; 
c.  Other detached conditional accessory buildings and uses allowed per conditional use permit shall have the maximum building height as provided by the conditional use permit. 
(2)  Lot area: At least three acres and up to a maximum of five acres. 
(3)  Minimum lot width: 150 feet. 
(4)  Front yard setback: 35 feet, or 68 feet from the centerline of the abutting roadway, whichever is greater. 
(5)  Rear yard setback, principal building: 25 feet. 
(6)  Side yard setback, principal building: 45 feet on each side. 
(7)  Side and rear yard, accessory building: Nine feet on each side. 
(Code 1998, § 106-769; Ord. No. 98-2, § 4(13-1-41), 3-30-1998) 
Secs. 133-760-133-786. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 23. - ER-1 ESTATE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-787. - General intent, uses and requirements. 
(a)  Intent. The ER-1 Estate Residential District is intended to permit development which has a low density, estate community character. Like the case for the CR-5ac Countryside Residential District, the land use standards for this district permit primarily single-family detached residential development and a variety of related institutional land uses. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that the ER-1 Estate Residential District shall serve as a designation which preserves and protects the estate community character of its area. This district is used to provide for the permanent protection of a low density residential area for those who want to live in an estate environment and who retain enough land with their residence, or in their development, to ensure that the estate community character is maintained as long as the ER-1 Estate Residential District designation is retained, regardless of how much development occurs within that area. This district is designed to accommodate existing subdivisions of this character and to allow such future development of this character and density consistent with adopted comprehensive land use plans of the town and village. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the ER-1 Estate Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Permitted uses in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District; 
(2)  Selective tree cutting; 
(3)  Passive outdoor public recreational activities. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the ER-1 Estate Residential district are as follows: 
(1)  Conditional uses in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District; 
(2)  All accessory buildings and uses allowed in the CR-5ac Countryside Residential District, and any additional accessory buildings and uses other than those permitted by subsection (b)(3) of this section, shall be allowed only as conditional accessory uses in the ER-1 Estate Residential District, and shall require a conditional use permit in compliance with other provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Accessory buildings and uses. Accessory buildings and uses in the ER-1 Estate Residential District are those accessory buildings and uses permitted in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District. 
(e)  Height and area requirements. Height and area requirements for the ER-1 Estate Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height: 
a.  Principal residential building: 35 feet; 
b.  Detached accessory building: 15 feet; 
c.  Other detached conditional accessory buildings and uses allowed per conditional use permit shall have the maximum building height as provided by the conditional use permit. 
(2)  Lot area: At least one acre and less than three acres. 
(3)  Minimum lot width: 125 feet. 
(4)  Front yard setback: 30 feet, or 63 feet from the centerline of the abutting roadway, whichever is greater. 
(5)  Rear yard setback, principal building: 25 feet. 
(6)  Side yard setback, principal building: At least 15 feet on each side, but not less than 45 feet total for combined setbacks; 
(7)  Side and rear yard, accessory building: Nine feet on each side. 
(Code 1998, § 106-775; Ord. No. 98-2, § 4(13-1-42), 3-30-1998; Ord. No. 14-15, §§ 1, 2, 11-17-2014) 
Secs. 133-788-133-812. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 24. - SR-4 SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-813. - General intent, uses and requirements. 
(a)  Intent. The SR-4 Suburban Residential District is intended to permit development which has a moderate density, suburban community character. This district is intended to be the principal district for single-family development in urban service areas of the town. Unlike the case for the previously described residential districts, the land use standards for this district permit both single-family detached residential development and certain types of moderate density single-family attached development, as well as a variety of related institutional land uses. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that the SR-4 Suburban Residential District shall serve as a designation which preserves and protects the suburban residential community character of its area. This district is used to provide for the permanent protection of a moderate density residential area for those who want to live in a suburban residential environment and who retain enough land with their residence, or in their development, to ensure that the suburban character is maintained as long as the SR-4 Suburban Residential District designation is retained, regardless of how much development occurs within that area. This district is designed to accommodate new subdivisions of this character in urban service areas and to allow such future development of this character and density consistent with the adopted comprehensive land use plans of the town and the village. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses for the SR-4 Suburban Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Permitted uses in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District; 
(2)  Selective tree cutting; 
(3)  Passive outdoor public recreational activities. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses for the SR-4 Suburban Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Two-family dwelling units; 
(2)  Conditional uses in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District. 
(d)  Accessory buildings and uses. Accessory buildings and uses in the SR-4 Suburban Residential District are those accessory buildings and uses permitted in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District. 
(e)  Height and area requirements. Height and area requirements for the SR-4 Suburban Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height: 
a.  Principal building: 35 feet; 
b.  Detached accessory building: 15 feet. 
(2)  Lot area: At least one-fourth acre and less than one acre. 
(3)  Minimum lot width: 90 feet. 
(4)  Front yard setback: 25 feet. 
(5)  Rear yard setback, principal building: 20 feet. 
(6)  Side yard setback, principal building: nine feet on each side. 
(7)  Side and rear yard, accessory building: nine feet on each side. 
(Code 1998, § 106-782; Ord. No. 98-2, § 4(13-1-43), 3-30-1998) 
Secs. 133-814-133-834. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 25. - S-1 SENIOR HOUSING DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-835. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of the S-1 Senior Housing District is to provide a district for affordable senior housing that complies with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 106.50(5m) and the Fair Housing Act as amended, 42 USC 3601-3631 (1994). 
(Code 1998, § 106-783; Ord. No. 02-07, § 1, 8-5-2002) 
Sec. 133-836. - Permitted uses. 
    All uses in the S-1 Senior Housing District are conditional uses. 
(Code 1998, § 106-784; Ord. No. 02-07, § 2, 8-5-2002) 
Sec. 133-837. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses in the S-1 Senior Housing District are as follows: 
(1)  Senior housing multifamily dwellings in which at least 80 percent of the units must be occupied by at least one individual age 55 years or older; 
(2)  Senior and community centers; 
(3)  Day care facilities; 
(4)  Community living arrangements for persons age 55 or older serving eight or fewer persons; 
(5)  Nursing homes and assisted living centers; 
(6)  Government buildings; 
(7)  Churches or other places of indoor religious assembly; 
(8)  Commercial, professional and business office uses that are reasonably likely to provide regular service to residents of senior housing facilities and occupy no more than a total of 3,000 square feet of gross floor area per structure. 
(Code 1998, § 106-785; Ord. No. 02-07, § 2, 8-5-2002) 
Sec. 133-838. - Height and area requirements. 
    Height and area requirements in the S-1 Senior Housing District are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. The maximum building height for a principal building shall be 45 feet; for a detached accessory building, the height shall be 20 feet, except where taller buildings are approved as conditional uses. 
(2)  Minimum floor area. The minimum floor area of dwelling units shall be 400 square feet per living unit. 
(3)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area for any use shall be 8,000 square feet. In addition, the following requirements shall be used to calculate the lot area required for a multi-unit structure: 
a.  First unit, 4,000 square feet; 
b.  Each additional one-bedroom unit, 1,000 square feet; 
c.  Each additional two-bedroom unit, 1,300 square feet; 
d.  Each additional three-bedroom unit, 3,000 square feet. 
(4)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 80 feet. 
(5)  Setbacks. The minimum setbacks shall be as follows: 
a.  Front yard, 30 feet; 
b.  Rear yard, principal building, 40 feet; 
c.  Side yards, principal building, 12 feet; 
d.  Side and rear yard, accessory building, three feet on each side. 
(6)  Zero lot line structures. 
a.  For purposes of this section, the term "zero lot line structure" means a single structure which consists of two parts, located on two abutting lots, with a common property line where the two parts meet and are attached, and where there is no side yard setback between the two parts. 
b.  The plan commission may authorize the construction of a zero lot line structure in the S-1 district as a conditional use, if the plan commission finds that the zero lot line structure meets the standards in section 133-936. 
c.  Although no side yard setback is required for a zero lot line structure, a zero lot line structure shall conform to all other applicable regulations. 
d.  A site plan for a zero lot line structure shall be prepared by a certified surveyor and approved by the plan commission before a conditional use permit will be granted. The site plan shall show the proposed location of structures, the side yard, rear yard, and front yard setbacks, and the sizes of the lots upon which the structure is proposed to be located. 
(7)  Minimum green area. Minimum green area shall be 30 percent of the lot area. 
(8)  Minimum building separation. On lots with more than one building, there shall be a minimum separation distance between buildings equal to the sum of the required side yards for each building. 
(Code 1998, § 106-786; Ord. No. 02-07, § 4, 8-5-2002) 
Sec. 133-839. - Other senior housing requirements. 
(a)  The owner or agency shall publish and adhere to policies and procedures that demonstrate intent to provide housing for persons 55 years of age or older. 
(b)  To continue to qualify for the senior housing classification, the owner or agency shall, upon the village's request, file with the village clerk a certified copy of a census of all the residents of the dwelling structure, listing the number of tenants by age and the percentage of dwelling units occupied by at least one person age 55 or older. 
(Code 1998, § 106-787; Ord. No. 02-07, § 5, 8-5-2002) 
Secs. 133-840-133-856. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 26. - SPECIAL TEMPORARY ZONING CLASSIFICATIONS AND RELATED REGULATIONS IN THE JOINT PLANNING AREA AND EXPANDED ETZ AREA 

Sec. 133-857. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal unit means the equivalent of one cow, four hogs, ten sheep, ten goats, 100 poultry, one horse, one pony, one mule or 100 rabbits or an equivalent combination thereof. 
    Home occupation means any occupation carried on by a member of the immediate family residing on the premises, which meets all of the following conditions: 
(1)  That the occupation is conducted within a dwelling and not in an accessory building; 
(2)  That only members of the immediate family residing on the premises may be employed on the premises, plus a maximum of one other unrelated person; 
(3)  That no stock-in-trade is kept or commodities sold, other than those made on the premises; 
(4)  That samples may be kept but not sold on the premises; 
(5)  That no mechanical equipment is used except such as may be used for purely domestic or household purposes; 
(6)  That such occupation shall not require internal or external alterations, or involve construction features not customary in a dwelling; 
(7)  That not more than 25 percent of the floor area of one story of the dwelling is devoted to such home occupation; 
(8)  That the entrance to the space devoted to such occupation is from within the building; 
(9)  That there is no evidence, other than the sign referred to in subsection (10) of this definition, that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling; and 
(10)  That one sign shall be permitted, which sign shall be attached to the building, shall not exceed two square feet in area and shall not be lighted at night. 
    Utility services means transmission and distribution lines both above and below ground which carry electricity, petroleum products, natural or manufactured gas, water, sewer or telephone communications. The term "utility services" includes buildings necessary to operate transmission and distribution lines such as substations, transformer installations, repeated stations, and pumping stations, but does not include offices, garages, manually operated exchanges, terminal distribution facilities, electric generating plants and sewage disposal plants. 
(Code 1998, § 106-790; Ord. No. 98-2, § 4(13-1-44(c)), 3-30-1998) 
Sec. 133-858. - Intent. 
    This division adopts the permitted uses and applicable standards from the county zoning code (as in effect April 30, 1997, for the JPA and as in effect May 21, 2007, for the expanded ETZ area and as may be amended from time to time) to apply only to property in the Waunakee/Westport joint planning area (the "JPA") and expanded ETZ area as defined at section 133-18, so that property in the JPA and expanded ETZ area can be placed in a zoning district which has the same permitted uses and standards which applied to such property as it was classified under the county zoning code prior to creation of the JPA or expanded ETZ area. This division does not adopt any conditional uses from the county zoning code. 
(Code 1998, § 106-788; Ord. No. 98-2, § 4(13-1-44(a)), 3-30-1998; Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 133-859. - Limited use of zoning classifications and regulations. 
(a)  Application. The zoning classifications and regulations in this division shall apply only to properties in the JPA and expanded ETZ area which were in a zoning classification contained in this division under a corresponding provision of the county zoning code at the time the JPA and expanded ETZ area were created. No other property under the village's zoning jurisdiction may be zoned any of the zoning classifications in this division, except for use of the county A-1 Agriculture District (Exclusive) for farmland preservation tax credit purposes. 
(b)  Rezonings. No property in the JPA or expanded ETZ area classified as one of the districts set forth in this division may be rezoned to any other district in this division, it being the intent that these provisions are to be used temporarily until such time as the parcels in the JPA or expanded ETZ area are rezoned using only the zoning classification found in other sections of the village zoning code, above, except for use of the county A-1 Agriculture District (Exclusive) for farmland preservation tax credit purposes. 
(c)  Land divisions . No division of property with a zoning classification under this division shall be approved or allowed until that property is rezoned to an appropriate zoning classification other than under this division, pursuant to the procedures in this chapter except for use of the county A-1 Agriculture District (Exclusive) for farmland preservation tax credit purposes. 
(d)  Regulations outside this division. The regulations of this division shall apply only in the JPA or expanded ETZ area and only to property designated one of the zoning classifications contained in this section. To the extent such regulations conflict with other regulations of this chapter, the regulations of this division shall apply to property both in the JPA or expanded ETZ area and classified under one of the zoning districts contained in this division. The regulations in this section shall not apply outside the JPA and expanded ETZ area. Any other regulations contained in this chapter which do not conflict with any regulations in this division (including definitions) shall be applicable in the JPA and expanded ETZ area and shall apply to property in a zoning district classification found in this division, such provisions being supplementary to the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1998, § 106-789; Ord. No. 98-2, § 4(13-1-44(b)), 3-30-1998; Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 17-6, § 1, 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 133-860. - Districts. 
    Regulations for the special temporary zoning classifications in the joint planning area are as follows: 
(1)  County R-1 Residence District. 
a.  Permitted uses. Permitted uses for the county R-1 Residence District are as follows: 
1.  Single-family detached dwellings; 
2.  Utility services; 
3.  Home occupations, as defined in section 133-857; 
4.  Uses and buildings, clearly incidental and necessary to permit use on the premises; 
5.  Community living arrangements for less than nine persons. Foster homes for less than five children licensed under Wis. Stats. § 48.62. 
b.  Building height limit. Building height limits for the county R-1 Residence District are as follows: 
1.  For residential dwelling, 21/2 stories or 35 feet. 
2.  Accessory buildings shall not exceed 12 feet in height. 
c.  Lot width and area. Lot width and area requirements for the county R-1 Residence District are as follows: 
1.  Unsewered lots shall be not less than 100 feet in width at the building setback line and have an area of not less than 20,000 square feet. 
2.  Sewered lots shall be not less than 100 feet in width at the building setback line and have an area of not less than 15,000 square feet. 
d.  Lot coverage. In the county R-1 Residence District, no building together with its accessory buildings shall occupy in excess of 30 percent of the area of an interior lot or 35 percent of the area of a corner lot. 
e.  Setback requirements. In the county R-1 Residence District, setback from front lot line or highway right-of-way lines shall conform to the requirements of section 133-862. 
f.  Side yard requirements. In the county R-1 Residence District, there shall be total side yards of not less than 25 feet and no single side yard shall be less than ten feet. 
g.  Rear yard requirements. In the county R-1 Residence District, the minimum depth of any rear yard shall be 50 feet. 
(2)  County R-2 Residence District. 
a.  Permitted uses. All uses permitted in the county R-1 Residence District. 
b.  Building height limit. 
1.  Residential dwelling, two and one-half stories or 35 feet. 
2.  Accessory buildings shall not exceed 12 feet in height. 
c.  Lot width area. 
1.  Unsewered lots shall be not less than 100 feet in width at the building setback line and have an area of not less than 20,000 square feet. 
2.  Sewered lots shall be not less than 75 feet in width at the building setback line and have an area of not less than 10,000 square feet. 
d.  Lot coverage. No building together with its accessory buildings shall occupy in excess of 35 percent of the area of an interior lot or 40 percent of the area of a corner lot. 
e.  Setback requirements. Setback from front lot line or highway right-of-way lines shall conform to the requirements of section 133-862. 
f.  Side yard requirements. The minimum width of any side yard shall be ten feet. 
g.  Rear yard requirements. The minimum depth of any rear yard shall be 35 feet. 
(3)  County R-3 Residence District. 
a.  Permitted uses. Permitted uses for the county R-1 Residence District shall be all uses permitted in the county R-1 Residence District. 
b.  Building height limit. Building height limits for the county R-3 Residence District shall be as follows: 
1.  For a residential dwelling 21/2 stories or 35 feet. 
2.  Accessory buildings shall not exceed 12 feet in height. 
c.  Lot width and area. Lot width and area requirements for the county R-3 Residence District are as follows: 
1.  Unsewered lots shall be not less than 100 feet in width at the building setback line and have an area of not less than 20,000 square feet. 
2.  Sewered lots shall be not less than 60 feet in width at the building setback line and have an area of not less than 8,000 square feet. 
d.  Lot coverage. In the county R-3 Residence District, no building together with its accessory buildings shall occupy in excess of 35 percent of the area of an interior lot or 40 percent of the area of a corner lot. 
e.  Setback requirements. In the county R-3 Residence District, setback from front lot line or highway right-of-way lines shall conform to the provisions of section 133-862. 
f.  Side yard requirements. In the county R-3 Residence District, the minimum width of any side yard shall be ten feet. 
g.  Rear yard requirements. In the county R-3 Residence District, the minimum depth of any rear yard shall be 25 feet. 
(4)  County R-3A Residence District. 
a.  Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the county R-3A Residence District are as follows: 
1.  All uses permitted in the county R-1 Residence District; 
2.  Duplexes. 
b.  Building height limit. Building height limits in the county R-3A Residence District are as follows: 
1.  Residential dwellings, 21/2 stories or 35 feet; 
2.  Accessory buildings shall not exceed 12 feet in height. 
c.  Lot width and area. Lot width and area for county R-3A Residence Districts are as follows: 
1.  Unsewered lots for both single-family and duplex dwellings shall be not less than 100 feet in width at the building setback line and have an area of not less than 20,000 square feet; 
2.  Sewered lots for single-family dwellings shall be not less than 60 feet in width at the building setback line and have an area of not less than 8,000 square feet; 
3.  Sewered lots for duplex dwellings shall be not less than 75 feet in width at the building setback line and have an area of not less than 10,000 square feet. 
d.  Lot coverage. In the county R-3A Residence District, no building together with its accessory buildings shall occupy in excess of 30 percent of the area of an interior lot or 35 percent of the area of a corner lot. 
e.  Setback requirements. In the county R-3A Residence District, setback from front lot line or highway right-of-way line shall conform to the requirements of section 133-862. 
f.  Side yard requirements. In the county R-3A Residence District, the minimum width of any side yard shall be ten feet. 
g.  Rear yard requirements. Rear yard requirements for the county R-3A Residence District are as follows: 
1.  For single-family dwellings, the minimum depth of any rear yard shall be 25 feet. 
2.  For duplex dwellings, the minimum depth of any rear yard shall be 35 feet. 
h.  Off-street parking. For duplex dwelling units in the county R-3A Residence District, off-street parking shall be provided as required in section 133-863. 
(5)  County R-4 Residence District. 
a.  Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the county R-4 Residence District are as follows: 
1.  All uses permitted in the county R-3A Residence District; 
2.  Multiple-family dwellings, condominiums; 
3.  Community living arrangements for from nine to 15 persons. 
b.  Building height limit. Building height limit for the county R-4 Residence District are as follows: 
1.  Single-family and duplex dwellings, 21/2 stories or 35 feet. 
2.  Multiple-family dwellings, four stories. 
3.  Accessory buildings shall not exceed 12 feet in height. 
c.  Lot width and area. Lot width and area for the county R-4 Residence District are as follows: 
1.  Unsewered lots for single-family, duplex dwellings and multiple-family dwellings shall be not less than 100 feet in width at the building setback line and have an area of not less than 20,000 square feet; 
2.  Sewered lots. 
(i)  Lots for single-family and duplex dwelling units shall be the same as the county R-3A Residence District; 
(ii)  Lots for multiple-family dwellings shall be not less than 60 feet in width at the building setback line and have an area of not less than 8,000 square feet. 
d.  Lot area and coverage. Lot area and coverage for the county R-4 Residence District are as follows: 
1.  For single-family and duplex dwellings, the lot coverage shall be the same as for county R-3A Residence District; 
2.  Unsewered lots for multiple-family dwellings shall provide a minimum of 5,000 square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit; 
3.  Sewered lots for multiple-family dwellings shall provide a minimum of 2,000 square feet of lot area for each efficiency, one bedroom, and two bedroom dwelling unit and a minimum of 2,250 square feet of lot area for each three bedroom or more dwelling units. If a building contains a mixture of efficiency, one and two bedroom and three or more bedroom dwelling units, the lot area requirements shall be prorated. In computing lot areas for multiple-family dwelling complexes, private roads, driveways, parking areas, and recreational areas common to all of the buildings in the complex shall be considered as part of the total area of the complex. 
e.  Setback and front yard requirements. Setback and front yard requirements for the county R-4 Residence District are as follows: 
1.  Setback from both the front lot line and any road right-of-way lines shall conform to the requirements of section 133-862; 
2.  Private roads or driveways within a multiple-family dwelling complex shall not be considered a road for determining setback; 
3.  Multiple-family dwelling buildings located in the interior of a complex shall provide a front yard of not less than 15 feet, each building shall be provided with its own front yard area irrespective of the yards required for other buildings. 
f.  Side yard requirements. Side yard requirements for the county R-4 Residence District are as follows: 
1.  For single-family and duplex buildings, the side yards shall be a minimum of ten feet on each side. 
2.  Multiple-family dwelling buildings shall adhere to the following requirements: 
(i)  Buildings which are two stories or less in height shall have a minimum ten-foot side yard on each side of the building; 
(ii)  Buildings which are more than two stories in height shall have side yards as follows: 
A.  If the side of a building does not include any windows for apartment dwellings a minimum side yard of ten feet on that side is required; 
B.  If the side of a building does include windows for apartment dwellings an additional five feet of side yard for each story over two stories is required on that side. 
(iii)  Buildings located within a complex shall each be provided with their own side yard areas irrespective of the yards required for other buildings. 
g.  Rear yard. Rear yard requirements for the county R-4 Residence District are as follows: 
1.  For single-family dwellings and duplex buildings, the rear yards shall be a minimum of 25 feet. 
2.  For multiple-family dwellings not exceeding two stories, the rear yard shall be not less than 25 feet. For buildings exceeding two stories, the rear yard shall be increased by five feet for each story over two stories. 
h.  Off-street parking. Off-street parking for the county R-4 Residence District shall be provided as required in section 133-863. 
(6)  County RH-1 Rural Homes District. 
a.  Permitted uses. Permitted uses for the county RH-1 Rural Homes District are as follows: 
1.  All uses permitted in the county R-1 Residence District; 
2.  Agricultural uses, the number of livestock kept on a zoning lot in the county RH-1 Rural Homes District shall not exceed one animal unit for each full area; 
3.  Home occupations, as defined in section 133-857; 
4.  Utility services; 
5.  Uses and buildings, clearly incidental and necessary to a permitted use on the premises. 
b.  Building height limit. Residential buildings in the county RH-1 Rural Homes District shall not exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet. 
c.  Lot width and area. In the county RH-1 Rural Homes District, the minimum lot width shall be 150 feet to be measured at the front building line of a residence, also at the location of any accessory building for the housing of livestock; the minimum lot area shall be not less than two acres. 
d.  Lot coverage. In the county RH-1 Rural Homes District, no residential building together with its accessory buildings shall cover in excess of ten percent of the lot area. 
e.  Setback requirements. Setback from front lot line or highway right-of-way lines in the county RH-1 Rural Homes District shall conform to the requirements of section 133-862. 
f.  Side yard requirements. Side yard requirements in the county RH-1 Rural Homes District are as follows: 
1.  For residential buildings there shall be a total of 25 feet of side yards and no single side yard shall be less than ten feet; 
2.  Accessory buildings for the housing of livestock shall be located not less than 50 feet from any side lot line; 
3.  Other accessory buildings shall be located not less than ten feet from any side lot line. 
g.  Rear yard requirements. Rear yard requirements in the county RH-1 Rural Homes District are as follows: 
1.  For residential buildings, the minimum rear yards shall be not less than 50 feet; 
2.  Accessory buildings for the housing of livestock shall be located not less than 50 feet from any rear lot line; 
3.  Other accessory buildings shall be located not less than ten feet from any rear lot line. 
(7)  County RH-2 Rural Homes District. 
a.  Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the county RH-2 Rural Homes District are all uses permitted in the county RH-1 Rural Homes District. 
b.  Building height limit. Building height limit in the county RH-2 Rural Homes District shall be the same as the county RH-1 Rural Homes District. 
c.  Lot width and area. The minimum lot width in the county RH-2 Rural Homes District shall be 150 feet to be measured at the front building line of a residence, also at the location of any accessory building for the housing of livestock; the minimum lot area shall be not less than four acres. 
d.  Lot coverage, setback, side yard and rear yard requirements. Lot coverage, setback, side yard and rear yard requirements for the county RH-2 Rural Homes District shall be the same as for the county RH-1 Rural Homes District. 
(8)  County RH-3 Rural Homes District. 
a.  Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the county RH-3 Rural Homes District are all uses permitted in the county RH-1 Rural Homes District; 
b.  Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the county RH-3 Rural Homes District are all conditional uses permitted in the county RH-1 Rural Homes District; 
c.  Building height limit. Building height limit in the county RH-3 Rural Homes District shall be the same as the county RH-1 Rural Homes District; 
d.  Lot width and area. The minimum lot width in the county RH-3 Rural Homes District shall be 150 feet to be measured at the front building line of a residence, also at the location of any accessory building for the housing of livestock; the minimum lot area shall be not less than eight acres; 
e.  Lot coverage, setback, side yard and rear yard requirements. Lot coverage, setback, side yard and rear yard requirements for the county RH-3 Rural Homes District shall be the same as county RH-1 Rural Homes District. 
(9)  County RH-4 Rural Homes District. 
a.  Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the county RH-4 Rural Homes District are all uses permitted in the county RH-1 Rural Homes District; 
b.  Building height limit. Building height limit in the county RH-4 Rural Homes District shall be the same as the county RH-1 Rural Homes District; 
c.  Lot width and area. The minimum lot width in the county RH-4 Rural Homes District shall be 150 feet to be measured at the front building line of a residence, also at the location of any accessory building for the housing of livestock; the minimum lot area shall be not less than 16 acres; 
d.  Lot coverage, setback, side yard and rear yard requirements. Lot coverage, setback, side yard and rear yard requirements for the county RH-1 Rural Homes District shall be the same as for the county RH-1 Rural Homes District. 
(10)  County B-1 Local Business District. 
a.  Intent and purpose. The county B-1 Local Business District is to provide a zoning district for retail businesses and services that do not include manufacturing or major assembly of items or products. Residential use is intended to be limited, outside storage of items is restricted and landscaping of properties is required. 
b.  Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the county B-1 Local Business District: 
1.  Retail sales or retail service businesses including related services but not including sales, servicing or repair of motor vehicles or any business or service for which the items offered for sale or which require service are stored, parked or displayed outside of a building, except as provided by this division; 
2.  Outdoor sales events limited to two events per year. For purposes of this subsection, a single event is one which is held on consecutive days of not more than ten days in duration; 
3.  Storage of items or materials incidental to an established retail or service use on the premises but not to serve any other business or location. Such storage shall be in an enclosed building or enclosed area as provided by section 133-861. Miniwarehouses are considered to be warehousing and are not permitted in the county B-1 Local Business District; 
4.  Medical, dental and veterinary clinics; 
5.  Banks, offices and office buildings; 
6.  Utility services; 
7.  Schools and educational facilities except truck driving or construction equipment operator schools; 
8.  Recreational facilities affiliated with a permitted B-1 use and which are not lighted for night operation; 
9.  Rental or lease of boat slips; 
10.  Private clubs or organizations; 
11.  Theaters and auditoriums. 
c.  Building height limit. Building height in the county B-1 Local Business District shall be limited to the lesser of six stories or 75 feet. A conditional use permit is required for buildings proposed to be over four stories in height; 
d.  Area, frontage and population density regulations. Area, frontage and population density regulations for the county B-1 Local Business District are as follows: 
1.  For parcels or sites to be used exclusively for business purposes, there is no minimum parcel width and no area limitations. Buildings shall not occupy in excess of 60 percent of the area of a parcel; 
2.  Parcels or sites which will be used for multifamily residential purposes or for combined business and apartment uses shall not be less than 60 feet in width at the building setback line and shall provide parcel areas as follows: 
(i)  On parcels not serviced by public sewer a minimum of 5,000 square feet of parcel area shall be provided for each apartment; 
(ii)  On parcels serviced by public sewer a minimum parcel area shall be provided as follows: 
A.  For each efficiency apartment and apartments which have one or two bedrooms a parcel area of 2,000 square feet shall be provided; 
B.  For each apartment containing three or more bedrooms a minimum of 2,250 square feet of parcel area shall be provided. 
(iii)  The setback, side yard, rear yard and parking space areas may be used to satisfy the required parcel area for apartments. 
e.  Setback from road and front property line and front yard requirements. Setback from road and front property line and front yard requirements in the county B-1 Local Business District are as follows: 
1.  Buildings in rural areas shall be set back from both the front lot line and any road right-of-way as provided by section 133-862; 
2.  Buildings in urban areas which are used strictly for commercial uses shall be set back from both the front lot line and any road right-of-way a minimum distance of five feet; 
3.  Buildings in urban areas which are used for residential uses or a combination of commercial and residential uses shall be set back from the front property line and any road right-of-way as provided by section 133-862; 
4.  Private roads or driveways within a multiple-family dwelling or business building complex shall not be considered a road for determining setback; 
5.  Buildings located in the interior of a complex shall provide a front yard of not less than 15 feet. Each building shall be provided with its own front yard area irrespective of the yards required for other buildings. 
f.  Side yard requirements. Side yard requirements for the county B-1 Local Business District are as follows: 
1.  Buildings which are two stories or less in height shall have a minimum ten-foot side yard on each side of the building; 
2.  Buildings which are more than two stories in height shall have side yards as follows: 
(i)  If the side of a building does not include any windows for apartment dwellings or offices a minimum side yard of ten feet on that side is required; 
(ii)  If the side of a building does include windows for apartment dwellings or offices an additional five feet of side yard for each story over two stories is required on that side. 
3.  Buildings located within a complex shall each be provided with their own side yard area irrespective of the yards required for other buildings. 
g.  Rear yard area requirements. Rear yard area requirements for the county B-1 Local Business District are as follows: 
1.  Buildings which are two stories or less in height shall have a minimum rear yard of ten feet; 
2.  Buildings which are more than two stories in height shall have rear yards as follows: 
(i)  If the rear of a building does not include any windows for apartment dwellings or offices a minimum rear yard of ten feet is required; 
(ii)  If the rear of a building does include windows for apartment dwellings or offices an additional five feet of rear yard for each story over two stories is required. 
3.  Buildings located within a complex shall each be provided with their own rear yard areas irrespective of the yards required for other buildings. 
h.  Off-street parking. In the county B-1 Local Business District, off-street parking space shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 133-863; 
i.  Screening provisions. On lots in the county B-1 Local Business District which are adjacent to or abutting land in a residence district, screening shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 133-861(7); 
j.  Landscaping. In the county B-1 Local Business District, all properties on which new construction or expansion of use is proposed shall provide landscaping in accordance with section 133-861; 
k.  Truck parking. In the county B-1 Local Business District, truck parking is subject to section 133-861(1)c. 
(11)  County A-B Agriculture-Business District. The county A-B Agriculture-Business District is designed to provide for those uses which are commercial in nature; are associated with local agricultural production; require a rural location due to extensive land area needs or proximity of resources; and do not require urban services. 
a.  Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the county A-B Agriculture-Business District are as follows: 
1.  Sales, service and repair of machinery and equipment used in farming; 
2.  Sales distribution, mixing, blending and storage of feeds, seeds and fertilizer; 
3.  Livestock and farm commodity trucking services; 
4.  Processing and preserving of natural agricultural products, fruits and vegetables; 
5.  Sale, service and repair of lawn and garden equipment; 
6.  Sales and distribution of nursery stock and plants; 
7.  Residential use for an owner of the business; 
8.  Sales and service of small scale methane generating equipment and alcohol distilling equipment that is designed for use in a farm operation; 
9.  Sales and service of wind driven electrical generating equipment. 
b.  Building height limit. Building height limits in the county A-B Agriculture-Business District are as follows: 
1.  For buildings containing offices, sales rooms and service areas, and residential buildings, the maximum height shall be 21/2 stories or 35 feet; 
2.  For all other buildings such as silos, bins and feed and seed storage facilities, no maximum height. 
c.  Area and lot width. In the county A-B Agriculture-Business District, a lot shall be not less than 100 feet in width at the building setback line and have an area of at least 20,000 square feet; 
d.  Density. In the county A-B Agriculture-Business District, buildings shall not occupy more than 60 percent of the area of an interior or corner lot; 
e.  Setback requirements. In the county A-B Agriculture-Business District, buildings that are erected, altered or moved shall be set back not less than is prescribed in section 133-862; 
f.  Side yard requirements. In the county A-B Agriculture-Business District, the side yard requirement shall be ten feet; 
g.  Rear yard requirements. In the county A-B Agriculture-Business District, the rear yard requirement shall be ten feet; 
h.  Off-street parking. In the county A-B Agriculture-Business District, off-street parking shall be provided as required by section 133-863. 
(12)  County A-1 Agriculture District (Exclusive). 
a.  Statement of purpose . The purposes of the county A-1 Exclusive Agriculture District are to preserve productive agricultural land for food and fiber production; preserve productive farms by preventing land use conflicts between incompatible uses and controlling public service costs; maintain a viable agricultural base to support agricultural processing and service industries; prevent conflicts between incompatible uses; reduce costs for providing services to scattered nonfarm uses; pace and shape urban growth; implement the provisions of the county agricultural plan when adopted and periodically revised; and comply with the provisions of the Farmland Preservation Law to permit eligible landowners to receive tax credits under Wis. Stats. § 71.613. 
b.  Lands to be included within the county A-1 Exclusive Agriculture District. This district is generally intended to apply to lands in productive farm operations including lands historically exhibiting good crop yields or capable of such yields; lands which have been demonstrated to be productive for dairying, livestock raising and grazing; other lands which are integral parts of such farm operations; land used for the production of specialty crops such as mint, sod, fruits and vegetables; and lands which are capable of productive use through economically feasible improvements such as irrigation. 
c.  Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the county A-1 Exclusive Agriculture District are as follows: 
1.  Agricultural use as defined in Wis. Stats § 91.01(2); 
2.  Residence for farm owner/operator. Substantial income must be derived from the farm operation; 
3.  Residences for owners of at least 35 acres of land that existed prior to January 1, 2014, shall be considered a permitted use; 
4.  Secondary farm residences which are occupied by a person who, or a family at least one member of which earns more than 50 percent of their gross income from farm operations on the farm; 
5.  Rental of existing or secondary residences no longer utilized in the operation of the farm; 
6.  Day cares meeting the standards of Wis. Stats § 91.01(1); 
7.  Utility uses meeting the standards of Wis. Stats § 91.44(f); 
8.  Roadside stands meeting the standards of Wis. Stats § 91.01(1); 
9.  Structures and improvements consistent with agricultural uses; 
10.  Home occupations meeting the standards of Wis. Stats § 91.01(b) or (d). 
d.  Building height limits. Building height limits in the county A-1 Exclusive Agriculture District are as follows: 
1.  Residential dwellings shall not exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height; 
2.  Residential accessory buildings shall not exceed 16 feet in height; 
3.  For agricultural accessory buildings there is no limitation on height. 
e.  Area, frontage and population density regulations. Area, frontage and population density regulations in the county A-1 Exclusive Agriculture District are as follows: 
1.  The minimum lot size to establish or maintain a farm operation is 35 acres; 
2.  The minimum lot size for residential uses shall be the same as for the county R-1 Residence District. 
f.  Setback requirements. In the county A-1 Exclusive Agriculture District, no building, including barns and other farm buildings of any description whatsoever, shall be erected, moved or structurally altered so as to be nearer the highway than is prescribed by section 133-862; 
g.  Side yard requirements. Side yard requirements in the county A-1 Exclusive Agriculture District are as follows: 
1.  Side yards for residential dwellings and residential accessory buildings shall be the same as for the county R-1 Residence District; 
2.  Accessory buildings, cages or hives for housing of animals or insects shall be located at least 100 feet from a county R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-3A or R-4 Residence District, except with respect to existing structures when the residence district has been created for an existing farm residence or by separating a farm residence from a farm property and the separated parcel has been rezoned to a residence district after or at the time of the division. 
h.  Rear yard requirements. Rear yard requirements in the county A-1 Exclusive Agriculture District are as follows: 
1.  Rear yards for residential dwellings and residential accessory buildings shall be the same as for the county R-1 district; 
2.  Accessory buildings, cages, kennels, hives and runs for housing of animals or insects shall be located at least 100 feet from a county R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-3A or R-4 Residence District, except with respect to existing structures when the residence district has been created for an existing farm residence or by separating a farm residence from a farm property and the separated parcel has been rezoned to a residence district after or at the time of the division. 
i.  General provisions applicable to the county A-1 Exclusive Agriculture District. In addition to the conditions provided for in section 133-861(1), the following additional conditions shall apply: 
1.  Residential and residential accessory buildings on parcels of less than 35 acres in the county A-1 Exclusive Agriculture District shall comply with the lot width and area standards applicable in the county R-1 Residence District; 
2.  The keeping or raising of livestock is not permitted on parcels in the county A-1 Exclusive Agriculture District which have an area of less than five acres; 
3.  Any residential building or its accessory building that is located on a substandard parcel as defined herein and which is destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God or act of public enemy may be rebuilt provided the locational requirements of the county R-1 Residence District are complied with; 
4.  The provisions of section 133-861(1)b.1 pertaining to real estate offices do not apply to lands in this district. 
j.  Rezoning of land in the county A-1 Exclusive Agriculture District. No land in the county A-1 Exclusive Agriculture District shall be rezoned except in accordance with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 91.48, and the village shall provide the report required therein. 
(13)  County A-2 Agriculture District. 
a.  Statement of purpose. The purpose of the county A-2 Agriculture District is to provide for low density land uses compatible with agricultural and other rural uses and to accommodate agricultural uses on parcels of less than 35 acres; 
b.  Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the county A-2 Agriculture District are as follows: 
1.  Agricultural uses; 
2.  Single-family detached residences; 
3.  Utility services; 
4.  Home occupations as defined in section 133-857(2); 
5.  Accessory buildings. 
(i)  Accessory buildings include private garages and buildings clearly incidental to a permitted use of the premises. Such buildings shall not be used for residential purposes. The building shall not be used for the storage of goods or merchandise considered to be a dealer's inventory or for storage of machinery or equipment used off of the premises for other than agricultural purposes; 
(ii)  Accessory buildings may be built on parcels of land in the county A-2 Agriculture District without the necessity of there being a residence on the property. 
c.  Building height limits. Building height limits in the county A-2 Agriculture District are as follows: 
1.  Residential dwellings shall not exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height; 
2.  Residential accessory buildings shall not exceed 16 feet in height; 
3.  For agricultural accessory buildings there is no limitation on height. 
d.  Area, frontage and population density regulations. Area, frontage and population density regulations in the county A-2 Agriculture District are as follows: 
1.  A-2(1) = Minimum one acre; 
2.  A-2(2) = Minimum two acres; 
3.  A-2(4) = Minimum four acres; 
4.  A-2(8) = Minimum eight acres; 
5.  A-2 = Minimum 16 acres; 
6.  Keeping of livestock: 
(i)  On parcels of less than two acres the keeping of livestock is not permitted; 
(ii)  On parcels of less than three acres through 16 acres livestock shall be limited to one animal unit per each full acre; 
(iii)  On parcels of more than 16 acres, no limit to the number of livestock; 
7.  Salvage recycling centers: Minimum area is three acres; 
8.  For residential uses, the lot width and area shall be the same as for the county R-1 Residence District; 
9.  For other permitted uses, there shall be no minimum width or area except for those uses for which special setback and side yard requirements have been established. 
e.  Setback requirements. Setback requirements in the county A-2 Agriculture District, no building, including barns and other farm buildings of any description whatsoever, shall be erected, moved or structurally altered so as to be nearer the highway than is prescribed by section 133-862. 
f.  Side yard requirements. Side yard requirements in the county A-2 Agriculture District are as follows: 
1.  Side yards for residential dwellings and residential accessory buildings shall be the same as for the county R-1 Residence District; 
2.  Accessory buildings, cages, kennels, hives and runs for housing of animals or insects shall be located at least 100 feet from a county R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-3A or R-4 Residence District, except with respect to existing structures when the residence district has been created for an existing farm residence or by separating a farm residence from a farm property and the separated parcel has been rezoned to a residence district after or at the time of the division. 
g.  Rear yard requirements. Rear yard requirements in the county A-2 Agriculture District are as follows: 
1.  Rear yards for residential dwellings and residential accessory buildings shall be the same as for the county R-1 Residence District; 
2.  Accessory buildings, cages, kennels, hives and runs for housing of animals or insects shall be located at least 100 feet from a county R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-3A or R-4 Residence District, except with respect to existing structures when the residence district has been created for an existing farm residence or by separating a farm residence from a farm property and the separated parcel has been rezoned to a residence district after or at the time of the division. 
(14)  County A-3 Agriculture District. 
a.  Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the county A-3 Agriculture District are all uses permitted in the county A-1 Exclusive Agriculture District; 
b.  Building height limit. Building height in the county A-3 Agriculture District shall be the same as for the county A-1 Exclusive Agriculture District; 
c.  Area, frontage and population density regulations. Area, frontage and population density regulations in the county A-3 Agriculture District shall be the same as for the county A-1 Exclusive Agriculture District; 
d.  Setback requirements. Setback requirements in the county A-3 Agriculture District shall be the same as for the county A-1 Exclusive Agriculture District; 
e.  Side yard requirements. Side yard requirements in the county A-3 Agriculture District shall be the same as for the county A-1 Exclusive Agriculture District; 
f.  Rear yard requirements. The minimum rear yard in the county A-3 Agriculture District shall be the same as for the county A-1 Exclusive Agriculture District; 
g.  General provisions. General provisions applicable to the county A-3 Agriculture District shall be the same as for the county A-1 Exclusive Agriculture District. 
(15)  County C-1 Commercial District. 
a.  Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the county C-1 Commercial District are as follows: 
1.  Retail and service uses including, but not limited to, grocery stores, drugstores, hardware stores, appliance and furniture stores, barbershops and beauty shops without limitation as to size; 
2.  Self-service laundries and dry cleaning establishments; 
3.  Warehousing and storage incidental to a permitted use on the premises. Miniwarehouses are excluded from use in the county C-1 Commercial District; 
4.  Medical, dental and veterinary clinics; 
5.  Banks, offices, office buildings and condominium office buildings devoting not more than two floors to office space; 
6.  Utility services; 
7.  Roominghouses and boardinghouses; 
8.  Bakeries, printing plants, laundries, dry cleaning plants; 
9.  Distribution centers and wholesale businesses; 
10.  Woodworking shops, machine shops, manufacturing and assembly plants; 
11.  Bicycle sales and service; 
12.  Rental businesses, except for motor vehicles and construction machinery and equipment; 
13.  Experimental laboratories not to exceed 5,000 square feet of floor area; 
14.  Sales and repair of lawn and garden equipment; 
15.  Games such as horseshoes, volleyball or similar activities not lighted for night operation; 
16.  Marinas. 
b.  Building height limit. Building height limit in the county C-1 Commercial District are as follows: 
1.  For business buildings, including offices, the maximum building height shall be four stories, provided however, that no building may provide more than two stories devoted to office space; 
2.  Lots or building sites for residential purposes or for combined business and residential uses shall comply with the requirements of the county R-4 Residence District. 
c.  Area, frontage and population density regulations. Area, frontage and population density regulations in the county C-1 Commercial District shall be the same as for the county B-1 Local Business District. 
d.  Setback requirements. Setback from front lot line or highway right-of-way in the county C-1 Commercial District shall comply with the provisions of section 133-862. 
e.  Side yard requirements. Side yard requirements in the county C-1 Commercial District shall be the same as for the county B-1 Local Business District. 
f.  Rear yard requirements. Rear yard requirements in the county C-1 Commercial District are as follows: 
1.  For buildings to be used exclusively for business purposes the minimum depth of any rear yard shall be ten feet; 
2.  For residential buildings, or buildings combining residential and business uses, the minimum depth of any rear yard shall be 25 feet. 
g.  Off-street parking. In the county C-1 Commercial District, off-street parking space shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 133-863. 
h.  Screening provisions. In the county C-1 Commercial District, on lots adjacent to or abutting land in a residence district, the screening provisions of section 133-861(7) shall be complied with prior to the issuance of a certificate of compliance or occupancy permit. 
(16)  County C-2 Commercial District. 
a.  Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the county C-2 Commercial District are as follows: 
1.  All uses permitted in the county C-1 Commercial District without limitations as to size; 
2.  Major repairs to motor vehicles; 
3.  Sales of new and used motor vehicles; 
4.  Sales of new and used mobile homes, recreational equipment rental, sales and service; 
5.  Sales of new and used contractor's machinery and equipment; 
6.  Repairs, storage and service of contractor's machinery and equipment; 
7.  Rental and leasing of motor vehicles, contractor's machinery and equipment; 
8.  Bulk fuel storage, sales and storage of lumber and building material; 
9.  Truck and bus terminals; 
10.  Auxiliary or supplemental electric generating stations; 
11.  Fertilizer mixing or blending plants; 
12.  Slaughterhouses, meat processing plants; 
13.  Bottling plants; 
14.  Utility services; 
15.  Storage, repair and maintenance of carnival, concession and circus machinery and equipment; 
16.  Automobile and truck driver training schools and construction equipment operator training schools that are privately owned and operated for profit; 
17.  Parking or storing of motor vehicles; 
18.  Storage or processing of scrap or waste materials, conducted entirely within a building; 
19.  Warehouses; 
20.  Games such as horseshoes, volleyball or similar activities not lighted for night operation; 
21.  Miniwarehouses. 
b.  Building height limit. The maximum height for all buildings in the county C-2 Commercial District shall be 50 feet. Tanks, storage bins, silos and towers shall not be subject to this limitation. 
c.  Area, frontage and population density regulations. Area, frontage and population density regulations in the county C-2 Commercial District are as follows: 
1.  The area and frontage shall be the same as for the county B-1 Local Business District; 
2.  Any principal building together with its accessory building shall not cover more than 60 percent of the lot area. 
d.  Setback requirements. In the county C-2 Commercial District, setback from front lot line or highway right-of-way shall conform to the provisions of section 133-862. 
e.  Side yard requirements. Side yard requirements in the county C-2 Commercial District shall be the same as for the county B-1 Local Business District. 
f.  Rear yard requirements. For business and commercial buildings in the county C-2 Commercial District, the minimum depth of any rear yard shall be ten feet. 
g.  Screening provisions. On lots in the county C-2 Commercial District adjacent to or abutting land in a residence district, the screening provisions of section 133-861(7) shall be complied with prior to the issuance of a certificate of compliance or occupancy permit. 
(Code 1998, § 106-791; Ord. No. 98-2, § 4(13-1-44(d)-(s)), 3-30-1998; Ord. No. 13-9, § 1, 5-6-2013; Ord. No. 17-6, § 2, 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 133-861. - General provisions and exceptions. 
    The following provisions apply only in the JPA and expanded ETZ area, and only to property designated under one of the zoning classifications contained in this division: 
(1)  Use. 
a.  Any use not listed as a permitted use in a district is prohibited in that district and, except as otherwise expressly provided, any use listed as a permitted use in any other district shall be construed as a prohibited use in any other district. 
b.  The following uses shall be permitted in the districts specified when these uses do not alter the character of the premises in respect to their use for the purposes permitted in that district: 
1.  In any district, real estate offices and signs advertising property for sale for a period not to exceed one year; 
2.  In any district, temporary buildings and the temporary storage of materials and equipment incidental to the construction of buildings on the premises, for a period not to exceed one year. 
c.  Storage or parking of motor vehicles. 
1.  In the county R-1, R-2, R-3, R-3A, R-4 and RH-1 Residence Districts and on any lot in the county A-2 Agriculture District on which the principal use is residential, motor vehicles used for personal transportation, recreational vehicles, and trailers owned by persons who are resident on the premises may be parked or stored provided that the gross vehicle weight does not exceed 12,000 pounds; 
2.  In the county A-B Agriculture-Business District, county B-1 Local Business District and the county C-1 Commercial District, motor vehicles that are accessory to a permitted and principal use on any lot can be stored or parked; 
3.  Any automobile licensed as an antique or special interest vehicle under Wis. Stats. § 341.266 or parts cars therefor, can be stored on a lot in any district provided that those vehicles are stored as required by Wis. Stats. § 341.266(4); 
4.  Farm trucks or trailers licensed under Wis. Stats. §§ 341.26(3)(a), (b) or 340.01(73) or 341.30, may be parked in an agriculture district; 
5.  Trucks, whose gross vehicle weight exceeds 12,000 pounds, semitractors and semitrailers shall be stored or parked only in the county C-2 Commercial District or county M-1 Industrial District, except as otherwise provided by this division; 
6.  Subject to Wis. Stats. § 341.266(4), a motor vehicle that is inoperable or unlicensed is considered as salvage or junk and can only be stored in a licensed salvage recycling center. A parts car stored as provided for in subsection (1)c.3 of this section shall not be subject to this subsection; 
7.  Trucks licensed on a monthly or quarterly basis shall be considered as currently licensed if they have been licensed for at least one period during the previous year; 
8.  The storage of not more than one motor vehicle of a type commonly known as a stock car, hobby car or the storage of any racing vehicle and parts therefor shall at all times be stored in an enclosed building, secluded from public view; 
9.  School buses that are driven by a person who is a resident on the premises may be parked on a lot or parcel in any zoning district except for the following restriction in the residence districts: in the residence districts the lot area shall be not less than one acre. 
d.  Parking of one truck or one road tractor or semitractor and its trailer in excess of 12,000 pounds gross vehicle weight is permitted in the residence and agricultural districts, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The vehicle shall be owned or operated by a person resident on the premises; 
2.  In the residence districts the lot area shall be not less than one acre; 
3.  The vehicle shall not be parked or stored within the required highway or road setback area; 
4.  The vehicle shall not be parked closer than 300 feet to another residence; 
5.  No new buildings shall be constructed for the housing of any aforedescribed vehicle; 
6.  Before any truck or semitractor or its trailer can be parked or stored subject to the foregoing conditions: a certificate of compliance shall be issued by the zoning administrator. 
e.  In the agriculture districts, the production of fuel, using products or byproducts from a farm operation on the premises, is a permitted use incidental to the farm operation. Surplus fuel not needed for the farm operation may be sold as any other farm commodity. 
f.  Airports that are listed as "Personal by Owner Only" on an application to the state department of transportation, bureau of aeronautics, for airport site approval are permitted to locate in the agricultural and rural homes districts. 
(2)  Height. Hospitals, churches, schools, radio transmission towers, water towers, chimneys, spires, penthouses, cupolas, silos, windmills and similar structures may be erected to a height greater than the maximum permitted in the district in which they are located; provided, however, that no part of that structure above the height limit shall be used for residential purposes. 
(3)  Setback, front yard. 
a.  In a district in which retail fuel sales are permitted, pumps, pump islands and related canopies may be located within the setback lines, but not closer to the lot line or highway right-of-way line than 20 feet. On corner lots, no pump, pump island or related canopy shall be closer to either street or highway than 20 feet. The total height of any overhead canopy shall not exceed 20 feet as measured to the highest point of the structure and shall be located a minimum of eight feet above grade; 
b.  In case of interior lots having frontage on two side streets, no accessory building shall extend into the setback area of either street; 
c.  When the side line of an interior lot is formed wholly or in part by the rear line of an abutting corner lot and the street side yard for the main building is less than the setback from the main building facing such street, the setback for the building on such interior lot may be modified so as to be midway between the side yard for the building on the corner lot and the setback from such street; 
d.  In platted subdivisions recorded before the adoption of this section where a building line shall have been established by the construction of buildings on 30 percent of the lots in any one block, such established setback line shall be the setback for that block, but in no event shall such setback be less than 20 feet; 
e.  No existing building, erected prior to the adoption of this section, which projects into the setback area shall be moved, structurally altered or added to so as to increase that part of the building projecting into the setback area. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit additions or alterations which conform to the setback requirements; 
f.  For purposes of entry to a commercial or multifamily building, steps or stoops may be constructed in such a manner that they intrude into the required setback area provided such structures are not more than three feet above ground level and do not extend more than four feet into the required setback area; 
g.  For purposes of entry to single-family or duplex residence buildings, steps, stoops or decks may be constructed in such a manner that they intrude into the required front yard setback area provided that any such steps, stoop or deck does not exceed a maximum height of five feet above ground level or exceed a width of 12 feet side to side, and provided, further, any such structure does not extend any further into the required setback area than a distance that would be the lesser of either ten feet or 50 percent of the distance from the building to the appropriate lot line. No such structure shall be enclosed. Railings which do not exceed 31/2 feet in height and which are of open architecture and not solid in appearance are permitted; 
h.  For single-family residences or duplex residence buildings, single-story bay windows may be constructed in such a manner that they project three feet or less into the front yard, provided that such windows do not occupy, in the aggregate, more than one-third of the front wall of the building; 
i.  On lake front lots, accessory buildings may be located in front yards subject to the locational requirements of subsection (5)a.1 of this section, provided, however, that the setback requirements are met. 
(4)  Side yards. 
a.  Lots of nonconforming width. 
1.  On lots 50 feet or more in width but less than 60 feet, the minimum aggregate side yards shall be 15 feet and no single side yard shall be less than five feet; 
2.  On lots less than 50 feet in width the minimum side yard on each side shall be five feet. 
b.  Corner lots. 
1.  When the long side of a corner lot is formed by a class A, B or C highway the side yard on that street shall conform to the setback requirements for such highway. 
2.  When the long side of a corner lot is formed by a class D or E highway, the setback from the lot line of the long side shall not be less than one-fifth of the lot depth measured from the long side except on lots of less than 60 feet, then the setback shall not be less than 12 feet. For buildings with attached garages facing the long side and having access to the long side of the lot, the minimum setback of the garage from the lot line shall be not less than 20 feet. 
(5)  Rear yards. 
a.  Location of accessory buildings in rear yards. 
1.  On interior lots 60 feet or more in width no accessory building shall be erected, moved or added to so as to be nearer than four feet to the side lot or rear lot line; provided, however, if the front building line of any accessory building is located closer than ten feet from the rear building line of a residence, the same side and rear yards as required for a principal or residential building shall be maintained; 
2.  On interior lots less than 60 feet in width no accessory building shall be erected, moved or added to so as to be nearer than 21/2 feet to a side or rear lot line; provided, however, if the front building line of any accessory building is located closer than ten feet from the rear building line of a residence, the same side and rear yards as required for a principal or residential building shall be maintained; 
3.  On interior lots abutting on two streets, or corner lots abutting on three streets, no accessory building shall be erected, moved or added to so as to be nearer the rear street than the setback for that street. This provision shall not apply to alleys; 
4.  On corner lots abutting on two streets, no accessory building shall be erected, moved or added to so as to be nearer to the side street than the distance required for the main building on that street; provided, however, that for garages with entrances facing the side street, the minimum distance from such side street shall be 20 feet. When the rear lot line of the corner lot forms the side line of an adjoining or abutting lot, no accessory building shall be erected, moved or added to so as to be nearer such rear lot line than the side line required for the building on the adjoining lot. 
b.  Permitted obstructions in a required rear yard. 
1.  Steps or stoops to provide access to a building that is not more than three feet above ground level and which do not extend more than four feet into a required rear yard; 
2.  One-story bay windows projecting three feet or less into the yard, provided that such windows do not occupy, in the aggregate, more than one-third of the rear wall of the building; 
3.  Uncovered decks and porches that are supported by piers or posts may extend into any required rear yard by not more than 12 feet; 
4.  Uncovered swimming pools both above and below ground, provided that they are located not closer than ten feet from any lot line; 
5.  Free standing solar collectors, provided that they are located not closer than three feet from any lot line and not exceeding 12 feet in height. 
(6)  Provisions applicable to all yards. 
a.  No existing building, erected prior to the adoption of this section, which projects into a required yard shall be moved, structurally altered or added to so as to increase that part of the building's projection into the required yard. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit additions or alterations which conform to the setback requirements; 
b.  Roof overhangs, soffits and awnings that are not supported to the ground may extend into any required yard by not more than three feet. 
(7)  Screening. Screening shall consist of either a planted evergreen screen at least six feet in width and initially landscaped with four-foot tall evergreen shrubs to ultimately form a continuous hedge not less than five feet in height and maintained with healthy shrubs, or a decorative wall or fence without signs and impervious to sight not less than six feet nor more than eight feet in height shall be maintained along the interior boundaries of any lot in the county B-1, C-1, C-2, LC-1, LC-2 or M-1 district that is adjacent to land in the residence district to a point 15 feet from the street right-of-way. 
(8)  Snowmobile and off-road vehicle operations. 
a.  The operation of snowmobiles is permitted in any district, provided the operation is confined to those areas which are marked as part of the county-wide snowmobile trail system; 
b.  Off-trail use of snowmobiles, motorcycles and all-terrain vehicles is permitted in the agricultural districts with the consent of the affected landowner. 
(Code 1998, § 106-792; Ord. No. 98-2, § 4(13-1-44(t)), 3-30-1998; Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 133-862. - Street/highway setback regulations. 
    For the purpose of determining the distance buildings and other structures shall be set back from streets and highways, the streets and highways in the JPA and expanded ETZ area are divided into the following classes. The following provisions apply only in the JPA and expanded ETZ area and only to property designated under one of the zoning classifications contained in this division. 
(1)  Class A highways. 
a.  All state and federal highways are hereby classified class A highways; 
b.  The setback line for a class A highway shall be 100 feet from the centerline of the highway right-of-way or 42 feet from the right-of-way line, whichever is greater; 
c.  Service roads to class A highways a distance of 100 feet from the centerline of such highways shall be considered class C, D or E highways for the purpose of determining the setback along such service roads. 
(2)  Class B highways. 
a.  All county trunks except as otherwise provided, are hereby designated class B highways. For the purpose of this section any road will be considered as a county trunk after it has been placed on the county trunk system by the county board and approved by the state highway commission; 
b.  The setback from class B highways shall be 75 feet from the centerline of any highway right-of-way or 42 feet from the right-of-way, whichever is greater. 
(3)  Class C highways. 
a.  All town roads and village streets not included within the boundaries of a recorded subdivision or plat are hereby designated class C highways; 
b.  The setback from class C highways shall be 63 feet from the centerline of such highway right-of-way or 30 feet from the right-of-way line, whichever is greater; provided, however, that in the case of a service road, contiguous to the right-of-way of a main highway, where buildings can be built on only one side of such service road, the minimum setback shall be 30 feet, regardless of the width of such service road, and provided, further, that if such service road shall be a street in a platted subdivision, then the setback provisions governing such platted street shall apply. 
(4)  Class D highways. 
a.  Roads and streets in subdivisions platted prior to the adoption of this section, except those designated class A or class B highways, are hereby designated as class D highways; 
b.  For all class D highways setback lines are hereby established, parallel to and distant 20 feet from the right-of-way line or front lot line. 
(5)  Class E highways. 
a.  All streets, highways and roads not otherwise classified are hereby designated class E highways; 
b.  For all class E highways setback lines are hereby established, parallel to and distant 30 feet from the right-of-way or front lot line. 
(Code 1998, § 106-793; Ord. No. 98-2, § 4(13-1-44(u)), 3-30-1998; Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 133-863. - Off-street parking. 
    The following provisions apply only in the JPA and expanded ETZ area and only to property designated under one of the zoning classifications contained in this division. 
(1)  An off-street parking space shall be not less than eight feet in width if parallel to a curb or building, and not less than nine feet in width if angle parking is provided, and in no case shall any space be less than 19 feet in length. Parking spaces may be provided in either an open or enclosed area and shall be provided with adequate ingress or egress from a public street or road; 
(2)  No building for which off-street parking space is required may be added to, structurally altered or converted in use so as to encroach upon or reduce the parking space below the required minimum; 
(3)  No parking spaces required under this division may be used for any other purpose; provided, however, that open spaces required by this division for setback and side yards may be used for such parking spaces and approaches thereto; 
(4)  Parking space required. 
a.  In the local business, commercial and light manufacturing and industrial districts, in addition to other parking spaces herein required, there shall be provided adequate off-street parking for the loading and unloading of trucks and other commercial vehicles and for the vehicles of employed personnel; 
b.  Duplexes shall provide two off-street parking spaces; multiple-family dwellings, apartment houses and apartment house complexes shall provide two off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit; 
c.  Establishments offering curb service or services to customers who remain in the vehicle shall provide adequate space to accommodate all vehicles to be so serviced; 
d.  Except for banks, office buildings and clinics, retail or local places of business shall provide one parking space for each 300 square feet of floor space devoted to retail sales. Banks, office buildings and clinics shall provide one such space for each 300 square feet of floor area; 
e.  Buildings combining business and residential uses shall provide one parking space for each 200 square feet of area devoted to business uses, plus two parking spaces for each dwelling unit; 
f.  Theaters, churches, auditoriums, lodges or fraternity halls and similar places of public assemblage shall provide one parking space for each seven seats. Outdoor theaters shall provide sufficient off-street parking for overflow parking; 
g.  Hotels, lodginghouses and dormitories shall provide one parking space for each three guestrooms; 
h.  Restaurants, taverns and the like, except curb service establishments, shall provide one parking space for each 50 square feet of space devoted to the use of patrons; 
i.  Funeral parlors and mortuaries shall provide one parking space for each 50 square feet of floor space devoted to parlors; 
j.  Bowling alleys shall provide five parking spaces for each alley; 
k.  Garages and service stations shall provide adequate parking space for vehicles waiting to be serviced or repaired; 
l.  Motels shall provide one parking space for each lodging room plus one space for each dwelling unit. 
(Code 1998, § 106-794; Ord. No. 98-2, § 4(13-1-44(v)), 3-30-1998; Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 133-864. - Fees. 
    The village shall collect fees for activities permitted in this division in the amounts established by the village board by resolution from time to time. Fees shall be collected as a condition of reviewing applications, granting or denying permits, performing reviews of documents by village staff, and additional administrative or other activities required in this chapter, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Zoning permit; 
(2)  Certificate of compliance; 
(3)  Site plan review; 
(4)  Zoning amendment application; 
(5)  Conditional use permit; 
(6)  PUD-SIP review; 
(7)  PUD-GDP review; 
(8)  Board of zoning appeal filing; 
(9)  Antenna permit; 
(10)  Additional meetings; 
(11)  Copies of maps and ordinances. 
(Code 1998, § 106-795; Ord. No. 06-11, § 2, 11-20-2006) 
Secs. 133-865-133-891. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 133-892. - Purpose of district. 
(a)  The PUD Planned Unit Development District is established to encourage and promote improved environmental design in the village by allowing for greater freedom, imagination and flexibility in the development of land, while ensuring substantial compliance with the basic intent of this chapter and the general plan for community development. The PUD district allows diversification and variation in the relationship of uses, structures, open spaces and heights of structures in developments conceived and implemented as comprehensive and cohesive, unified projects. It is further intended to encourage more rational and economic development in regard to public services and encourage and facilitate preservation of open land. 
(b)  This article contemplates that there may be residential, commercial, industrial, and mixed-use planned unit developments. 
(Code 1998, § 106-801; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-50, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-893. - General requirements. 
(a)  Minimum total area requirements. Areas designated as PUDs shall contain a minimum total development area as follows: 
Principal Uses Minimum Area of PUD 
(in acres) Residential PUD 5 Commercial PUD 2 Industrial PUD 5 Mixed use 5  
(b)  Lot area, lot width, heights and yard requirements. In the PUD district, there shall be no specific lot area, lot width, height, floor area ratio, yard and usable open space requirements, but such requirements as are made a part of an approved recorded general development plan shall be, along with the recorded plat, construed to be and shall be enforced as a part of this chapter. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Any use permitted in any of the other districts of this chapter may be permitted in the PUD district, subject to the criteria as established in section 133-895 and provided such uses are identified in the approved and recorded general development plan. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Any use allowed as a conditional use in any of the other districts of this chapter may be allowed in the PUD district, subject to the criteria as established in section 133-895 and provided such uses and any conditions or requirements attached to such uses are identified in the approved and recorded general development plan. 
(e)  Minimum green area. The minimum green area shall be 30 percent. 
(Code 1998, § 106-802; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-51, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-894. - Procedural requirements. 
(a)  Preapplication conference. Prior to the official submission of the petition for the approval of a PUD district, the owner or the owner's agent should meet with the plan commission or its staff to discuss the scope and proposed nature of the contemplated development. 
(b)  Petition for rezoning approval. Following the preapplication conference, the owner or the owner's agent may file a petition with the zoning administrator for approval of a zoning change to the planned unit development zoning district. Such petition shall be accompanied by payment of a PUD review fee as specified in section 133-45. The procedure for rezoning to a Planned Unit Development District shall be as required for any other zoning district change as set forth under division 3 of article II of this chapter, except that, in addition thereto, the following information shall be filed by the applicant with the zoning administrator with the petition for rezoning: 
(1)  Informational statement. A petition for a zoning change to the PUD district shall be accompanied by an informational statement that sets forth the following information: 
a.  Total area to be included in the PUD, area of open space, residential density, proposed number and type of dwelling units, projected population, availability of or requirements for municipal services and other similar data pertinent to a comprehensive evaluation of the proposed development; 
b.  A general summary of the estimated value of structures and site improvement costs, including landscaping and special features; 
c.  A general outline of the organizational structure of a property owners' or management's association, which may be proposed to be established for the purpose of providing any necessary private services; 
d.  Any proposed departures from the standards of development as set forth in this chapter, chapter 129, other village regulations or administrative rules, or other universal guidelines; 
e.  The expected date of commencement of physical development as set forth in the proposal and also an outline of any development staging which is planned. 
(2)  General development plan. A petition for a zoning change to the PUD district shall be accompanied by a general development plan which shall include the following information: 
a.  A legal description of the boundaries of the subject property included in the proposed PUD and its relationship to surrounding properties; 
b.  The location of public and private roads, driveways, sidewalks and parking facilities; 
c.  The size, arrangement, and location of any individual building sites and proposed building groups on each individual site; 
d.  The location of institutional, recreational and open space areas and areas reserved or dedicated for public uses, including schools, parks, and drainageways; 
e.  The type, size and location of all structures; 
f.  General landscape treatment; 
g.  The existing and proposed location of public sanitary sewer, water supply facilities, and stormwater drainage facilities; 
h.  The existing and proposed location of all private utilities or other easements; 
i.  Characteristics of soils related to contemplated specific uses; 
j.  Existing topography on the site with contours at no greater than two-foot intervals; 
k.  If the development is to be staged, a staging plan; 
l.  A plan showing how the entire development can be further subdivided in the future. 
(c)  Recording. Upon final approval of the application and adoption of a zoning change to the PUD district by the village board, the general development plan, as approved, shall be recorded by the developer within ten days in the county register of deeds' office. Detailed construction and engineering plans need not necessarily be completed at the time the zoning is approved, but the approval and recording of such plans shall be conditioned upon the subsequent submittal, approval, and recording of more specific and detailed plans as the development progresses. 
(Code 1998, § 106-803; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-52, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-895. - Basis for approval. 
    As a basis for reviewing a PUD district application to the plan commission and village board, the following criteria shall be applied to the application for such district with specific consideration as to whether or not it is consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter, whether or not it is consistent with the policies of the village master plan, whether or not it has been prepared with professional advice and guidance, and whether or not it produces significant benefits in terms of environmental design: 
(1)  Character and integrity of land use. In a PUD district, the uses proposed and their intensity and arrangement on the site shall be of a visual and operational character which: 
a.  Are compatible to the physical nature of the site with particular concern for preservation of natural features, tree growth and open space; 
b.  Would produce an attractive environment of sustained aesthetic and ecological desirability, economic stability, and functional practicality compatible with the general development plans for the area as established by the community; 
c.  Would not adversely affect the anticipated provision for school or other municipal services; 
d.  Would not create traffic or parking demands incompatible with the existing or proposed facilities to serve it. 
(2)  Economic feasibility and impact. The proponents of a PUD district application shall provide evidence satisfactory to the plan commission and village board of its economic feasibility, of available adequate financing, and that it would not adversely affect the economic prosperity of the village or the values of surrounding properties. 
(3)  Engineering design standards. The width of street rights-of-way, width of paving, width and location of street or other paving, outdoor lighting, location of sewer and water lines, provision for stormwater drainage or other similar environmental engineering consideration shall be based on standards necessary to implement the specific function in the specific situation; provided, however, in no case shall standards be less than those necessary to ensure the public safety and welfare as determined by the village engineer. 
(4)  Preservation and maintenance of open space. In a PUD district, adequate provisions shall be made for the permanent preservation and maintenance of open space either by private reservation or dedication to the public. 
a.  For private reservation, the open area to be reserved shall be protected against building development by conveying to the village as part of the conditions for project approval an open space easement over such open areas restricting the area against any future building or use except as consistent with that of providing landscaped open space for the aesthetic and recreational satisfaction of the surrounding residences. Buildings or uses for noncommercial, recreational, or cultural purposes compatible with the open space objective may be permitted only where specifically authorized as part of the general development plan or, subsequently, with the express approval of the village board following approval of building, site, and operational plans by the plan commission; 
b.  The care and maintenance of such open space reservations shall be ensured by establishment of appropriate management organization for the project. The manner of assuring maintenance and assessing such cost to individual properties shall be included in any contractual agreement with the village and shall be included in the title to each property; 
c.  Ownership and tax liability of private open space reservations shall be established in a manner acceptable to the village and made a part of the conditions of the plan approval. 
(5)  Implementation schedule. The proponents of a PUD district shall submit a reasonable schedule for the implementation of the development to the satisfaction of the village board, including suitable provisions for assurance that each phase could be brought to completion in a manner that would not result in an adverse effect upon the community as a result of termination at that point. The plan commission and village board, in making their respective recommendation and determination, shall consider the reasonableness of the proposed construction schedule and any staging plan for the physical development of the proposed PUD, commencement of the physical development within one year of approval being deemed reasonable. 
(6)  Residential PUD considerations. The plan commission and village board, in making their respective recommendation and determination as to a proposed residential PUD, shall further consider whether: 
a.  Such development will create an attractive residential environment of sustained desirability and economic stability, including structures in relation to terrain, consideration of safe pedestrian flow, ready access to recreation space, and coordination with overall plans for the community; 
b.  The total net residential density within the PUD will be compatible with the village master plan or components thereof, and shall be compatible with the density of the neighborhood wherein located; 
c.  Structure types will be generally compatible with other structural types permitted in the neighborhood; 
d.  Provision has been made for the installation of adequate public facilities and the continuing maintenance and operation of such facilities if privately owned; 
e.  Provision has been made for adequate, continuing fire and police protection; 
f.  The population density of the development will have an adverse effect upon the community's capacity to provide needed school or municipal service facilities; 
g.  Adequate guarantee is provided for permanent preservation of open space areas as shown on the general development plan either by private reservation and maintenance or by dedication to the public. 
(7)  Commercial PUD considerations. The plan commission and village board, in making their respective recommendation and determination as to a proposed commercial PUD, shall further consider whether: 
a.  The economic practicality of the proposed development can be justified; 
b.  The proposed development will be served by off-street parking and truck service facilities in accordance with this chapter; 
c.  The proposed development shall be adequately provided with and shall not impose any undue burden on public services and facilities such as fire and police protection, street maintenance, water, sanitary sewer and stormwater drainage, and maintenance of public areas; 
d.  The locations of entrances and exits have been designated to prevent unnecessary interference with the safe and efficient movement of traffic on surrounding streets and that the development will not create any adverse effect upon the general traffic pattern of the surrounding neighborhood; 
e.  The architectural design, landscaping, control of lighting and general site development will result in an attractive and harmonious service area compatible with and not adversely affecting the property values of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(8)  Industrial PUD considerations. The plan commission and village board, in making their respective recommendation and determination as to a proposed industrial PUD, shall further consider whether: 
a.  The operational character and physical plant arrangement of buildings will be compatible with the latest in performance standards and industrial development design and will not result in an adverse effect upon the property values of the surrounding neighborhood; 
b.  The proposed development shall be adequately provided with and shall not impose any undue burden on public services and facilities, such as fire and police protection, street maintenance, water, sanitary sewer and stormwater drainage, and maintenance of public areas; 
c.  The proposed development will include provision for off-street parking and truck service areas in accordance with this chapter and will be adequately served by easy-access rail or arterial highway facilities; 
d.  The proposed development is properly related to the total transportation system of the community and will not result in an adverse effect on the safety and efficiency of the public streets. 
(9)  Mixed use PUD considerations. The plan commission and village board, in making their respective recommendation and determination as to a proposed mixed use PUD, shall further consider whether: 
a.  The proposed mixture of uses results in a unified composite which is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood; 
b.  The various types of uses conform to the general requirements as set forth in this chapter, applicable to projects of such use and character. 
(Code 1998, § 106-804; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-53, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-896. - Specific implementation plan. 
    After approval and recording of the general development plan and the zoning change to the PUD district, the applicant shall file a specific implementation plan with the plan commission, through the zoning administrator. Unless and until a specific implementation plan has been approved by the plan commission and recorded, no building permit shall be issued for any construction within the PUD district. Specific implementation plans shall include the following information: 
(1)  A precise description of the type, number and size of dwelling units; a description of the type and amount of square feet devoted to commercial or industrial uses, the estimated number of employees, and character and volume of truck and automobile traffic generated from the site; 
(2)  A detailed site plan of the development showing the location of all buildings, pavement areas, signs, and outdoor lighting; 
(3)  A final plat of the entire development area showing detailed lot layout and the intended use of each lot or parcel of land, public dedications, public and private streets, driveways, walkways, and parking facilities; 
(4)  A detailed landscape plan showing the location and treatment of open space areas and the location, species, and size of landscape material; 
(5)  Architectural drawings and sketches illustrating the design and character of proposed structures, including elevation drawings of all principal buildings. In residential PUDs with single-family homes, the plan commission may approve site and architectural design guidelines contained within a declaration of covenants, deed restrictions, or other similar document, in lieu of reviewing the plans for each individual single-family residence; 
(6)  Location of all utility installations; 
(7)  A detailed grading plan; 
(8)  Stormwater management plan; 
(9)  A development schedule indicating: 
a.  The approximate date when construction of the project can be expected to begin; 
b.  The stages in which the project will be built and the approximate date when construction of each stage can be expected to begin; 
c.  The anticipated rate of development; and 
d.  The approximate date when the development of each of the stages will be completed; 
(10)  Agreements, bylaws, provisions, or covenants that govern the organizational structure, use, maintenance and continued protection of the PUD and any of its common services, open areas or other facilities; 
(11)  Any other plans, documents or schedules required by the plan commission or village board. 
(Code 1998, § 106-805; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-54, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-897. - Development agreement. 
    Before any building permit shall be issued, the applicant and the owner shall enter into an appropriate contract with the village to guarantee the implementation of the planned unit development according to the terms and conditions established as a part of the general development plan and the specific implementation plan. The village shall have the right, if deemed appropriate, to require the inclusion of performance bonds or other security deemed satisfactory to the village attorney. 
(Code 1998, § 106-806; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-55, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-898. - Amendment of general development plans or specific implementation plans. 
    Under this article, any subsequent change of use of any lot or parcel of land or addition or modification of the general development plans or specific implementation plans shall first be submitted for approval to the plan commission and if, in the opinion of the plan commission, such change or modification constitutes a substantial alteration of the original plans, the procedures described in sections 133-894, 133-896, and 133-897 shall be required before the use is changed or the plans modified. 
(Code 1998, § 106-807; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-56, 11-3-1997) 
Secs. 133-899-133-929. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONDITIONAL USES 

Sec. 133-930. - Statement of purpose. 
    The development and execution of this article is based upon the division of the village into districts, within which districts the use of land and buildings and bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation to the land are mutually compatible and substantially uniform. However, there are certain uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as restricted permitted uses in any particular district, without consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land or public facilities, and of the public need for the particular use of a particular location. Such uses, nevertheless, may be necessary or desirable to be allowed in a particular district, provided that due consideration is given to location, development and operation of such uses. Such uses are classified as conditional uses. 
(Code 1998, § 106-841; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-60, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-931. - Authority of plan commission. 
(a)  The plan commission may authorize the zoning administrator to issue a conditional use permit for conditional use after review and public hearing, provided that such conditional use and involved structure are found to be in accordance with the purpose and intent of this chapter and are further found to be not hazardous, harmful, offensive or otherwise adverse to the environment or the value of the neighborhood or the community. Prior to the granting of a conditional use, the commission shall make findings based upon the evidence presented that the standards prescribed in this article are being complied with. 
(b)  Any development within 500 feet of the existing or proposed rights-of-way of freeways, expressways, and within one-half mile of their existing or proposed interchange or turning lane rights-of-way shall be specifically reviewed by the highway agency that has jurisdiction over the trafficway. The plan commission shall request such review and await the highway agency's recommendation for a period not to exceed 20 days before taking final action. 
(c)  Conditions such as landscaping, architectural design, type of construction, construction commencement and completion dates, sureties, lighting, fencing, planting screens, operation control, hours of operation, improved traffic circulation, deed restrictions, highway access restrictions, increased yards or parking requirements may be required by the plan commission upon its finding that these are necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(d)  Compliance with all other provisions of this chapter, such as lot width and area, yards, height, parking, loading, traffic, highway access and performance standards, shall be required of all conditional uses. 
(Code 1998, § 106-842; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-61, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-932. - Initiation. 
    Any person having a freehold interest or a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession or a contractual interest that may become a freehold interest or an exclusive possessory interest and that is specifically enforceable in the land for which a conditional use is sought may file an application to use such land for one or more of the conditional uses in the zoning district in which such land is located. 
(Code 1998, § 106-843; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-62, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-933. - Application. 
(a)  Required materials. An application for a conditional use shall be filed in duplicate on a form prescribed by the village. Such applications shall be forwarded to the plan commission on receipt by the zoning administrator. Such applications shall include, where applicable: 
(1)  A statement, in writing, by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed conditional use shall conform to the standards set forth in this article; 
(2)  Names and addresses of the applicant, owner of the site, architect, professional engineer, contractor and all property owners of record within 100 feet; 
(3)  Description of the subject site by lot, block and recorded subdivision or by metes and bounds; address of the subject site; type of structure; proposed operation or use of the structure or site; number of employees and the zoning district within which the subject site lies; 
(4)  Plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor showing all of the information required for a building permit and existing and proposed landscaping; 
(5)  Additional information as may be required by the plan commission or other boards, commissions or officers of the village. The plan commission may require such other information as may be necessary to determine and provide for enforcement of this chapter, including a plan showing contours and soil types; high water mark and groundwater conditions; bedrock, vegetative cover, specifications for areas of proposed filling, grading, and lagooning; location of buildings, parking areas, traffic access, driveways, walkways, open spaces, and landscaping; plans of buildings, sewage disposal facilities, water supply systems, and arrangements of operations. 
(b)  Fees. Applications for conditional use permits shall be accompanied by payment of a conditional use permit fee as specified in section 133-45. 
(c)  Plans. In order to secure information upon which to base its determination, the plan commission shall require the applicant to furnish, in addition to the information required for a building permit, 30 copies of a plan. Plans submitted under this section shall include a minimum of five plan sets of full-scale plan sheets with sufficient detail to provide all required dimensions and other pertinent information. The remaining plan sets may be reductions printed on 17 inch by 11 inch sheets. The plans shall show the following: 
(1)  Plan showing the contours, soil types, high water mark, groundwater conditions, bedrock, slope and vegetation cover; 
(2)  Location of buildings, parking areas, traffic access, driveways, walkways, open spaces, landscaping, and lighting; 
(3)  Plans for buildings, sewage disposal facilities, water supply systems, and arrangements of operation; 
(4)  Specifications for areas of proposed filling, grading, lagooning, or dredging; 
(5)  Other pertinent information necessary to determine if the proposed use meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 106-844; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-63, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-10, § 7, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 133-934. - Hearing on application. 
    All requests for conditional uses shall be to the plan commission or the plan commission can, on its own motion, apply for a conditional use permit when applications for rezoning come before it. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the village board, on its own motion, from referring the request for conditional use to the plan commission. Upon receipt of the application and statement referred to in section 133-45, the plan commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for a conditional use at such time and place as shall be established by such commission. The hearing shall be conducted and a record of the proceedings shall be presented in such a manner and according to such procedures as the plan commission shall, by rule, prescribe from time to time. 
(Code 1998, § 106-845; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-64, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-935. - Notice of hearing on application. 
    Notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing provided for in section 133-934 shall be given by publication of a class 2 notice under state law in the official village newspaper. Notice of the time, place, and purpose of such public hearing shall also be sent to the applicant, the zoning administrator, members of the village board and plan commission, and the owners of record as listed in the office of the village assessor who are owners of property in whole or in part situated within 100 feet of the boundaries of the properties affected. The notice shall be sent at least five days prior to the date of such public hearing. Failure to comply with this section shall not, however, invalidate any previous or subsequent action on the application. 
(Code 1998, § 106-846; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-65, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-936. - Standards for approval. 
    No application for a conditional use shall be approved by the plan commission or granted by the village board on appeal unless such commission and board shall find that the following conditions are present: 
(1)  The establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare; 
(2)  The uses, values and enjoyment of other property in the neighborhood for purposes already permitted shall be in no foreseeable manner substantially impaired or diminished by the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the conditional use and the proposed use is compatible with the use of adjacent land; 
(3)  The establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district; 
(4)  Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary site improvements have been or are being provided; 
(5)  Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets; 
(6)  The conditional use shall, except for yard requirements, conform to all applicable regulations of the district in which it is located; 
(7)  The proposed use does not violate floodplain regulations governing the site; 
(8)  When applying the standards in subsections (1) through (7) of this section to any new construction of a building or an addition to an existing building, the plan commission and village board shall bear in mind the statement of purpose for the zoning district such that the proposed building or addition at its location does not defeat the purposes and objective of the zoning district; 
(9)  In addition to passing upon a conditional use permit, the plan commission and board shall also evaluate the effect of the proposed use upon: 
a.  The maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; 
b.  The prevention and control of water pollution including sedimentation; 
c.  Existing topographic and drainage features and vegetative cover on the site; 
d.  The location of the site with respect to floodplains and floodways of rivers and streams; 
e.  The erosion potential of the site based upon degree and direction of slope, soil type and vegetative cover; 
f.  The location of the site with respect to existing or future access roads; 
g.  Its compatibility with uses on adjacent land; 
h.  The amount of liquid wastes to be generated and the adequacy of the proposed disposal systems. 
(Code 1998, § 106-847; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-66, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-937. - Denial of application. 
    When a decision of denial of a conditional use application is made, the plan commission shall furnish the applicant, in writing when so requested, those standards that are not met and shall enumerate reasons the commission has used in determining that each standard was not met. 
(Code 1998, § 106-848; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-67, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-938. - Appeals. 
    Any action of the plan commission in granting or denying a conditional use permit may be appealed to the village board, if a written request for an appeal is filed within ten days after the date of the plan commission's action in granting or denying the permit. Such request for appeal shall be signed by the applicant or by the owners of at least 20 percent of the land area immediately adjacent extending 100 feet therefrom or by the owners of 20 percent or more of the land directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land. The request shall be filed with the zoning administrator who shall submit it to the village board at its next meeting, together with any documents and other data used by the plan commission in reaching its decision. The village board may consider the matter forthwith, may refer the matter to a subsequent meeting, or may set a date for a public hearing thereon. If the village board elects to hold a public hearing, notice thereof shall be given by mail to the known owners of the lands immediately adjacent thereto and directly opposite any street frontage of the lot or parcel in question and by publication of a class 1 notice in the official newspaper at least ten days before the date of the hearing. The village board may either affirm or reverse in whole or in part the action of the plan commission and may finally grant or deny the application for a conditional use permit. 
(Code 1998, § 106-849; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-68, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-939. - Conditions and guarantees. 
    The following shall apply to all conditional uses: 
(1)  Conditions. Prior to the granting of any conditional use, the plan commission, or the village board on appeal, may stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the conditional use as deemed necessary to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified in section 133-936. When conditional uses are granted, the board shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with. Such conditions may include specifications for, without limitation because of specific enumeration, the following: 
a.  Landscaping; 
b.  Type of construction; 
c.  Construction commencement and completion dates; 
d.  Sureties; 
e.  Lighting; 
f.  Fencing; 
g.  Operational control; 
h.  Hours of operation; 
i.  Traffic circulation; 
j.  Deed restrictions; 
k.  Access restrictions; 
l.  Setbacks and yards; 
m.  Type of shore cover; 
n.  Specified sewage disposal and water supply systems; 
o.  Planting screens; 
p.  Piers and docks; 
q.  Increased parking; or 
r.  Any other requirements necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(2)  Site review. In making its decision, the plan commission shall evaluate each application and may request assistance from any source that can provide technical assistance. The commission may review the site, existing and proposed structures, architectural plans, neighboring uses, parking areas, driveway locations, highway access, traffic generation and circulation, drainage, sewer and water systems, and the proposed operation/use. 
(3)  Alteration of conditional use. No alteration of a conditional use shall be permitted unless approved by the plan commission. 
(4)  Architectural treatment. Proposed architectural treatment will be in general harmony with surrounding uses and the landscape. To this end, the plan commission may require the use of certain general types of exterior construction materials and architectural treatment. 
(5)  Sloped sites; unsuitable soils. Where slopes exceed six percent or where a use is proposed to be located on areas indicated as having soils that are unsuitable or marginal for development, on-site soil tests or construction plans shall be provided that clearly indicate that the soil conditions are adequate to accommodate the development contemplated or that any inherent soil condition or slope problems will be overcome by special construction techniques. Such special construction might include, among other techniques, terracing, retaining walls, oversized foundations and footings, drain tile, etc. 
(6)  Compliance with other requirements. Conditional uses shall comply with all other sections of this chapter, such as lot width and area, yards, height, parking, and loading. No conditional use permit shall be granted where the proposed use is deemed to be inconsistent or conflicting with neighboring uses for reasons of smoke, dust, odors, noise, vibration, lighting, health hazards, or possibility of accident. 
(Code 1998, § 106-850; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-69, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-940. - Validity of conditional use permit. 
    Where the plan commission has approved or conditionally approved an application for a conditional use permit, such approval shall become null and void within 12 months of the date of the commission's action unless the use is commenced, construction is underway, or the current owner possesses a valid building permit under which construction is commenced within six months of the date of issuance and which shall not be renewed unless construction has commenced and is being diligently prosecuted. Approximately 45 days prior to the automatic revocation of such permit, the zoning administrator shall notify the holder by certified mail of such revocation. The plan commission may extend such permit for a period of 90 days for justifiable cause, if application is made to the village at least 30 days before the expiration of the permit. 
(Code 1998, § 106-851; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-70, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-941. - Resolution of complaints. 
    The plan commission shall retain continuing jurisdiction over all conditional uses for the purpose of resolving complaints against all previously approved conditional uses. Such authority shall be in addition to the enforcement authority of the zoning administrator to order the removal or discontinuance of any unauthorized alterations of an approved conditional use, and the elimination, removal or discontinuance of any violation of a condition imposed prior to or after approval or violation of any other section of this chapter. Upon written complaint by any citizen or official, the plan commission shall initially determine whether the complaint indicates a reasonable probability that the subject conditional use is in violation of one or more of the standards set forth in section 133-936, a condition of approval, or other requirement imposed thereunder. Upon reaching a positive initial determination, a hearing shall be held upon notice as provided in section 133-935. Any person may appear at such hearing and testify in person or be represented by an agent or attorney. The plan commission may, in order to bring the subject conditional use into compliance with the standards set forth in section 133-936 or conditions previously imposed by the plan commission, modify existing conditions upon such use and impose additional reasonable conditions upon the subject conditional use. Additionally, the offending party may be subjected to forfeiture as set forth in this chapter and section 1-32. If no reasonable modification of such conditional use can be made in order to ensure that standards in subsections 133-936(1) and (2) will be met, the plan commission may revoke the subject conditional approval and direct the zoning administrator and the village attorney to seek elimination of the subject use. Following any such hearing, the decision of the plan commission shall be furnished to the current owner of the conditional use in writing stating the reasons therefor. An appeal from a decision of the plan commission under this section may be taken to the village board. 
(Code 1998, § 106-852; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-71, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-942. - Bed and breakfast establishments. 
(a)  Considered as conditional use. Bed and breakfast establishments shall be considered conditional uses and may be permitted in residence districts pursuant to the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent means the person designated by the owner as the person in charge of such establishment and whose identity shall be filed in writing with the zoning administrator upon issuance of the permit and updated five days prior to a designated agent taking charge. 
    Bed and breakfast establishment means any place of lodging that provides six or fewer rooms for rent for more than ten nights in a 12-month period, which is the owner's personal residence, that is occupied by the owner at the time of rental, and in which the only meal served to guests is breakfast. 
(c)  Compliance with state standards. All bed and breakfast establishments and licensees shall be subject to and shall comply with Wis. Admin. Code ch. HFS 197, relating to bed and breakfast establishments or Wis. Admin. Code ch. HFS 195 relating to hotels, motels and tourist roominghouses. 
(d)  Registry. Each bed and breakfast establishment shall provide a register and shall require all guests to register their true names and addresses before being assigned quarters. The register shall be kept intact and available for inspection by a village representative for a period of not less than one year. 
(e)  Permit required. 
(1)  Village permit. In addition to the permit required by Wis. Admin. Code chs. HFS 195 and 197, before opening for business, every bed and breakfast establishment shall obtain a permit from the zoning administrator by application made upon a form furnished by the zoning administrator and shall obtain a conditional use permit; 
(2)  Application requirements. The following shall be furnished at the time an application is filed for a conditional use permit in addition to the other application requirements of this article: 
a.  Site plan showing location and size of buildings, parking areas and signs; 
b.  Number, surfacing and size of parking stalls; 
c.  Number, size and lighting of signs; 
(3)  Display. The permit issued by the zoning administrator shall be conspicuously displayed in the bed and breakfast establishment. 
(f)  Off-street parking required. Permits shall be issued only to those establishments that provide a minimum of one improved off-street parking space for each room offered for occupancy. Establishments otherwise qualified under this section regulating bed and breakfast establishments shall not be subject to the other requirements of this chapter with respect to traffic, parking and access. 
(g)  On-site signs. Signage shall be limited to a total of 12 square feet and may be lighted in such manner and nature as to not alter or deteriorate the nature of the surrounding neighborhood. Establishments otherwise qualifying under this section regulating bed and breakfast establishments shall not be subject to the requirements of this chapter with respect to signs. 
(h)  Termination of permit. A bed and breakfast use permit shall be void upon the sale or transfer of the property ownership. The plan commission shall review and conditionally approve or disapprove an application submitted by a person anticipating the purchase of premises for such use. A permit issued in accordance with subsection (e) of this section shall be valid until terminated by action of the zoning administrator for violation of this section, or of state regulations as set forth in Wis. Admin. Code ch. HFS 195 or 197, or as provided in this section. 
(Code 1998, § 106-853; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-72, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-943. - Home occupations. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to provide a means to accommodate a small family business as a conditional use without the necessity of a rezone into a commercial district. Approval of an expansion of a limited family business or home occupation at a future time beyond the limitations of this section is not to be anticipated; relocation of the business to an area that is appropriately zoned may be necessary. 
(b)  Restrictions. Home occupations are a conditional use in all residential districts and are subject to the requirements of the district in which the use is located, in addition to the following: 
(1)  The home occupation shall be conducted only within the enclosed area of the dwelling unit or an attached garage; 
(2)  There shall be no exterior alterations that change the character thereof as a dwelling and exterior evidence of the home occupation other than those signs permitted in the district; 
(3)  No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies, or equipment related to the operation of the home occupation shall be visible outside any structure located on the premises; 
(4)  No use shall create smoke, odor, glare, noise, dust, vibration, fire hazard, small electrical interference, or any other nuisance not normally associated with the average residential use in the district; 
(5)  Only one sign may be used to indicate the type of occupation or business. Such sign shall not be illuminated; 
(6)  The use shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for more than occasional delivery of materials to or from the premises; 
(7)  The plan commission may determine the percentage of the property that may be devoted to the occupation; 
(8)  The home occupation may be restricted to a service-oriented business prohibiting the manufacturing of items or products or the sale of items or products on the premises; 
(9)  The types and number of equipment or machinery may be restricted by the plan commission; 
(10)  Sale or transfer of the property shall cause the conditional use permit to be null and void; 
(11)  Under no circumstances shall a vehicle repair or body-work business qualify as a home occupation. 
(c)  Exception. A home occupation under this section may be maintained in any residential district as a permitted use, as opposed to a conditional use, if the standards of subsection (b) of this section are complied with, and no sign is erected or maintained regarding the home occupation, no more than one person works on the premises and no customers regularly come to the house. 
(Code 1998, § 106-854; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-73, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-944. - Plan of operation. 
(a)  Plan of operation required. Except as provided in subsections (c) and (g) of this section, no person or entity may use any property for any purpose without an approved plan of operation issued pursuant to this section. Except as provided in subsections (c) and (g) of this section, no activity or enterprise may be engaged in or carried on upon any property, except as provided in an approved plan of operation issued pursuant to this section. 
(b)  Temporary plan of operation. A temporary plan of operation is required for seasonal business operations, special events, vendor stalls, and other seasonal or short term nonresidential activities such as holiday tree sales and fruit and vegetable stands. The duration of a temporary plan of operation permit shall be established by the plan commission. 
(c)  Exceptions. Approval of a plan of operation is not required for residential uses, village facilities and operations, or public school buildings and operations. 
(d)  Application. An application for approval of a plan of operation shall be submitted to the zoning administrator on a form prescribed by the village, and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  A description of the business, commercial, industrial or other activities that will occur on the property; 
(3)  The name and address of the on-site manager of the business or entity; 
(4)  The proposed hours during which activities will occur on the property; 
(5)  The number of full-time and the number of part-time employees that will be employed on the property, which may be expressed as a range of full-time and part-time employees; 
(6)  If the plan of operation is for a multi-tenant building, the application shall include a plot plan for the building. 
(e)  Standards for approval. A plan of operation shall be approved if the zoning administrator finds that the proposed use of the property does not violate any provision of this chapter and, if applicable, is permitted under the conditional use permit issued for the property. 
(f)  New plan of operation required for changed operations. A new or amended plan of operation is required where: 
(1)  The person or entity that owns or leases the property or operates the business on the property changes; 
(2)  The number of employees working on the property increases beyond the maximum number specified in the existing plan of operation; 
(3)  The hours of operation are changed; 
(4)  The business, commercial, industrial or other activities that will occur on the property changes from the activities described in the existing plan of operation. 
(g)  Existing uses. The lawful use of structures or land existing on April 13, 2001 may be continued without an approved plan of operation. For such uses, a plan of operation shall be required where: 
(1)  The person or entity that owns or leases the property or operates the business on the property changes; 
(2)  The number of employees working on the property increases beyond the number of employees on April 20, 2001; 
(3)  The hours of operation are changed from the hours of operation that existed on April 20, 2001; 
(4)  The business, commercial, industrial or other activities that will occur on the property changes from the activities that occurred on the property on April 20, 2001. 
(Code 1998, § 106-855; Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 4-2-2001) 
Sec. 133-945. - Outdoor eating and drinking. 
    It is the intent of the village that any person or owner who wishes to use property, at least in part, as a commercial outdoor eating or drinking area shall obtain a conditional use permit from the village pursuant to this article V. Therefore, in a zoning district where a restaurant, bar, tavern or similar use is identified as a permitted use, no person or owner shall be allowed to establish or use an outdoor area for eating or drinking associated with the restaurant, bar, tavern or similar use unless the person or owner has first obtained a conditional use permit under this article. 
(Code 1998, § 106-856; Ord. No. 14-16, 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 133-946. - Business dormitories. 
(a)  Intent . The intent of this section is to provide a means to accommodate the use of business dormitories as an ancillary use to the primary industrial use of a property as a conditional use. 
(b)  Definitions . For purposes of this section, a "business dormitory" is a structure that is approximately 400 square feet or less in floor area, including lofts; is built on a concrete slab; is independently habitable; and provides the basic requirements of shelter, heating, cooking, and water and sanitary sewer utilities. 
(c)  Standards . In addition to the standards set forth in section 133-936, business dormitories are subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  All business dormitories must be served by village water and sewer, and must have appropriate heat and power. 
(2)  The use of a business dormitory must be directly related to the primary industrial use of the property. The applicant must identify for the plan commission the unique business reason(s) for why the business dormitories are necessary for the industrial use of the property. Further, a business dormitory may only be used for the purpose identified in subsection (3) (i.e., a temporary residence for a contractor, guest, or off-site employee). 
(3)  Only one individual may reside in a business dormitory. The individual residing in the business dormitory must be working or training at the primary structure on the property as a contractor, guest, or off-site employee, as described herein. Employees who primarily work at the primary structure on the property cannot reside in the business dormitory. Employees who primarily work off site (the off-site work location must be at least 100 miles from the property) may reside in a business dormitory. The maximum number of days that an individual may reside in a business dormitory is 30 days, unless extended in writing by the zoning administrator because a specific project requires a longer stay. The applicant shall maintain a log book that identifies the individuals residing in a business dormitory, the dates the individual resided in the business dormitory, and the business reason why each individual resided in the business dormitory. The applicant shall make the log book available to the village upon request. 
(4)  The number of business dormitories permitted on a property shall correspond with the size of the primary structure on the property. For each 4,000 square feet of the primary structure on the property, one business dormitory may be located on the property. Notwithstanding the preceding sentences, the maximum number of business dormitories on a property shall be eight, and construction of business dormitories shall be done in phases, with no more than four business dormitories constructed in a phase. Each phase of construction shall require a separate conditional use permit from the plan commission. 
(5)  Suitable space must be provided for one parking space for each business dormitory. 
(6)  The maximum height of a business dormitory shall be 25 feet. 
(7)  The architecture and color of the business dormitories shall be compatible with the primary structure on the property, and approved by the zoning administrator. 
(8)  The location of the business dormitories shall be approved as part of the site plan process for the property. This shall include any necessary setbacks from other business dormitories, the primary structure on the property, and lot lines. 
(9)  The business dormitories, and the land upon which the business dormitories are located, shall be properly maintained, including, but not limited to, complying with all village ordinances regarding maintenance of structures and property, and complying with any protective covenants that may apply to the property on which the business dormitories are located. 
(10)  The applicant shall not generate revenue, directly or indirectly, from the use of the business dormitories. 
(Ord. No. 18-6, § 2, 3-12-2018) 
Secs. 133-947-133-963. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Nonconforming uses, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h), (7)(ham). 

Sec. 133-964. - Existing nonconforming uses and structures. 
(a)  The continued lawful use of a building, premises, structure, or fixture existing on November 3, 1997, or at the time of the amendment of this chapter is not prohibited although the use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter. The nonconforming use may not be extended. The total structural repairs or alterations in such a nonconforming building, premises, structure, or fixture shall not during its life exceed 50 percent of the assessed value of the building, premises, structure, or fixture unless permanently changed to a conforming use. If the nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 12 months, any future use of the building, premises, structure, or fixture shall conform to this chapter. 
(b)  If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to any use permitted in the same use district as that in which the use existing is permitted according to this chapter. However, when a use district is changed, any existing, nonconforming use in such changed district may be continued or changed to a use permitted in the same use district as that in which the existing use is permitted, provided all other regulations governing the new use are complied with. 
(c)  Substitution of new equipment may be permitted by the board of zoning appeals if such equipment will reduce the incompatibility of the nonconforming use with the neighboring uses. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsections (a)-(c) of this section, a manufactured home community licensed under Wis. Stats. § 101.935 that is a legal nonconforming use continues to be a legal nonconforming use notwithstanding the occurrence of any of the following activities within the community: 
(1)  Repair or replacement of homes; 
(2)  Repair or replacement of infrastructure. 
(Code 1998, § 106-886; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-80, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-965. - Abolishment or replacement. 
(a)  Termination. If a nonconforming use is discontinued or terminated for a period of 12 months, any future use of the structure or land shall conform to this chapter. 
(b)  Building destroyed by fire. Where a building located in a district restricted against its use has been destroyed by fire or other calamity to the extent of not more than 50 percent of its fair market value, the building may be rebuilt. However, where such a building is destroyed to the extent of more than 50 percent of its fair market value, a building permit, following specific village board approval, may be granted for its reconstruction within 12 months from the date of such fire or other calamity, except any public utility located in a restricted district shall be permitted to rebuild, alter or enlarge in any business or industrial district as the interest of the public demands. 
(Code 1998, § 106-887; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-81, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-966. - Existing nonconforming structures. 
(a)  Generally. The lawful nonconforming structure existing on November 3, 1997, or at the time of amendment of this chapter may be continued although its size or location does not conform with the lot width, lot area, yard, height, parking and loading, and access provisions of this chapter. However, it shall not be extended, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except when required to do so by law or order or so as to comply with this chapter. 
(b)  Repair and maintenance of certain nonconforming structures. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Development regulations means the part of this chapter that applies to elements including setback, height, lot coverage, and side yard. 
    Nonconforming structure means a dwelling or other building that existed lawfully before his chapter was enacted or amended, but that does not conform to one or more of the development regulations in this chapter. 
(2)  Nothing in this chapter prohibits, or limits based on cost, the repair, maintenance, renovation, or remodeling of a nonconforming structure. 
(c)  Restoration of certain nonconforming structures. 
(1)  Restrictions in this chapter that are applicable to damaged or destroyed nonconforming structures and that are contained in an ordinance enacted under this subsection do not prohibit the restoration of a nonconforming structure if the structure will be restored to the size, subject subsection (c)(2) of this section, location, and use that it had immediately before the damage or destruction occurred, or impose any limits on the costs of the repair, reconstruction, or improvement if all of the following apply: 
a.  The nonconforming structure was damaged or destroyed on or after March 2, 2006; 
b.  The damage or destruction was caused by violent wind, vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold, or infestation. 
(2)  The structure may be larger than the size it was immediately before the damage or destruction if necessary for the structure to comply with applicable state or federal requirements. 
(Code 1998, § 106-888; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-82, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-967. - Changes and substitutions. 
    Once a nonconforming use or structure has been changed to conform, it shall not revert back to a nonconforming use or structure. Once the board of zoning appeals has permitted the substitution of a more restrictive nonconforming use for an existing nonconforming use, the substituted use shall lose its status as a legal nonconforming use and shall become subject to all the conditions required by the board of zoning appeals. 
(Code 1998, § 106-889; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-83, 11-3-1997) 
Secs. 133-968-133-992. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TRAFFIC VISIBILITY, LOADING, PARKING AND ACCESS 

Sec. 133-993. - Traffic visibility. 
(a)  On a corner lot in all zoning districts, no fence, wall, parking, vegetation, hedge, planting, or structure shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to obstruct vision between a height of 21/2 feet and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the edge of right-of-way street lines of such corner lots and a line joining the points along such street lines 15 feet from the point of intersection; 
(b)  If arterial streets intersect with other arterial streets or railways, the corner cutoff distances establishing the triangular vision clearance space shall be increased to 30 feet; 
(c)  This section shall not apply to the trunks of trees and posts not over six inches square or in diameter. 
(Code 1998, § 106-921; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-90, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-994. - Loading requirements. 
(a)  Loading space required. On every lot on which a business, commercial, or industrial use is established, space with access to a public street or alley shall be provided as indicated in the following table for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the public right-of-way: 
Use Floor Area 
(sq. ft.) Loading Space Retail/wholesale warehouse, service manufacturing, and industrial establishments 2,000-10,000 1 10,000-20,000 2 20,000-40,000 3 40,000-60,000 4 Each additional 
50,000 1 Hotels, offices, hospitals, places of public assembly 5,000-10,000 1 10,000-50,000 2 50,000-100,000 3 Each additional 
25,000 1 Funeral homes 2,500-4,000 1 4,000-6,000 2 Each additional 
10,000 1  
(b)  Multiple or mixed uses. Where a building is devoted to more than one use or for different uses and where the floor area for each use is below the minimum required for a loading space but the aggregate floor area of such uses is above such a minimum, off-street loading space shall be provided as if the entire building were devoted to that use in the building for which the most loading spaces are required. 
(c)  Location. Required off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot with the principal use requiring such space. No loading space shall be located within 30 feet of the nearest point of intersection of two streets or require any vehicle to back into a public street. 
(d)  Surfacing. All open off-street loading berths shall be improved with a compacted gravel base, not less than seven inches thick, surfaced with not less than two inches of asphalt or treated with some comparable all-weather dustless material. 
(e)  Repair and service. No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities provided in any residential district. 
(f)  Utilization. Space allocated to any off-street loading berth shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facilities or portions thereof. 
(g)  Central loading. Central loading facilities may be substituted for loading berths on the individual zoning lots, provided the following conditions are filled: 
(1)  Each zoning lot served shall have direct access to the central loading area without crossing streets or alleys at grade; 
(2)  Total berths provided shall meet the requirements based on the sum of the several types of uses served (Areas of types of uses may be totaled before computing the number of loading berths); 
(3)  No zoning lot served shall be more than 300 feet removed from the central loading area; 
(4)  The tunnel or ramp connecting the central loading area with the zoning lot served shall be not less than seven feet in width and shall have a clearance of not less than seven feet. 
(Code 1998, § 106-922; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-91, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-995. - Parking requirements. 
    All new nonresidential parking lots in excess of four stalls and all alterations of existing lots shall be subject to the approval of the plan commission. Requests for such parking lots shall be accompanied with detailed plans on landscaping, parking layout, drainage provision, and driveway locations. In all districts there shall be provided at the time any use or building is erected, enlarged, extended, or increased off-street parking stalls for all vehicles in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Access. Adequate access to a public street shall be provided for each parking space. 
(2)  Design standards. The size of each parking space shall be not less than 162 square feet (nine feet by 18 feet) exclusive of the space required for ingress and egress. Minimum width of aisles providing access to stalls for one-way traffic shall be as follows: 11 feet for 30-degree parking; and 20 feet for 90-degree parking. Minimum width of aisles providing access to stalls for two-way traffic shall be 24 feet. No parking area of more than two spaces shall be designed as to require any vehicle to back into a public street. Any parking area of more than five spaces shall be sufficiently screened in the form of a solid fence or shrubbery to protect adjacent residential uses. Large expanses of unchanneled parking areas shall be avoided by interior landscaping and safety islands. The plan commission may authorize stalls sized for smaller vehicles (eight feet by 16 feet) where the number of stalls being provided exceeds the minimum number required and where all of the minimum required stalls are full sized (nine feet by 18 feet). 
(3)  Location. 
a.  Location shall be on the same lot as the principal use or not over 500 feet from the principal use. 
b.  Off-street parking is permitted in all yards of all districts except in the front yards of single-family and two-family residence districts, but shall not be closer than five feet to a nonresidential side lot line, right-of-way line, or rear lot line. No parking space or driveway, except in residential districts, shall be closer than 25 feet to a residential district lot line. 
c.  Off-street parking in the single-family and two-family residence districts is permitted in the front yard in the driveway, even though closer than five feet to a side lot line, providing the driveway conforms to the requirements in division 2 of article VI of chapter 58. 
(4)  Surfacing. All off-street parking areas, except a single parking space accessory to a single-family dwelling, shall be surfaced with a dustless all-weather material capable of carrying a wheel load of 4,000 pounds (normally, a two-inch blacktop on a four-inch base or five inches of Portland cement will meet this requirement). Any parking area for more than five vehicles shall have the aisles and spaces clearly marked. Compacted stone or gravel may be used only with the approval of the plan commission. Completion of surfacing is required prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. However, for required surfacing during the period between November 1 and June 1, the owner shall enter into an agreement with the village agreeing to complete all required surfacing by no later than the following June 1. 
(5)  Repair and service. No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in association with parking facilities provided in residence districts. 
(6)  Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed away from residential properties and public streets in such a way as not to create a nuisance. However, in no case shall such lighting exceed three footcandles measured at the lot line. 
(7)  Curbs. Curbs or barriers shall be installed a minimum of four feet from a property line so as to prevent the parked vehicles from extending over any lot lines. 
(8)  Number of stalls. The number of parking stalls required is shown in the following table: 
Use Minimum Parking Required Dwellings: Single-family, two-family and manufactured homes 2.0 stalls for each dwelling unit Dwellings: Multifamily 2.0 stalls for each dwelling unit Dwellings: Elderly housing 1.2 stall for each dwelling unit Hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts 1.2 stall for each guestroom Sororities, dormitories, roominghouses and boardinghouses 1 stall per sleeping room Retirement homes, nursing homes, convents, monasteries 1 stall per resident Hospitals, sanitariums, institutions, rest and nursing homes 1 stall per bed Medical and dental clinics 1 stall per 300 square feet of floor area Restaurants, bars, clubs and lodges, places of entertainment 1 stall for each 200 square feet of floor area used for customer seating or 1 stall for every 3 seats available for customers, whichever is greater Retail business and commercial services 1 stall per 200 square feet of floor area used for customer sales or service Financial institutions, business, government and professional offices 1 stall per 300 square feet of floor area Office buildings and professional offices 1 parking space per 300 square feet of floor area Manufacturing and process plants (including meat and food processing), laboratories, and warehouses 1 stall per 1,000 square feet of floor area Theaters, auditoriums, community centers, sports arenas, and other places of public assembly 1 stall for each 5 seats or spaces equal to 20 percent of capacity in persons, whichever is greater Colleges, secondary and elementary schools 1 stall for each 2 employees plus 1 stall for each 5 students of 16 years of age or more Libraries, museums, art galleries, and other public buildings 1 stall per 300 feet of floor area Funeral homes, mortuaries and similar-type uses 1 stall for each 300 square feet of floor area Churches and other places of indoor religious assembly 1 stall per 300 square feet of floor area Motor vehicle sales (new and used) 1 stall for each 1,000 square feet of floor area used for sales or vehicle display Automobile repair garages and stations 1 stall for each 2 employees plus 2 service spaces for each service bay Bowling lanes 4 stalls for each alley, plus 1 additional stall for each 200 square feet used for retail or restaurant purposes Day care centers and other similar facilities for children or adults 1 stall per employee during the maximum shift, plus 1 stall per 10 students or persons licensed to attend Swimming pools 1 stall per 100 square feet of water surface  
(9)  Uses not listed. For structures or uses not mentioned, the provision for a use that is similar shall apply or the plan commission may rely on standards and parking ratios that appear in the most recent edition of the Institute of Traffic Engineers Parking Generation Manual. Floor space or area shall mean the gross floor area inside the exterior walls, where floor space is indicated in the table in subsection (8) of this section as a basis for determining the amount of off-street parking required. 
(10)  Combined uses. Combinations of any of the uses in the table in subsection (8) of this section shall provide the total of the number of stalls required for each individual use. Two or more uses may provide required off-street parking spaces in a common parking facility less than the sum of the spaces required for each use individually, provided such uses are not operated during the same hours. The following conditions must be met for any joint use: 
a.  The proposed joint parking space is within 500 feet of the use it will serve; 
b.  The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the two buildings or uses for which joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed; 
c.  A properly drawn legal instrument approved by the village board, executed by the parties concerned, for joint use of off-street parking facilities shall be filed with the zoning administrator. Such instrument may be a three party agreement, including the village and all private parties involved. Such instrument shall first be approved by the village attorney. 
(11)  Physically disabled parking requirements. In addition to any other requirements relating to parking spaces contained in this Code, the provisions contained in Wis. Stats. §§ 101.13, 346.503 and 346.56, and any Wisconsin Administrative Code sections adopted pursuant thereto are adopted by reference and made applicable to all parking facilities whenever constructed. 
(12)  Changes in buildings or use. Whenever a building or use is changed, structurally altered, or enlarged to create a need for an increase of 25 percent or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use is enlarged to the extent of 50 percent or more in the floor area, such building or use shall then comply with the parking requirements set forth in the district in which it is located. 
(13)  Off-lot parking. 
a.  Required off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot with the principal use, or when this requirement cannot be met, such parking spaces may be located off-lot, provided the parking spaces are located in the same district and not over 500 feet from the principal use. When off-street parking facilities are permitted on land other than the same lot as the principal use, such facilities shall be in the same possession as the lot occupied by the use to which the parking facilities are necessary or in the possession of the controller of the principal use to which the parking facilities are accessory. Such possession shall be by deed whereby the owner of the land on which the parking facilities are to be located shall be bound by a covenant filed and recorded in the office of the county register of deeds requiring such owner, the owner's heirs or assigns to maintain the required facilities for the duration of the use served; 
b.  Off-lot parking spaces for residential uses shall be within 250 feet of the principal entrance or the entrance for the individual occupants for whom the spaces are reserved while the farthest portions of a parking lot for all other uses shall be within 400 feet of the entrance of the establishment; 
c.  Accessory parking may be located in residential districts, provided that such lots or property are immediately adjacent to a commercial, business or industrial zoning district; 
d.  All off-street parking lots adjoining lots zoned for residential use shall have a minimum setback of ten feet from any interior lot line, except if the adjoining lot is used for legally conforming parking purposes. 
(14)  Signs. Signs located in parking areas necessary for orderly operation of traffic movement shall be permitted in addition to others permitted in this chapter. 
(15)  Reduction of parking areas. Off-street parking spaces shall not be reduced in number unless such number exceeds the requirement set forth in this section. 
(16)  Exceptions. 
a.  The plan commission may authorize exceptions to the parking standards or other requirements of this section where the applicant can demonstrate that the proposed use will generate less parking demand than the parking standard requirements, or where an exception from the requirements would result in a site plan and development that would benefit the village and be consistent with the intent of this section. An applicant requesting an exception to the parking requirements shall be required to demonstrate and document the projected parking demand based on an analysis of similar or comparable uses; 
b.  The plan commission may require additional parking stalls where it is determined that the proposed use is likely to generate a demand for more parking stalls than this chapter would require; 
c.  In granting exceptions to the parking standards, the plan commission may grant conditional exceptions, subject to future review and reconsideration. 
(Code 1998, § 106-923; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-92, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 99-11, § 1, 7-19-1999; Ord. No. 01-04, § 2, 4-2-2001; Ord. No. 07-02, § 15, 4-2-2007; Ord. No. 08-08, § 2, 5-5-2008) 
Sec. 133-996. - Parking area landscaping requirements. 
(a)  Scope of section. The parking area landscaping standards in this section are intended to ensure that parking areas will be sufficiently landscaped so as to soften the visual impact of parking areas as seen from public rights-of-way and adjoining properties. The parking area landscaping standards consist of a point system that is designated to provide flexibility in developing an appropriate landscape plan. Applicants can implement a landscape plan which most effectively achieves the desired aesthetic results and which is consistent with the need of providing readily accessible and visible parking, provided the landscape plan meets the minimum point requirements as specified in this section. 
(b)  Minimum canopy tree and parking space requirements. 
(1)  All off-street vehicular parking areas with room for more than six vehicles shall provide and maintain one canopy-type tree for each 12 parking spaces or fraction thereof over the initial six spaces. Canopy trees shall be located in tree islands or within ten feet of the periphery of the parking area pavement. The preservation of desirable existing trees is encouraged, and those within the distance requirement may be applied to meeting the standards of this subsection. To be counted for purposes of this subsection, all newly planted and existing trees must have a minimum two-inch diameter measured six inches above the ground surface; 
(2)  Rows of parking stalls must be broken by a tree island at the rate of one tree island for each linear row of 12 parking spaces, for single row configurations, or for each 24 parking spaces in double row configurations. 
SCHEDULE FOR CANOPY TREES STANDARDS 
Number of Stalls Number of Trees Required 1 to 6 0 7 to 18 1 19 to 30 2 31 to 42 3 43 to 54 4 55 to 66 5 67 to 78 6 79 to 90 7 91 to 102 8 103 to 114 9 Over 114 9 plus 1 for each 12 spaces or fraction thereof  
(c)  Screening standards for parking areas near residentially zoned parcels or streets. 
(1)  There shall be a screening barrier for the purpose of obstructing light beams and muffling noise where an off-street parking area for four or more vehicles: 
a.  Abuts within 25 feet of an adjoining a residential property lot line in the R-1 or R-2 zoning district; 
b.  Is located in a manner where nearby residentially zoned properties would be affected by headlight glare (i.e., directly across a public right-of-way). 
(2)  The effective height of the barrier shall be a minimum of 31/2 feet above the surface of the parking area. Such a barrier may consist of wood or masonry fencing, walls, berming, or the use of plant material. Where plant materials are used for screening, they shall be of suitable size and density to accomplish the screening objective within three years from the time of planting. 
(d)  Minimum landscape element standards. In all districts all parking areas shall be required to accumulate a minimum number of points. The number of points required is based on the number of parking spaces. Parking areas for four or more vehicles are required to accumulate 15 points for each space. To qualify for points, the landscape elements must be located in a manner which primarily meets the objectives of landscaping parking areas. 
POINT SCHEDULE FOR LANDSCAPE ELEMENTS 
Landscape 
Element Minimum Planted Size Points Canopy trees 2" to 21/2" or 1" to 11/2" for multistem trees 50 Canopy trees 11/2" to 2" or 8' to 10' 30 Evergreen trees 4' 30 Low ornamental trees 5' and BB stock 20 Tall shrubs 21/2' to 4' 9 Medium shrubs 18" to 36" 6 Low shrubs 15" to 24" 3  
(e)  Minimum dimensions for tree islands and planted areas. 
(1)  All tree islands and landscaped areas with trees shall be a minimum of four feet as measured from the inside of any curb or frame; 
(2)  All landscape areas without trees, but planted with shrubs, shall have a minimum width of three feet measured from inside the curb or frame. 
(f)  Unsuitable species. Several shrubs and trees, which are not native to the state, have an established history of spreading to nearby parks and conservancy areas. These nonnative plants tend to become overly abundant and ultimately eliminate many desirable native species. The control and eradication of these unsuitable plants create a costly management problem. The following species of plant material are unsuitable for use as landscape plants: 
(1)  Honeysuckle: 
a.  Lonicera x-bella. 
b.  Lonicera morrowi. 
c.  Lonicera tatarica. 
(2)  Buckthorn (common): 
a.  Rhamnus cathartica. 
b.  Rhamnus frangula (tall hedge). 
(3)  Norway maple (Acer platanoides). 
(g)  Adjustments to parking area landscaping requirements. The plan commission may authorize adjustments to the requirements where literal compliance with the specifications and standards would make the parking lot landscaping ineffective or unnecessary. Topographic constraints, existing vegetation, traffic safety, or compliance with fire or other public safety requirements may necessitate adjustments. 
(Code 1998, § 106-924; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-93, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 05-12, §§ 1-3, 9-6-2005) 
Sec. 133-997. - Highway access. 
(a)  Private access. No direct private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed rights-of-way of expressways or to any controlled access arterial street without permission of the highway agency that has access control jurisdiction. No direct public or private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed rights-of-way of freeways, interstate highways and their interchanges or turning lanes or to intersecting or interchanging streets within 1,500 feet of the most remote end of the taper of the turning lanes, such as exit and entrance ramps. No driveway openings shall be permitted within 100 feet of the intersection of an arterial street right-of-way line. 
(b)  Barriers. Access barriers, such as curbing, fencing, ditching, landscaping, or other topographic barriers shall be erected to prevent unauthorized vehicular ingress or egress to the streets or highways specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Temporary access permit. Temporary access to the rights-of-way specified in subsection (a) of this section may be granted by the zoning administrator after review and recommendation by the highway agencies having jurisdiction. Such access permit shall be temporary, revocable, and subject to any conditions required and shall be issued for a period not to exceed 12 months. 
(Code 1998, § 106-925; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-94, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-998. - Storage and parking of recreational vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Boat means every description of watercraft used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water. 
    Recreational vehicle means any of the following: 
(1)  Travel trailer. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis and on wheels that is between ten and 36 feet long, including the hitch, and eight feet or less in width, designated to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, vacation, or other uses and towed by a car, station wagon, or truck. It includes so-called fifth-wheel units. 
(2)  Pickup coach. A structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, vacation, or other uses. 
(3)  Motor home. A portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation, vacation, or other uses, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle. 
(4)  Camping trailer. A canvas or folding structure mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation, vacation, or other uses. 
(5)  Chassis mounts, motor homes and mini-motor homes. Recreational structures constructed integrally with a truck or motor-van chassis and incapable of being separated therefrom. 
(6)  Converted and chopped vans. Recreational structures that are created by altering or changing an existing auto van to make it a recreational vehicle. 
(7)  Boat or snowmobile trailer. A vehicle on which a boat or snowmobile may be transported and is towable by a motor vehicle. When removed from the trailer, a boat or snowmobile, for purposes of this section, is termed an "unmounted boat or snowmobile." 
(b)  Permitted parking or storage. In all residential and commercial districts, it is permissible to park or store a recreational vehicle or boat and boat trailer on private property in the following manner: 
(1)  No part of the unit may extend over the public sidewalk or into public right-of-way. 
(2)  Parking is permitted only for storage purposes. Recreational vehicles, trailers, or boats shall not be: 
a.  Used for dwelling purposes; 
b.  Permanently connected to sewer lines, water lines, or electricity. The recreational vehicle may be connected to electricity temporarily for charging batteries and other purposes; 
c.  Used for storage of goods, materials, or equipment other than those items considered to be part of the unit or essential for its immediate use. 
(3)  The recreational vehicle or boat shall be owned by the resident on whose property the unit is parked for storage. 
(Code 1998, § 106-926; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-95, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-999. - Storage of trucks, tractors and road machinery. 
(a)  Truck parking in residential areas. No motor vehicle with a tare or empty weight in excess of 12,000 pounds, over 18 feet in length, or having a height of more than eight feet from the roadway, bearing a commercial license, including school buses, and no commercially licensed trailer, including semitrailers, shall be parked or stored in a residential district, except when loading, unloading, or rendering a service. 
(b)  Tractors and road machinery. No person shall park, keep, or maintain on properties zoned as residential or multiple residential dwellings the following types of vehicles: tractors, tractor-trailers, semitrailers, dumptrucks, auto wreckers, and road machinery. Such vehicles may not be kept or parked on the premises, whether or not they are in enclosed buildings, except for the purposes of unloading or servicing the premises. 
(c)  Applicability. This section only applies to areas not constituting a street, alley or public way. 
(Code 1998, § 106-927; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-96, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-1000. - Portable outdoor storage units. 
(a)  Applicability. The standards within this section apply to portable outdoor storage units in all zoning districts, except that subsections (d) through (f) of this section shall apply only in residential zoning districts. 
(b)  Definition. The term "portable outdoor storage unit" means a portable storage container with more than 216 cubic feet of storage space designed and used primarily for temporary storage and/or transportation of household goods and other such materials that is kept outdoors and not affixed to a foundation. The term "portable outdoor storage unit" does not include storage sheds constructed of wood, plastic or steel which are located on a permanent or temporary foundation, are not intended to be moved or relocated on a regular basis, and are in compliance with all village setback and other requirements. The term "portable outdoor storage unit" also does not include construction trailers or temporary storage units utilized by contractors or developers incidental to the ongoing construction of structures, public improvements or utilities, or other aspects of property development. 
(c)  Permitted locations and uses. 
(1)  Portable outdoor storage units shall not be placed in or on a public right-of-way, including public sidewalks and public terrace areas, or on other public property, except by the public entity that owns the property; 
(2)  Portable outdoor storage units shall only be placed on lots by the owner or lessee of the lot; 
(3)  Portable outdoor storage units shall be placed on a hard, all-weather surface, such as concrete or asphalt (with gravel allowed for institutional uses in the joint planning area or the expanded extraterritorial zoning area); 
(4)  Portable outdoor storage units shall not be placed in such a location or fashion as to impede or obstruct the flow of drainage or obstruct emergency, vehicle, pedestrian, or utility access to or through the lot or adjacent area or lots; 
(5)  The following minimum setbacks from lot lines shall apply to portable outdoor storage units: 
a.  Front yard setback, ten feet; 
b.  Read year setback, ten feet; 
c.  Side yard setback, three feet; 
(6)  Portable outdoor storage units shall be used only for temporary storage of personal goods and belongings. Portable outdoor storage units shall not be used for occupancy or sleeping, housing of animals, or housing or storage of hazardous, flammable, or unlawful materials or substances. Portable outdoor storage units shall be closed and secured from unauthorized access at all times when not under the direct supervision of the lot owner or lessee. 
(d)  Maximum duration of placement. No portable outdoor storage unit shall be placed on the same lot for more than 30 consecutive days, except that the village zoning administrator may allow an extension of no greater than 90 additional days if he determines that a legitimate need has been established. 
(e)  Maximum number. Not more than one portable outdoor storage unit shall be placed on any lot at any one time, nor shall there be a portable outdoor storage unit placed on any lot more than three times in any calendar year. 
(f)  Maximum size. No portable outdoor storage unit shall exceed eight feet in width, nine feet in height, or 16 feet in length. 
(g)  Maintenance. All portable outdoor storage units shall be maintained in a good and clean condition, free from rust, peeling paint, or other visible deterioration. 
(Ord. No. 15-3, 2-16-2015) 
Secs. 133-1001-133-1028. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS 

Sec. 133-1029. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Apartment complex sign means an on-premises sign that provides identification for an apartment complex. 
    Awning means a temporary hood or cover that projects from the wall of the building that can be retracted, folded, or collapsed against the face of a supporting structure. 
    Banner means a suspended sign made of a flexible material such as canvas, cloth, plastic, paper, or fabric of any kind, and intended to be displayed on a temporary basis. Banners shall not exceed 20 feet in height, including, without limitation, the appurtenance on which the banner is displayed. Such a sign shall be firmly attached on all four corners. 
    Billboard means a sign that advertises goods, products or facilities or services not necessarily on the premises where the sign is located or directs persons to a different location from where the sign is located. 
    Blanketing means the unreasonable obstruction of view of a sign caused by the placement of another sign. 
    Digital billboard means a billboard capable of displaying multiple static images controlled by electronic means or communications. 
    Directional routing sign means any sign displayed for the purpose of informing people of or guiding people to a particular place for a specified event, including, but not limited to, an open house, garage sale, estate sale, or other similar event. 
    Directly illuminated sign means any sign designed to give any artificial light directly through any transparent or translucent material from a source of light originating within or on such sign. 
    Directory sign means any sign on which the names and locations of occupants or the use of a building is given. This includes office and church or other place of religious assembly directories. 
    Electronic message unit sign means any sign whose message may be changed by electronic process, including such messages as copy, art, graphics, time, date, temperature, weather or information concerning civic, charitable or the advertising of products or services for sale on the premises. This also includes traveling or segmented message displays. 
    Flashing sign means any directly or indirectly illuminated sign on which artificial light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use. 
    Ground sign or pole sign means any sign that is supported by structures or supports in or upon the ground and independent of support from any building (also referred to as "freestanding sign"). 
    Identification sign means any sign that carries only the name of the firm, major enterprise, institution, or principal products offered for sale on the premises or combination of these. 
    Indirectly illuminated sign means a sign that is illuminated from a source outside of the actual sign. 
    Marquee sign means any sign attached to and made part of a marquee. A marquee is defined as a permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building wall at an entrance to a building or extending along and projecting beyond the building's wall and generally designed and constructed to provide protection against weather. 
    Nonconforming sign means any sign that does not conform to the regulations of this article. 
    Political sign means any sign containing a message intended for a political purpose or a message which pertains to an issue of public policy of possible concern to the electorate, but does not include a message intended solely for a commercial purpose. 
    Portable sign means any sign not permanently attached to the ground that is designed to be easily moved from one location to another, excluding a sail sign. 
    Projecting sign means any sign extending more than 18 inches, but less than five feet, from the face of a wall or building. 
    Real estate sign means any sign that is used to offer for sale, lease, or rent the property upon which the sign is placed. 
    Roof sign means any sign erected upon or over the roof or parapet of any building. 
    Sail sign means a wind device that is made of cloth or a cloth-like material, varying in size and shape and that is attached to a staff that is driven into the ground for support or that is mounted to a pole on a weighted base. Sail signs are generally used in connection with a promotional event or as an advertising tool. 
    Sign includes anything that promotes, calls attention to or invites patronage, or anything similar, to a business, location, or product. 
    Temporary sign means any sign intended to be displayed for a short period of time, including real estate or construction site signs, and banners, decorative-type displays, or anything similar to such, but not including political signs and sail signs. 
    Wall sign means any sign attached to, erected on, or painted on the wall of a building or structure and projecting not more than 18 inches from such wall. 
    Window sign means any sign located completely within an enclosed building and visible from a public way. 
(Code 1998, § 106-957; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-101, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-2, §§ 1, 2, 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 01-01, § 1, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 16-4, § 1(106-957), 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 133-1030. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish minimum standards to safeguard life and property and promote public welfare and community aesthetics by regulating the appearance, construction, location, and maintenance of all signs and billboards. 
(Code 1998, § 106-956; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-100, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-1031. - Sign permit. 
(a)  Required. Except those signs specified in section 133-1032, no sign shall be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, or structurally altered without a permit. 
(b)  Issuance of permit. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued by the zoning administrator. Applicants for a sign permit must provide the zoning administrator with a site plan indicating where the proposed sign would be located and a drawing showing the design and the dimensions of the sign. 
(2)  The zoning administrator may issue permits only if all of the requirements of the Code are met. Permits may be revoked at any time if the requirements of the Code are violated. 
(c)  Appeal. Appeal of the denial of a sign permit shall be to the plan commission. A written notice of appeal shall be filed with the zoning administrator within seven days of the issuance of the written denial of the permit application. The zoning administrator shall provide the notice of appeal to the plan commission, which shall hear the appeal as soon as reasonably practical. 
(Code 1998, § 106-958; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-102, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-2, § 3, 2-7-2000) 
Sec. 133-1032. - Sign permit exceptions. 
    All signs must have a building permit, except the following, provided that the following exempt signs may not be located over a public road right-of-way or in, on, or over public water, and may not be located on village property without prior village plan commission approval: 
(1)  Signs over show windows or doors of a nonconforming business establishment announcing without display or elaboration only the name and occupation of the proprietor and not to exceed two feet in height and ten feet in length. 
(2)  Real estate signs not to exceed eight square feet in area that advertise the sale, rental, or lease of the premises upon which such signs are temporarily located. 
(3)  Name, occupation, and warning signs not to exceed four square feet located on the premises. 
(4)  Bulletin boards for public, charitable, or religious institutions not to exceed eight square feet in area located on the premises. 
(5)  Memorial signs, tablets, names of buildings, and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of metal and affixed flat against the structure. 
(6)  Official signs, such as traffic control, parking restriction, information, and notices. 
(7)  Temporary signs not exceeding 11 square feet in area, when authorized by the building inspector, for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
(8)  A sign identifying a planned shopping center grouping may be permitted with the approval of the zoning administrator, and the zoning administrator may, in such case, modify the regulations applicable to the height, size and location of such sign consistent with the spirit and intent of this Code. 
(9)  A sign for the purpose of designating a new building or development, for promotion of a subdivision, for announcement of a special event, or for similar special informational purposes may be permitted for a limited period of time in any district with the approval of the zoning administrator and subject to the following: 
a.  Drawings showing the specific design, appearance, and location of the sign shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for approval; 
b.  The permitted size and location of any such sign shall be at the discretion of the zoning administrator based upon the character of the area, the type and purpose of the sign, and the length of time permitted; 
c.  Where the sign is to be located on the premises involved, such may be permitted for a period up to one year. An extension may be permitted for a period not to exceed two years total; 
d.  Where the sign is not to be located on the premises involved, such sign may be permitted for a period not to exceed nine months. 
(10)  Signs designating entrances, exits, service areas, parking areas, restrooms, and other such signs relating to functional operation of the building or premises shall be permitted without limitation other than reasonable size and necessity. 
(11)  Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only property numbers, postbox numbers, or names of occupants of premises. 
(12)  Flags and insignia of any government, except when displayed in connection with commercial promotion. 
(13)  Legal notices, identification information, or directional signs erected by governmental bodies. 
(14)  Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except letters, trademarks, moving parts, or moving lights. 
(15)  Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property, but bearing no advertising matter. 
(16)  Political signs not exceeding 11 square feet in area and not having an electrical, mechanical or audio component, during an election campaign period as provided in Wis. Stats. § 12.04. 
(Code 1998, § 106-959; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-103, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-2, §§ 4-9, 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 01-01, §§ 2-4, 2-5-2001) 
Sec. 133-1033. - Signs permitted. 
(a)  Commercial and industrial districts . Signs are permitted in the commercial districts and the industrial districts and commercial PUDs subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Wall signs placed against the exterior walls of buildings shall not extend more than six inches out from a building's wall surface, shall not exceed 150 square feet in area or 15 percent of the wall surface, whichever is smaller, for any one premises and shall not extend above the wall on which they are placed. 
(2)  Projecting signs fastened to, suspended from, or supported by structures shall not exceed 20 square feet in area for any one premises, shall not extend more than six feet into any required yard, shall not extend into any public right-of-way, shall not be less than ten feet from all side lot lines, shall not exceed a height of 20 feet above the mean centerline street grade, and shall not be less than ten feet above a driveway or an alley. 
(3)  Ground signs for buildings under 40,000 square feet of gross floor area shall not exceed ten feet in height above the mean centerline street grade, shall meet all requirements for the district in which they are located, shall be considered part of the structure in meeting all height requirements for the district in which they are located, and shall not exceed 64 square feet on each individual sign face. Ground signs for buildings 40,000 square feet or more of gross floor area shall not exceed 20 feet in height and shall not exceed 100 square feet on each individual sign face. Any portion of the base or foundation of a ground sign containing any information shall be considered part of the sign face. There shall be no more than one ground sign per 500 linear feet of street frontage with no more than a total of three ground signs per premises. 
(4)  Roof signs shall not be permitted. 
(5)  Window signs shall be placed only on the inside of commercial buildings and shall not exceed 25 percent of the glass area of the pane upon which a window sign is displayed. 
(6)  Sail signs . One free standing sail sign shall be permitted per legal business if the person wishing to display such sign applies therefore and obtains a permit. For a multi-tenant commercial property, no more than two sail signs may be permitted at any given time. Sail signs are not to exceed 12 feet in height as measured from ground level to the tip of the pole or staff to which it is affixed and three feet in width. A sail sign may be displayed for a maximum period of 14 consecutive days, two times per year, per legal business and which shall not occur in the same or consecutive months. Sail signs shall not be located within any public right-of-way, driveway or alley. 
(7)  Banners . One banner not to exceed 11 square feet shall be permitted per legal business, and in conformity with section 133-1038. Banners in excess of 11 square feet may be permitted if the person wishing to display such sign applies therefore and obtains a permit. Banners may be displayed for a maximum period of 30 consecutive days at the same location. Banners permitted under this exception shall not exceed 20 feet in height, including, without limitation, the appurtenance on which the banner is displayed. Such a sign shall be firmly attached on all four corners and shall not be located within any public right-of-way, driveway or alley. 
(8)  Any sign qualifying as more than one of the types listed in subsections (a)(1) through (7) of this section shall meet the requirements for each type. 
(9)  Bills and posters shall not be posted on the exterior of buildings or windows. 
(b)  Residential, conservancy and agricultural districts . All signs are prohibited in the R-1, R-2, R-3, residential PUD, A-1, A-1E and CON districts, except the following: 
(1)  Signs over show windows or doors of a nonconforming business establishment announcing without display or elaboration only the name and occupation of the proprietor and not to exceed four square feet. 
(2)  Real estate signs not to exceed four square feet in area that advertise the sale, rental, or lease of the premises upon which such signs are temporarily located. 
(3)  Name, occupation, and warning signs not to exceed two square feet located on the premises. 
(4)  Bulletin boards for public, charitable, or religious institutions not to exceed eight square feet in area located on the premises. 
(5)  Memorial signs, tablets, names of buildings, and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of metal and affixed flat against a structure. 
(6)  Official signs, such as traffic control parking restrictions, information, and notices. 
(7)  Temporary signs or banners not to exceed 11 square feet, and in conformity with section 133-1038. 
(8)  Political signs not exceeding 11 square feet in area and not having an electrical, mechanical or audio component during an election campaign period as defined in Wis. Stats. § 12.04. 
(c)  Multiple-family residential districts . All signs are prohibited in the R-4 and R-5 districts except the following: 
(1)  Apartment complex signs may be installed on the premises for identification of an apartment building or apartment complex. The sign may be either a ground or wall sign. Apartment complex signs shall have a maximum size of 32 square feet and shall be erected to a height not to exceed eight feet. Such signs shall be located on the site advertised on the sign. Not more than one such sign is permitted for an apartment complex. 
(2)  Signs over show windows or doors of a nonconforming business establishment announcing without display or elaboration only the name and occupation of the proprietor and not to exceed four square feet. 
(3)  Real estate signs not to exceed four square feet in area that advertise the sale, rental, or lease of the premises upon which such signs are temporarily located. 
(4)  Name, occupation, and warning signs not to exceed two square feet located on the premises. 
(5)  Bulletin boards for public, charitable, or religious institutions not to exceed eight square feet in area located on the premises. 
(6)  Memorial signs, tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of metal and affixed flat against a structure. 
(7)  Official signs, such as traffic control, parking restrictions, information, and notices. 
(8)  Temporary signs or banners not exceeding 11 square feet in area, and in conformity with section 133-1038. 
(9)  Political signs not exceeding 11 square feet in area and not having an electrical, mechanical or audio component, during an election campaign period as provided in Wis. Stats. § 12.04. 
(10)  Sail signs . One free standing sail sign shall be permitted per legal business if the person wishing to display such sign applies therefore and obtains a permit. For a multi-tenant commercial property, no more than two sail signs may be permitted at any given time. Sail signs are not to exceed 12 feet in height as measured from ground level to the tip of the pole or staff to which it is affixed and three feet in width. A sail sign may be displayed for a maximum period of 14 consecutive days, two times per year, per legal business and which shall not occur in the same or consecutive months. Sail signs shall not be located within any public right-of-way, driveway or alley. 
(d)  C-1D downtown business district . In addition to the requirements in subsection (a) above, in the C-1D downtown commercial district, the area of each sign shall be limited by the length of the facade of that portion of the building or structure occupied by the applicant which is nearest to and parallel to any public street or to any public parking area in a shopping center or group of commercial buildings. Sail signs shall not contribute to the overall sign area permitted per legal business. The maximum sign area for any individual sign in the C-1D downtown commercial district shall be as follows: 
Length of Building Façade Maximum Size 20 feet or less 16 square feet 30 feet or less, but more than 20 feet 20 square feet 40 feet or less, but more than 30 feet 24 square feet 50 feet or less, but more than 40 feet 36 square feet More than 50 feet 48 square feet  
(Code 1998, § 106-960; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-104, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-2, §§ 10, 11, 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 01-01, §§ 5-8, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 05-05, § 1, 6-20-2005; Ord. No. 07-02, § 16, 4-2-2007; Ord. No. 09-06, § 8, 7-20-2009; Ord. No. 16-4, § 1(106-960), 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 133-1034. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  Facing. No sign, except those permitted in section 133-1032, shall be permitted to face a residential district within 100 feet of such district boundary. 
(b)  Traffic interference/safety hazard. The village may remove any sign located on village property without approval, or any sign which poses a traffic hazard emergency or other emergency threat to public safety as determined by the police chief or building inspector. 
(c)  Moving or flashing signs. No sign shall be erected that has any flashing, rotating, or brilliant intermittent parts or lights or bare reflecting-type bulbs, except those giving public service information such as time, date, temperature, weather, or similar information or where allowed by conditional use permit. 
(d)  Off-premises signs. Any sign owned or leased by a person other than the owner or occupant of the principal structure on the lot on which the sign is located is prohibited, unless approved as a conditional use as provided in section 133-930 through 133-943. The following off-premises signs are exempted from this requirement: 
(1)  Directional routing signs. 
(2)  Temporary signs. 
(Code 1998, § 106-961; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-105, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 01-01, § 9, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 07-02, § 17, 4-2-2007) 
Sec. 133-1035. - Dangerous and abandoned signs. 
(a)  Removal. All signs shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located when a business that it advertises has not been conducted for a period of six months or when, in the judgment of the building inspector, such sign is so old, dilapidated, or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous or unsafe, whichever occurs first. If the owner or lessee fails to remove it, the village board may remove the sign at the cost of the owner, following adequate written notice. The owner may appeal the village board's decision to the board of appeals. 
(b)  Alterations. Any sign that was erected before November 3, 1997, shall not be rebuilt or relocated without conforming to all of the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Violations. All signs constructed or maintained in violation of any of the sections of this article are declared public nuisances within the meaning of this Code. In addition to the penalty for violation of this chapter, the village board may bring an action to abate the nuisance in the manner set forth in state law. 
(Code 1998, § 106-962; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-106, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-1036. - Special exceptions. 
    Where the regulations in this article are unduly restrictive due to special conditions, the plan commission may grant a special exception as a conditional use under article V of this chapter. In addition to the factors specified in article V of this chapter, the plan commission shall consider the signage guidelines in the central business district master plan and the village comprehensive plan when exceptions are requested in the C-1D Downtown Commercial District. 
(Code 1998, § 106-963; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-107, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 05-05, § 2, 6-20-2005) 
Sec. 133-1037. - Construction and maintenance standards. 
(a)  Installation. All signs shall be properly secured, supported and braced and shall be kept in reasonable structural condition and shall be kept clean and well-painted at all times. Bolts or screws shall not be fastened to window frames. Every sign and its framework, braces, anchors and other supports shall be constructed of such material and with such workmanship as to be safe and satisfactory to the building inspector. 
(b)  General requirements. 
(1)  Awnings. The lowest part of any awning shall be seven feet above the sidewalk. Signs are allowed directly on the awning or hanging on the frame, but not below seven feet. 
(2)  Roof signs. No sign shall be located so as to project above the parapet line, unless approved by the plan commission. 
(3)  Illuminated signs. Any illuminated signs shall not interfere with surrounding properties or traffic. 
(4)  Projection signs. Projection signs including supports shall not project beyond five feet from the face of the wall to which the sign is attached. 
(5)  Blanketing. Blanketing of signs shall not be allowed. 
(6)  Maintenance. All signs, including supports and attachments, shall be properly maintained and shall have an appearance that is neat and clean. 
(7)  Sidewalk setback. Signs adjacent to public sidewalks shall be set back so that the sign base or any portion of the signage area under ten feet in height is not within three feet of the sidewalk. 
(c)  Searchlights. The village board may permit the temporary use of a searchlight for advertising purposes in any district, provided that the searchlight will not be located in any public right-of-way, will not be located closer than ten feet to an adjacent property, and will not cause a hazard to traffic or adjoining properties. Searchlight permits shall not be granted for a period of more than five days in any six-month period. 
(d)  Signs on public rights-of-way. Signs shall not be permitted on public rights-of-way except for traffic control, parking, and directional signs and as otherwise specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 106-964; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-108, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 07-02, §§ 18, 19, 4-2-2007) 
Sec. 133-1038. - Specific requirements. 
    Specific requirements for signs shall be as follows: 
(1)  Temporary sign limitations. 
a.  All temporary signs such as real estate and construction site signs may be erected for 30 days and shall be removed within ten days after their use has discontinued. 
b.  Temporary signs may be placed on a property, but shall not be located on a right-of-way terrace, and shall not interfere with driveway vision clearance. 
(2)  Electronic message unit signs. 
a.  Such signs may be used only to advertise activities conducted on the premises or to present public service information pursuant to subsection 133-1034(c). 
b.  Electronic message units shall not exceed 40 square feet and shall be included in the maximum aggregate sign surface area for the premises. 
c.  For electronic message units with variable messages, the total length of the information cycle shall not be shorter than six seconds. 
d.  Electronic message unit signs may not display continuously traveling messages or similar actions that convey motion. 
(3)  Portable signs. The zoning administrator may grant permits for portable signs, including sandwich boards and reader boards that are not attached to the ground, for not more than three years, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  A permit shall be issued in accordance with section 133-1031 prior to displaying a portable sign. 
b.  The maximum size of a portable sign in commercial and industrial districts shall be 25 square feet, and 11 square feet in residential, conservancy, agricultural and multiple family districts, on each face, back to back. 
c.  Portable signs may not be larger than three feet by four feet or 12 square feet on a single face. Double-sided signs may have 12 square feet of sign on each side. 
d.  Portable signs must be removed and stored inside the premises during times when the business is not open to the public, except that signs too heavy to move may be permitted to remain in place, if the sign is maintained in the position approved in the site plan, and is stabilized to comply with section 133-1037. 
e.  No more than one portable sign may be permitted for any single establishment. 
f.  Portable signs shall not be located in a manner that obstructs vision from intersecting streets, alleys, or driveways, obstructs passage on a sidewalk or walkway, or otherwise create an unsafe condition. 
g.  No portable sign may be located closer than 15 feet to another portable sign. 
h.  Portable signs must be maintained in good repair. Maintenance refers to quality of paint, condition of the sign surface, and durability of the sign board supports. Permits for portable signs that are not well maintained may be revoked, and the signs may be removed by the village. The cost of sign removal may be charged to the person or entity responsible for placing the sign, or specially assessed against the property on which the sign is placed. 
(4)  Directional routing sign limitations. 
a.  Directional routing signs shall be no larger than two feet by three feet. 
b.  No more than four signs may be placed within the village at any one time for any one event. 
c.  No directional routing sign may be placed on private property without the permission of the property owner. 
d.  Directional routing signs may not be in place for more than two consecutive days and on each day, may not be in place longer than two hours before the opening and two hours after the close of the scheduled event to which the sign refers. 
e.  The purpose and content of the directional routing signs shall be to provide directions to an event being held in the village. Directional routing signs may only be placed where a change of direction is required. 
f.  Directional routing signs must not obscure visibility or impede public safety. 
g.  Directional routing signs that create a safety hazard or are otherwise not in compliance with this Code may be removed by the village. The cost of sign removal may be specially assessed to the person who placed the sign or the owner of the property, as appropriate. 
(Code 1998, § 106-965; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-109, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 00-2, §§ 12, 13, 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 01-01, § 10, 11, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 09-06, § 9, 7-20-2009) 
Sec. 133-1039. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Signs eligible for characterization as legal nonconforming. Any sign located within the village limits on November 3, 1997, or located in an area annexed to the village that does not conform with this article is eligible for characterization as a legal nonconforming sign and is permitted, providing it meets the following requirements: 
(1)  The sign was covered by a proper sign permit prior to November 3, 1997; 
(2)  If no permit was required under the applicable law for the sign in question and the sign was, in all respects, in compliance with applicable law on November 3, 1997. 
(b)  Loss of legal nonconforming status. A sign loses its nonconforming status if one or more of the following occurs: 
(1)  The sign is structurally altered in any way, except for normal maintenance or repair, which tends to or makes the sign less in compliance with requirements of this article than it was before alteration; 
(2)  The sign is relocated; 
(3)  The sign fails to conform to the village requirements regarding maintenance and repair, abandonment, or dangerous or defective signs; 
(4)  On the date of occurrence of any of the situations in subsections (b)(1) through (3) of this section, the sign shall be immediately brought in compliance with this article with a new permit secured therefor or the sign shall be removed. 
(c)  Legal nonconforming sign maintenance and repair. Nothing in this article shall relieve the owner or use of a legal nonconforming sign or the owner of the property on which the sign is located from the sections of this article regarding safety, maintenance, and repair of signs. 
(Code 1998, § 106-966; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-110, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-1040. - Sign illumination. 
    All illuminated signs shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Electrical permit. All signs in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used shall comply with all applicable provisions of the state electrical code. No permit for the erection of a sign shall be granted prior to approval and issuance of a valid electrical permit for that sign. 
(2)  Voltage displayed. The voltage of any electrical apparatus used in conjunction with a sign shall be conspicuously noted on that apparatus. 
(3)  External illumination. A building or structure, along with signs, awnings and canopies attached to the building or structure, may be illuminated externally, provided that the light source is designed, located, shielded, and maintained in such a manner that it is fixed and not directly visible from any adjacent public rights-of-way or surrounding premises. 
(4)  Internal illumination. Internally illuminated signs shall permit light to shine fully through the lettering and graphic element of the sign. The background for such lettering and graphics shall be opaque or translucent and shall transmit light at a level substantially less than that transmitted through the lettering and graphics. If the contrast between the lettering or graphic elements and background does not permit adequate legibility, a translucent white border of up to one inch in width may be placed around said lettering or graphic elements. 
(5)  Brightness limitation. In no instance shall lighting intensity of any illuminated sign exceed: 
a.  Three footcandles at the front lot line and one footcandle at all other lot lines, measured three feet above the surface of the ground; 
b.  Seventy-five footcandles measured perpendicular to the face of the sign from a distance equal to the narrowest dimension of the sign. When the sign is located on a lot adjoining a property used exclusively for residential purposes, this limit is reduced to 50 footcandles. 
(6)  Glare. All artificial illumination shall be designed, located, shielded, and directed so as to prevent the casting of glare or direct light upon adjacent public rights-of-way or surrounding property. 
(7)  Reflectors and lights. Gooseneck and similar reflectors and lights shall be permitted on freestanding and wall signs provided, however, the reflectors and lights shall concentrate the illumination upon the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street or surrounding property. It shall be unlawful to maintain any sign which is wholly or partially illuminated by floodlights or spotlights, unless such lights are completely concealed from view from the public rights-of-way. 
(Code 1998, § 106-969; Ord. No. 09-06, § 10, 7-20-2009) 
Sec. 133-1041. - Billboard replacement program. 
    An owner of a legally nonconforming billboard existing upon the effective date of this chapter may apply for a conditional use permit to replace an existing billboard with a digital billboard. The digital billboard shall comply with the following criteria, and any conditions identified in the conditional use permit: 
(1)  The digital billboard shall comply with Wis. Stat. § 84.30(4) and any other applicable Wisconsin Statutes. 
(2)  The area of the digital billboard shall be equal to or less than the billboard being replaced. 
(3)  No portion of the digital billboard shall be located closer to the public road right-of-way than the billboard it is replacing, nor shall it be located within 15 feet of any public road right-of-way as calculated by the shortest measurable distance between the nearest point of the digital billboard to the edge of the right-of-way. 
(4)  The illumination of a digital billboard shall not exceed a brightness level of 0.3 footcandles above ambient light, as measured using a footcandle meter at the following pre-set distances from the base of the digital billboard: 
300-375 square feet digital billboard face ..... 150 feet 376-475 square feet digital billboard face ..... 200 feet 476-672 square feet digital billboard face ..... 250 feet  
The measurement of the brightness level shall be taken with the meter aimed directly at the digital billboard sign face from the applicable pre-set distance. 
(5)  No embellishments or cutouts may be utilized on digital billboards. 
(6)  All of the standards and procedures applicable to conditional use permits contained in article V, chapter 133 shall apply, and, in addition, the conditional use permit shall contain conditions addressing the provision of public service announcements and other emergency alerts on the digital billboard. 
(7)  No digital billboard may be located within 1,000 feet of another digital billboard. 
(Ord. No. 16-10, § 2(106-970), 11-7-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-10, adopted May 18, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as § 106-970. Inasmuch as provisions for ch. 106 have been recodified at ch. 133, said provisions have been redesignated as § 133-1041, at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 133-1042-133-1065. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 133-1066. - Intent of article. 
    It is the intent of this article to use performance standards for the regulation of industrial uses to facilitate a more objective and equitable basis for control and to ensure that the community is adequately protected from potential hazardous and nuisance-like effects. 
(Code 1998, § 106-996; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-120, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-1067. - Noise. 
    No operation or activity shall transmit any noise exceeding 85 dBA from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and 75 dBA from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. beyond the property line. The following noises are exempt: 
(1)  Noises not directly under the control of the property owner; 
(2)  Noises from temporary construction or maintenance activities during daylight hours; 
(3)  Noises from emergency, safety or warning devices. 
(Code 1998, § 106-997; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-121, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-1068. - Vibration. 
(a)  No operation or activity shall transmit any physical vibration that is above the vibration perception threshold of an individual at or beyond the property line of the source. Vibration perception threshold means the minimum ground-borne or structure-borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a normal person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects. 
(b)  Vibrations not directly under the control of the property user and vibrations from temporary construction or maintenance activities shall be exempt from subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1998, § 106-998; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-122, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-1069. - External lighting. 
    No operation or activity shall produce any intense glare or lighting with the source directly visible beyond the boundary of an industrial or a commercial district. 
(Code 1998, § 106-999; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-123, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-1070. - Odor. 
    No operation or activity shall emit any substance or combination of substances in such quantities that create an objectionable odor as defined in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 154.18. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1000; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-124, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-1071. - Particulate emissions. 
    No operation or activity shall emit into the ambient air from any direct or portable source any matter that will affect visibility in excess of the limitations established in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 154.11. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1001; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-125, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-1072. - Visible emissions. 
    No operation or activity shall emit into the ambient air from any direct or portable source any matter that will affect visibility in excess of the limitations established in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 154.11(6). 
(Code 1998, § 106-1002; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-126, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-1073. - Hazardous pollutants. 
    No operation or activity shall emit any hazardous substances in such a quantity, concentration or duration as to be injurious to human health or property, and all emissions of hazardous substances shall not exceed the limitations established in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 154.19. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1003; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-127, 11-3-1997) 
Secs. 133-1074-133-1099. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SIGNAL RECEIVING ANTENNAS AND WIND AND SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS 

Sec. 133-1100. - Placement of signal receiving antennas. 
(a)  Purpose. This section regulating the placement of signal receiving antennas and satellite dishes over one meter in diameter is adopted to: 
(1)  Provide uniform regulation of all signal receiving antenna devices for private residences; 
(2)  Secure placement of such antennas in an aesthetically sensitive manner while allowing users reasonable reception of signals; 
(3)  Protect the public from injury from antennas that are inadequately mounted, unduly susceptible to wind pressure, improperly installed and wired, or are placed on structures insufficiently designed or constructed to safely support the antenna; and 
(4)  Provide for placement of such antennas in locations that preserve access to rear property areas by firefighting apparatus and emergency personnel. 
(b)  Permit required. No owner shall, within the village, build, construct, use or place any type of signal receiving antenna or satellite dish in excess of one meter in diameter for a private residence until a permit shall have first been obtained from the zoning administrator. 
(c)  Definition. For purposes of this section, the term "signal receiving antenna" is defined as any outdoor apparatus capable of receiving communications from a transmitter or a transmitter relay located in a planetary orbit. This definition includes all types of signal receiving antennas, including, without limitation, parabolic antennas; home earth stations; satellite television disks over one meter in diameter; UHF and VHF television antennas; and AM, FM, ham and short-wave radio antennas, regardless of the method of mounting. 
(d)  Application for permit. Application for a signal receiving antenna permit shall be made in writing to the zoning administrator. With such application, there shall be submitted payment of an antenna permit fee as specified in section 133-45. The applicant shall submit three sets of mounting plans and specifications, including a general plot plan showing the location of the proposed signal receiving antenna with respect to streets, lot lines and buildings. If such application meets all requirements of this section, the application shall be approved. 
(e)  Installation standards. Signal receiving antennas installed in any zoning district within the village shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Setbacks. 
a.  Any signal receiving antenna and its mounting post shall be located a minimum of three feet from any property line. The purpose of this setback is to protect the aesthetics of the area and to preserve adequate access for emergency equipment and personnel; 
b.  Subject to this chapter, signal receiving antennas shall only be located in the rear yard of any lot. If reasonable reception of signals is not possible with a rear yard placement due to the physical characteristics of the lot and area, the signal receiving antenna shall be placed in the side yard of the lot. If reasonable reception of signals is not possible by locating the signal receiving antenna on the rear or side yard of the property, such antenna may be placed in the front yard or on the roof of a structure on the property. For corner lots, a side yard is only a yard that does not face a street; 
c.  If side yard, front yard, or roof mounting is requested, the zoning administrator shall determine where reasonable reception is possible, based on evidence provided by the person seeking to erect or construct the antenna. 
(2)  Mounting. Signal receiving antennas attached to the wall or roof of any principal or accessory structure shall be permitted only if the structure is properly constructed to carry all imposed loading and complies with applicable state and local building code requirements. The zoning administrator may require engineering calculations. 
(3)  Diameter. The diameter of the signal receiving antenna shall not exceed 12 feet in diameter, except for systems used to provide community antenna television services. 
(4)  Height. 
a.  A ground-mounted signal receiving antenna, including any platform or structure upon which such antenna is mounted or affixed, may not exceed 15 feet in height, as measured from the ground to the highest point of the dish; 
b.  A roof-mounted antenna may not exceed eight feet in height above the surrounding roofline as measured from the lowest point of the existing roofline. 
(5)  Wind pressure. All signal receiving antennas shall be permanently mounted in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications for installation. All such installations shall meet a minimum wind load design velocity of 80 mph. 
(6)  Electrical installations. Electrical installations in connection with signal receiving antennas, including grounding of the system, shall be in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code, state electrical code, and the instructions of the manufacturer. If a conflict occurs, the more strict requirements shall govern. All cable used to conduct current or signals from the signal receiving antenna to the receivers shall be installed underground unless installation site conditions preclude underground. If a signal receiving antenna is to be used by two or more residential property owners, all interconnecting electrical connections, cables and conduits must also be buried. The location of all such underground lines, cables and conduits shall be shown on the application for a permit. All signal receiving antennas shall be grounded against direct lightning strikes. 
(7)  Temporary placement. No portable or trailer-mounted signal receiving antenna shall be allowed, except for temporary installation for on-site testing and demonstration purposes for periods not exceeding five days. However, such trial placement shall be in accordance with all of this section. Failure to comply shall result in a citation being issued for violation of this section. Any person making such temporary placement shall first give written notice to the zoning administrator of the date when such placement shall begin and end. There shall be no permit fee for temporary placement. 
(8)  Advertising. No form of advertising or identification, sign, or mural is allowed on the signal receiving antenna other than the customary manufacturer's identification plates. 
(9)  Interference with broadcasting. Signal receiving antennas shall be filtered or shielded so as to prevent the emission or reflection of an electromagnetic radiation that would cause any harmful interference with the radio and television broadcasting or reception on adjacent properties. If harmful interference is caused subsequent to its installation, the owner of the signal receiving antenna shall promptly take steps to eliminate the harmful interference in accordance with Federal Communications Commission regulations. 
(10)  Compliance with federal regulations. The installation and use of every signal receiving antenna shall comply with federal, state and local regulations. 
(11)  Aesthetic considerations. Signal receiving antennas shall be located and designed to reasonably reduce visual impact from surrounding properties at street level. 
(f)  Enforcement. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to construct, use, build or locate any signal receiving antenna in violation of this section. If any violation occurs, the village board or any property owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation may institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin a violation of this section. 
(2)  Any person who fails to comply with this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to the general penalty found in section 1-32. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1036; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-130, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-1101. - Conditional use permits required for wind and solar energy systems. 
(a)  Approval required. No owner shall, within the village, build, construct, use, or place any type or kind of wind or solar energy system without holding the appropriate conditional use permit for such system. Building-mounted solar energy systems that are permanently attached to the building and do not exceed the maximum building height allowed in the zoning district in which they are located are considered part of the structure and are not required to obtain a conditional use permit. 
(b)  Separate permit required for each system. A separate conditional use permit shall be required for each system. Such permit shall be applicable solely to the systems, structures, use, and property described in the permit. 
(c)  Basis of approval. The village board and plan commission shall base their determinations on general considerations as to the effect of such grant on the health, general welfare, safety, and economic prosperity of the village and, specifically, of the immediate neighborhood in which such use would be located, including such considerations as the effect on the established character and quality of the area; its physical attractiveness; the movement of traffic; the demand for related services; the possible hazardous, harmful, noxious, offensive, or nuisance effect as a result of noise, dust, smoke, or odor; and such other factors as would be appropriate to carry out the intent of this chapter. 
(d)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Solar energy system means equipment that directly converts and then transfers or stores solar energy into usable forms of thermal or electrical energy. 
    Wind energy system means equipment that converts and then stores or transfers energy from the wind into usable forms of energy. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1037; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-131, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 09-06, § 2, 7-20-2009) 
Sec. 133-1102. - Permit procedure for wind and solar energy systems. 
(a)  Application. The permit application for wind and solar energy systems shall be made to the zoning administrator on forms provided by the village. The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The address of the property on which the system will be located; 
(3)  A plat or survey for the property to be served showing the location of the generating facility and the means by which the facility will provide power to structures. If the system is intended to provide power to more than one premises, the plat or survey shall show all properties to be served and the means of connection to the system. A copy of all agreements with system users off the premises shall accompany the application. The application shall further indicate the level of noise to be generated by the system and provide assurances as to the safety features of the system. Energy easements shall accompany the application; 
(4)  An accurate and complete written description of the use for which special grant is being requested, including pertinent statistics and operational characteristics; 
(5)  Plans and other drawings showing proposed development of the site and buildings, including landscape plans, location of parking and service areas, driveways, exterior lighting, type of building material, etc., if applicable; 
(6)  Any other information that the zoning administrator, village board or building inspector may deem to be necessary to the proper review of the application. 
The zoning administrator shall review the application and, if the application is complete and contains all required information, shall refer it to the village board. 
(b)  Hearing. Upon referral of the application, the village board shall schedule a public hearing thereof following the procedures for conditional use permits in article V of this chapter. 
(c)  Determination. Following public hearing and necessary study and investigation, the village board shall, as soon as practical, render its decision and a copy shall be made a permanent part of the board's minutes. Such decision shall include an accurate description of the special use permitted, of the property on which it is permitted, and any and all conditions made applicable thereto, or, if disapproved, shall indicate the reasons for disapproval. The village board may impose any conditions or exemptions necessary to minimize any burden on the persons affected by granting the special use permit. 
(d)  Termination. When a special use does not continue in conformity with the conditions of the original approval or where a change in the character of the surrounding area or of the use itself cause it to be no longer compatible with surrounding areas or for similar cause based upon consideration for the public welfare, the special grant may be terminated by action of the village board following a public hearing thereon. 
(e)  Changes in plans or use. Subsequent change or addition to the approved plans or use shall first be submitted for approval to the village board and if, in the opinion of the board, such change or addition constitutes a substantial alteration, a public hearing before the village board shall be required and notice thereof be given. 
(f)  Additional permit requirements. The approval of a permit under this article shall not be construed to waive the requirement to obtain electrical, building, or plumbing permits prior to installation of any system. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1038; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-132, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 09-06, §§ 3, 4, 7-20-2009) 
Sec. 133-1103. - Specific requirements for wind energy systems. 
(a)  Additional standards. Wind energy conversion systems, commonly referred to as "windmills," which are used to produce electrical power, shall also satisfy the requirements of this section in addition to those found in other sections of this article. 
(b)  Application for erection of system. Applications for the erection of a wind energy conversion system shall be accompanied by a plat or survey for the property to be served showing the location of the generating facility and the means by which the facility will provide power to structures. If the system is intended to provide power to more than one premises, the plat or survey shall show all properties to be served and the means of connection to the wind energy conversion system. A copy of all agreements with system users off the premises shall accompany the application. The application shall further indicate the level of noise to be generated by the system and shall provide assurances as to the safety features of the system. Energy easements shall accompany the application. 
(c)  Construction standards. Wind energy conversion systems shall be constructed and anchored in such a manner to withstand wind pressure of not less than 40 pounds per square foot in area. 
(d)  Noise. The maximum level of noise permitted to be generated by a wind energy conversion system shall be 50 decibels, as measured on a dBA scale, measured at the lot line. 
(e)  Electromagnetic interference. Wind energy conversion system generators and alternators shall be filtered or shielded so as to prevent the emission of radio-frequency energy that would cause any harmful interference with radio and television broadcasting or reception. If harmful interference is caused subsequent to the granting of a conditional use permit, the operator of the wind energy conversion system shall promptly take steps to eliminate the harmful interference in accordance with Federal Communications Commission regulations. 
(f)  Location and height. A wind energy conversion system shall be located in the rear yard only, except as allowed under subsection 133-1101(c), and shall meet all setback and yard requirements for the zoning district in which it is located and, in addition, shall be located not closer to a property boundary than a distance equal to its height. Wind energy conversion systems are exempt from the height requirements of this chapter; however, all such systems over 75 feet in height shall submit plans to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to determine whether the system is to be considered an object affecting navigable air space and subject to Federal Aviation Administration restrictions. A copy of any Federal Aviation Administration restrictions imposed shall be included as a part of the wind energy conversion system conditional use permit application. 
(g)  Fence required. All wind energy conversion systems shall be surrounded by a security fence not less than six feet in height. A sign shall be posted on the fence warning of high voltages. 
(h)  Utility company notification. The appropriate electric power company shall be notified, in writing, of any proposed interface with that company's grid prior to installing such interface. Copies of comments by the appropriate utility company shall accompany and be part of the application for a conditional use permit. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1039; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-133, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 09-06, § 6, 7-20-2009) 
Sec. 133-1104. - Specific requirements for solar energy systems. 
(a)  Setbacks. 
(1)  Any solar energy system and its mounting posts shall be located a minimum of three feet from any property line. The purpose of this setback is to protect the aesthetics of the area and to preserve adequate access for emergency equipment and personnel; 
(2)  Except as provided in this subsection, solar energy systems shall only be located in the rear yard of any lot. If reasonable solar energy generation is not possible with rear yard placement due to the physical characteristics of the lot and area, a solar energy system may be placed in the side yard of the lot. For corner lots, a side yard is only a yard that does not face a street. If side yard placement of a solar energy system is requested, the zoning administrator shall determine where energy generation is possible, based on evidence provided by the person seeking to erect or construct the antenna. 
(b)  Height. 
(1)  In residential zoning districts, a ground-mounted solar energy system, including any platform or structure upon which such antenna is mounted or affixed, may not exceed 15 feet in height, as measured from the ground to the highest point of the structure; 
(2)  In residential zoning districts, roof-mounted solar energy systems may not exceed eight feet in height above the surrounding roofline as measured from the lowest point of the existing roofline. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1040; Ord. No. 09-06, § 7, 7-20-2009) 
Secs. 133-1105-133-1131. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 133-1132. - General standards for accessory uses or structures. 
(a)  Building permit required. No owner shall, within the village, build, construct, use, or place any type of an accessory building, including prefabricated accessory buildings, until a building permit shall have first been obtained from the building inspector. Application for an accessory building permit shall be made in writing to the building inspector. With such application, there shall be submitted a fee and a complete set of plans and specifications, including a plot plan or drawing accurately showing the location of the proposed accessory building with respect to adjoining alleys, lot lines and buildings. If such application meets all requirements of this section, the application shall be approved. 
(b)  Principal use required. An accessory use or structure in any zoning district shall not be established prior to the principal use or structure being present or under construction. Any accessory use or structure shall conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located except as specially otherwise provided. 
(c)  Placement restrictions in residential district. An accessory use or structure in a residential district may be established subject to the following: 
(1)  Number limits. In any residential district, in addition to the principal building, a detached garage or attached garage and one additional accessory building and one children's play structure may be placed on a lot, except as provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section; 
(2)  Limitation on number of attached garages and accessory buildings. 
a.  A residentially zoned parcel with a single garage attached to the dwelling and with alley access is permitted to have an additional one-car or two-car detached garage on the parcel. If a detached garage is erected, no other detached accessory buildings may be constructed or maintained on the parcel; 
b.  A residentially zoned parcel with more than a one-stall garage attached to the dwelling and with alley access is permitted to have an additional one-stall garage on the parcel. If a detached garage is erected, no other detached accessory buildings may be constructed or maintained on the parcel; 
c.  A garage attached to a dwelling shall be three stalls or less. Dwellings with an attached three stall garage are not permitted to have an additional detached garage on the parcel; 
d.  A lot zoned for single-family residential use and equal to or greater than two acres may have an attached two-stall garage and a detached two-stall garage; 
(3)  Attached accessory buildings. All accessory buildings that are attached to the principal building shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building; 
(4)  Lot area coverage for detached accessory buildings. No detached accessory building shall occupy any portion of the required front yard. Garages and other detached accessory buildings shall be less than 15 feet in height. No detached accessory building shall occupy more than 30 percent of the required rear yard or be located within three feet of any other accessory building or lot line or be located within five feet of an alley line. The dimensions of any swimming pool, children's play structure, detached garage, tennis court and other detached accessory buildings/structures shall be included in the determination of available lot area coverage for accessory structures; 
(5)  Detached accessory buildings prohibited in front yards. An accessory structure shall not be located forward of the front line of the principal structure, except for one detached one-stall or two-stall garage on a lot zoned for single-family residential use and equal to or greater than two acres so long as the detached garage is not placed in any part of the required front setback area or the portion of the front yard area located between two lines drawn perpendicular to the front line of the lot and extended to two corners of the principal building. Such front yard portion shall be the largest of any area formed by two corners of the principal building. 
(d)  Use restrictions in residential districts. Accessory uses or structures in residential districts shall not involve the conduct of any business, trade, or industry except for home occupations, as defined in this chapter, and shall not be occupied as a dwelling unit. Accessory buildings shall not be used for residential purposes; 
(e)  Placement restrictions in nonresidential districts. An accessory use or structure in a business or manufacturing district may be established in the rear yard or side yard and shall not be nearer than three feet to any side or rear lot line; 
(f)  Reversed corner lots. When an accessory structure is located on the rear of a reversed corner lot, it shall not be located beyond the front yard required on the adjacent interior lot to the rear, or nearer than three feet to the side line of the adjacent structure; 
(g)  Landscaping uses. Accessory vegetation used for landscaping and decoration may be placed in any required yard area. Permitted vegetation includes trees, shrubs, and flowers and gardens. Under no circumstances may a tent be used as a dwelling or an accessory structure; 
(h)  Temporary uses. Temporary accessory uses such as real estate sale field offices or shelters for materials and equipment being used in the construction of the permanent structure may be permitted by the zoning administrator; 
(i)  Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting installations shall not be permitted closer than three feet to an abutting property line and, where not specifically otherwise related, shall not exceed 15 feet in height and shall be adequately shielded or hooded so that no excessive glare or illumination is cast upon the adjoining properties; 
(j)  Lawn accessories. Walks, drives, paved terraces and purely decorative garden accessories such as pools, fountains, statuary, sundials, flagpoles, etc., shall be permitted in setback areas but not closer than three feet to an abutting property line, other than a street line; 
(k)  Retaining walls. Retaining walls may be permitted anywhere on the lot; provided, however, that no individual wall shall exceed six feet in height, and a terrace of at least three feet in width shall be provided between any series of such walls; 
(l)  Children's play structures. For purposes of this section, children's play structures, including playhouses, tree houses or elevated play structures, and climbing gyms, shall be considered accessory structures and shall comply with the requirements of this section, whether such play structures are placed on a foundation or not. Swing sets, slides, and sandboxes are not considered children's play structures for purposes of this section. A building permit is not required for the construction of a play structure. Play structures shall not be used for storage or be constructed out of materials that would constitute a nuisance. 
(m)  Terrace area restrictions. In addition to the definitions and restrictions contained in section 58-3 and the definition of the term "major alteration" in section 72-21, no person shall place any accessory structure or use, including landscaping ornaments, stones, and basketball backboards/hoops, in the terrace area. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1071; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-140, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-1133. - Outdoor storage of firewood. 
(a)  No person shall store firewood in the front yard on residentially zoned property, except that firewood may be temporarily stored in the front yard for a period of 30 days from the date of its delivery. 
(b)  Firewood should be neatly stacked and may not be stacked closer than two feet to any lot line and not higher than six feet from grade, except adjacent to a fence where firewood can be stacked against the fence as high as the fence. Fences, as used in this subsection, shall not include hedges and other vegetation. 
(c)  All brush, debris, and refuse from processing of firewood shall be promptly and properly disposed of and shall not be allowed to remain on the premises. 
(d)  Woodpiles that contain diseased wood that is capable of transmitting disease to healthy trees and woodpiles that harbor or that are infested or inhabited by rats or other vermin are public nuisances and may be abated pursuant to this Code. 
(e)  Not more than 20 percent of the side and rear yard may be used for storage of firewood at any one time. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1072; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-141, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-1134. - Outside storage. 
    No manure, rubbish, inoperable vehicles, salvage material, or miscellaneous refuse may be stored within any residential district when such may be construed as a menace to the public health or safety or when such may be held to have a depressing influence upon property values in the area. Junk shall be placed in properly zoned junkyards only. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1073; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-142, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 133-1135. - Fences and hedges. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the term "fence" is defined as an enclosed barrier consisting of vegetation, wood, stone, or metal intended to prevent ingress or egress. For the purpose of this section, the term "fence" shall include plantings, such as hedges and shrubbery. No fence shall be constructed of unsightly or dangerous materials that would constitute a nuisance. 
(b)  Classification. Fences shall be categorized into five classifications as follows: 
(1)  Boundary fence. A fence placed on or within three feet of the property lines of adjacent properties. 
(2)  Protective fence. A fence constructed to enclose a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(3)  Architectural or aesthetic fence. A fence constructed to enhance the appearance of the structure or the landscape. 
(4)  Hedge. A row of bushes of small trees planted close together that may form a barrier, enclosure, or boundary. 
(5)  Picket fence. A fence having a pointed post, stake, pale, or peg laced vertically with the point or sharp part pointing upward to form a part of the fence. 
(c)  Height restrictions. Height of fences shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Residential fences less than six feet in height are permitted on rear and side lot lines. Residential fences less than or equal to four feet in height are permitted in the street yard but shall not be closer than two feet to any public right-of-way and shall be subject to the requirements of section 133-993 related to traffic visibility. Residential fences equal to or greater than six feet shall require a conditional use permit. All fences must be constructed and maintained in a good state of repair and appearance; 
(2)  No fence, wall, hedge, or shrubbery shall be erected, placed, maintained, or grown along a lot line on any nonresidentially zoned property, adjacent to a residentially zoned property, to a height exceeding eight feet. 
(d)  Setback for residential fences. Fences in or adjacent to a residential property may be constructed along lot lines. Fences may be constructed alongside lot lines but shall not extend into the street yard as extended to the side lot lines. 
(e)  Fences in vision triangle. Fences within a required vision triangle at a street, alley, or driveway intersection must conform to section 133-993. 
(f)  Security fences. Security fences are permitted on the property lines in all districts, except residential districts, but shall not exceed eight feet in height and shall be of an open type similar to woven wire or wrought iron fencing. Security fences with an additional barbed wire barrier are permitted in industrially zoned areas. Such fences may be as much as 11 feet in total height, including support devices for securing barbed wire. The barbed wire portion of the fence may not be more than three feet in height, and the barbed wire shall not be less than eight feet from finished grade. 
(g)  Prohibited fences. No fence shall be constructed that is in a dangerous condition or that conducts electricity or that is designed to shock with electricity. Barbed wire may be used at the top of fences in industrial and commercial zones, provided that the barbed wire and its supports are six feet four inches above the ground. Barbed wire supports may not extend beyond the lot line of the fenced property. 
(h)  Maintenance. All fences shall be maintained and kept safe and in a state of good repair, and the finished side or decorative side of a fence shall face adjoining property. 
(i)  Temporary fences. Fences erected for the protection of planting or to warn of construction hazard or for similar purposes shall be clearly visible or marked with colored streamers or other such warning devices at four-foot intervals. Such fences shall comply with the setback requirements set forth in this section. The issuance of a permit shall not be necessary for temporary fences as described in this subsection, but such fences shall not be erected for more than 45 days. 
(j)  Nonconforming fences and hedges. Any fence or hedge existing on the effective date of this Code of Ordinances and not in conformance with this section may be maintained, but any alteration, modification, or improvement of such fence shall comply with this section. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1074; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-143, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 07-02, § 20, 4-2-2007) 
Sec. 133-1136. - Swimming pools and outdoor hot tubs. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Private or residential swimming pool or outdoor hot tub means an outdoor structure containing a body of water in a receptacle or other container having a depth for water at any point greater than 11/2 feet located above or below the surface of ground elevation that is used or intended to be used solely by the owner, operator, or lessee thereof and such owner's, operator's or lessee's family and by friends invited to use it, and includes all structural facilities, appliances and appurtenances, equipment, and other items used and intended to be used for the operation and maintenance of a private or residential swimming pool. 
(b)  Exemptions. Pools and outdoor hot tubs exempt from this section are as follows: 
(1)  Above ground swimming or wading pools are exempt from this section; 
(2)  Portable outdoor hot tubs are exempt from this section, providing they are installed for no more than 30 consecutive days. 
(c)  Permit required. Before work is commenced on the construction or erection of private or residential swimming pools, outdoor hot tubs or on any alterations, additions, remodeling or other improvements, an application for a swimming pool or outdoor hot tub building permit to construct, erect, alter, remodel, or add must be submitted in writing to the building inspector. Plans and specifications and pertinent explanatory data should be submitted to the building inspector at the time of application. No such work is obtained by the applicant. The minimum building permit fee established pursuant to the village building code shall accompany such application. 
(d)  Construction requirements. In addition to such other requirements as may be reasonably imposed by the building inspector, the building inspector shall not issue a permit for construction as provided for in subsection (c) of this section, unless the following construction requirements are observed: 
(1)  All materials and methods of construction in the construction, alteration, addition, remodeling, or other improvements and pool installation shall be in accord with all state regulations and codes and with any and all sections of this Code; 
(2)  All plumbing work shall be in accordance with all applicable sections of this Code and all state codes. Every private or residential swimming pool or outdoor hot tub shall be provided with a suitable draining method, and in no case shall waters from any pool be drained into the sanitary sewer system, onto lands of other property owners adjacent to that on which the pool is located, or in the general vicinity; 
(3)  All electrical installations, including lighting and heating, but not limited thereto, that are provided for, installed, and used in conjunction with a private swimming pool or outdoor hot tub shall be in conformance with the state laws and sections of this Code regulating electrical installations. 
(e)  Setbacks and other requirements. 
(1)  A private swimming pool or outdoor hot tub shall be erected or constructed on a rear or side lot, only, and only on a lot occupied by a principal building. No swimming pool shall be erected or constructed on an otherwise vacant lot. A lot shall not be considered vacant if the owner owns the contiguous lot and such lot is occupied by a principal building; 
(2)  No swimming pool or outdoor hot tub shall be located, constructed, or maintained closer to any side or rear lot line than is permitted in this chapter for an accessory building, and in no case shall the water line of any pool be less than five feet from any lot line. 
(f)  Fence. A fence for a swimming pool or outdoor hot tub shall be erected as follows: 
(1)  Pools or outdoor hot tubs within the scope of this section that are not enclosed with a permanent building shall be completely enclosed by a fence of sufficient strength to prevent access to the pool or shall have a cover or other protective device over such swimming pool of such a design and material that the cover can be securely fastened in place and when in place shall be capable of sustaining a person weighing 250 pounds. Such cover or protective device shall be securely fastened in place at all times when the swimming pool or outdoor hot tub is not in actual use for swimming or bathing purposes. Such fence or wall shall not be less than four feet in height and so constructed as not to have voids, holes, or openings larger than four inches in one dimension. Gates or doors shall be kept locked while the pool is not in actual use; 
(2)  The pool or outdoor hot tub enclosure may be omitted where a portable pool is installed aboveground and it has a raised deck around the entire pool perimeter with an attached enclosed railing a minimum of 36 inches high on the top. 
(g)  Compliance. All swimming pools and outdoor hot tubs existing at the time of passage of this Code not satisfactorily fenced shall comply with the fencing requirements of this section when water is placed in the pool. 
(h)  Filter system required. All private swimming pools and outdoor hot tubs within the meaning of this section must have, in connection therewith, some filtration system to ensure proper circulation of the water therein and maintenance of the proper bacterial quality thereof. 
(i)  Dirt bottoms prohibited. All swimming pools or outdoor hot tubs of a permanent nature shall have the sides and bottom of a smooth finish, and no sand or dirt bottom shall be permitted. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1075; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-144, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 03-12, § 1, 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 133-1137. - Aboveground liquid and gas fuel tanks. 
(a)  Aboveground liquid and gas fuel tanks shall not be located less than ten feet from a side or rear property line or 30 feet from a front property line. 
(b)  Aboveground liquid and gas fuel tanks shall not be located closer than ten feet from any other principal or accessory structures, other than a protective fence, and must be accessible by village firefighting and public safety equipment. 
(c)  Aboveground liquid and gas fuel tanks shall not be located less than ten feet from a front or rear property line or 30 feet from a front property line. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1076; Ord. No. 97-11, § 13-1-145, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 07-02, § 21, 4-2-2007) 
Secs. 133-1138-133-1167. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

Sec. 133-1168. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to regulate the location of sexually oriented businesses as defined herein in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the village. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials (including sexually oriented materials), or of suppressing or censoring any expressive activities protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or article I, section 3 of the Wisconsin Constitution. Similarly, it is not the intent, nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the board, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), and on studies in other communities including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and Beaumont, Texas, the Board finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises; 
(2)  Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses defined in this section as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments; 
(3)  Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows; 
(4)  Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions; 
(5)  Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses; 
(6)  At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, and trichomoniasis; 
(7)  Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States-600 in 1982, 2,200 in 1983, 4,600 in 1984, 8,555 in 1985 and 253,448 in 1992, and 886,575 through 2002. HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report, United States Health and Human Services Department, Center for Disease Control, 2003; 
(8)  As of December 30, 2003, there have been 5,386 reported cases of AIDS and 8,233 reported cases of HIV infection in the state. Wisconsin HIV/AIDS Quarterly Surveillance Summary, Wisconsin Department of Health and Family Services, September 30, 2003; 
(9)  Since 1981 and to the present, there have been an increasing cumulative number of persons testing positive for the HIV antibody test in the state; 
(10)  In the United States each year, 3,000,000 people are infected with chlamydia, 650,000 with gonorrhea, 70,000 with syphilis, 1,000,000 with herpes, 5,500,000 with human papillomavirus, 120,000 with hepatitis B, and 5,000,000 with trichomoniasis. Overall, the CDC estimates there are 15,000,000 new cases of sexually transmitted diseases each year. Tracking the Hidden Epidemics: Trends in STDs in the United States, United States Health and Human Services Department, Center for Disease Control, 2000; 
(11)  The surgeon general of the United States in his report of October 22, 1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn; 
(12)  According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts; 
(13)  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities; 
(14)  Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult-oriented" films; 
(15)  Sexually oriented businesses can contribute to the impairment of the character and quality of a surrounding residential neighborhood, and can contribute to a decline in the value of surrounding properties; 
(16)  The findings noted in subsections (b)(1) through (15) of this section raise substantial governmental concerns; 
(17)  A reasonable regulation of the location of sexually oriented businesses will provide for the protection of the image of the community and its property values and protect the residents of the community from the adverse secondary effects of a sexually oriented business, while providing to those who desire to patronize sexually oriented businesses such an opportunity in areas within the city which are appropriate for a location of sexually oriented businesses; 
(18)  The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the village will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1100; Ord. No. 04-03, § 1, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 133-1169. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Sexually oriented business means this article adopts and incorporates herein the definition of sexually oriented business in section 18-181. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1101; Ord. No. 04-03, § 1, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 133-1170. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  Sexually oriented businesses are permitted in C-1 and C-2 zones, and subject to the limitations noted in this article. 
(b)  Sexually oriented businesses are prohibited in all other zones. 
(c)  In C-1 and C-2 zoning districts, the operation or maintenance of a sexually oriented business is prohibited within: 
(1)  One thousand feet of any residential zone; 
(2)  One thousand feet of any public or private educational facility which serves persons age 17 or younger, licensed daycare facility, public library, elementary school, high school, church, religious institution, place of worship, recreational site, or any public park; 
(3)  Two thousand five hundred feet of any other sexually oriented business. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1102; Ord. No. 04-03, § 1, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 133-1171. - Standards of measurement. 
    The distances provided in this article shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest point of the structure (or portion of the structure) occupied or proposed for occupancy by the sexually oriented business, to the nearest point of the parcel of property or land use district boundary from which the proposed land use is to be separated. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1103; Ord. No. 04-03, § 1, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 133-1172. - Same use restrictions. 
    No sexually oriented business shall be located in the same building or upon the same property as another such use. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1104; Ord. No. 04-03, § 1, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 133-1173. - Sign limitations. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, a sexually oriented business shall not be permitted more than one sign advertising its business, which shall be an on-premises or building sign only. All such signs shall be in accord with all of the following criteria: 
(1)  No sign shall be placed in any window. A one square foot sign may be placed on the door stating the hours of operation and the limitation of admittance to adults only; 
(2)  No sign shall contain any flashing lights, moving elements, or mechanically changing messages; 
(3)  No sign shall contain any depiction of the human form or any part thereof, nor shall it contain sexually explicit language such as "nude dancing" or "Girls, Girls, Girls," etc.; 
(4)  No merchandise, pictures of the products, or representation of entertainment offered on the premises may be displayed in window areas or any area where they can be viewed from the sidewalk in front of the building. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1105; Ord. No. 04-03, § 1, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 133-1174. - Conformance with chapter. 
    Where permitted, all sexually oriented businesses must meet all regulations and requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 106-1106; Ord. No. 04-03, § 1, 3-1-2004) 
Secs. 133-1175-133-1199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - MOBILE TOWER SITING REGULATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-5, § 3, adopted May 2, 2016, set out provisions intended for use as art. XIII, §§ 106-1200-106-1207. Inasmuch as provisions for ch. 106 have been recodified at ch. 133, said provisions have been redesignated as art. XIII, §§ 133-1200-133-1207, at the editor's discretion. Original section designations have been retained parenthetically in the history notes. 

Sec. 133-1200. - Purpose, authority, and title. 
(a)  Purpose . The purpose of this article XIII is to regulate by zoning permit (1) the siting and construction of any new mobile service support structure and facilities; (2) with regard to a class I collocation, the substantial modification of an existing support structure and mobile service facilities; and (3) with regard to a class 2 collocation, collocation on an existing support structure which does not require the substantial modification of an existing support structure and mobile service facilities. Article XII shall be interpreted to comply with Wis. Stat. § 66.0404, and any amendments thereto. Any provisions within the Code that conflicts with the village's authority under Wis. Stat. § 66.0404 shall not be applied to new mobile service support structure and facilities, class I collocation, or class 2 collocation. 
(b)  Authority . The village adopts this article XIII pursuant to Wis. Stat. §§ 61.35, 62.23, and 66.0404. 
(c)  Title . This article XIII is entitled the Village of Waunakee Mobile Tower Siting Permit Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 16-5, § 3(106-1200), 5-2-2016) 
Sec. 133-1201. - Definitions. 
(a)  Definitions . All definitions contained in Wis. Stat. § 66.0404(1), and as may be amended in the future, are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 16-5, § 3(106-1201), 5-2-2016) 
Sec. 133-1202. - Siting and construction of any new mobile service support structure and facilities. 
(a)  Application process . 
(1)  A village zoning permit is required for the siting and construction of any new mobile service support structure and facilities. The siting and construction of any new mobile service support structure and facilities is a conditional use in the village obtainable with this permit. 
(2)  A written permit application must be completed by any applicant and submitted to the village. The application must contain the following information: 
a.  The name and business address of, and the contact individual for, the applicant. 
b.  The location of the proposed support structure. 
c.  The location of the proposed mobile service facility. 
d.  A construction plan which describes the proposed mobile service support structure and the equipment and network components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and related equipment to be placed on or around the new mobile service support structure. 
e.  An explanation as to why the applicant chose the proposed location and why the applicant did not choose collocation, including a sworn statement from an individual who has responsibility over the placement of the mobile service support structure attesting that collocation within the applicant's search ring would not result in the same mobile service functionality, coverage, and capacity; is technically infeasible; or is economically burdensome to the mobile service provider. 
(3)  A permit application will be provided by the village upon request to any applicant. 
(4)  If an applicant submits to the village an application for a permit to site and construct a new mobile service support structure and facilities and the application contains all of the information required under this section, the village shall consider the application complete. If the village does not believe that the application is complete, the village shall notify the applicant, in writing, within 10 days of receiving the application that the application is not complete. The written notification shall specify in detail the required information that was incomplete. An applicant may resubmit an application as often as necessary until it is complete. 
(5)  Within 90 days of its receipt of a complete application, the village shall complete all of the following or the applicant may consider the application approved, except that the applicant and the village may agree in writing to an extension of the 90 day period: 
a.  Review the application to determine whether it complies with all applicable aspects of the village's building code and this section. 
b.  Make a final decision whether to approve or disapprove the application. 
c.  Notify the applicant, in writing, of its final decision. 
d.  If the decision is to disapprove the application, include with the written notification substantial evidence which supports the decision to disapprove. 
(6)  The village may disapprove an application if an applicant refuses to evaluate the feasibility of collocation within the applicant's search ring and provide the sworn statement described under subsection (2)e. 
(7)  If an applicant provides the village with an engineering certification showing that the new mobile service support structure is designed to collapse within a smaller area than the set back or fall zone required in this section, then the village may not disapprove the application based on a violation of the fall zone unless the village provides the applicant with substantial evidence that the engineering certification is flawed. 
(8)  The fee for the permit shall be $3,000.00. 
(9)  To ensure compliance with this section, including, but not limited to, the requirements set forth in subsection (b), the applicant shall provide a letter of credit or surety bond in an amount to be determined when the application is filed, but which amount shall not exceed $20,000.00. 
(b)  Requirements . The following requirements shall apply to all new mobile service support structure and facilities: 
(1)  The mobile service support structure shall be placed on property in a location such that its fall zone shall not cross, or intersect with, the property's boundaries. The applicant shall provide the village with an engineering certification showing that the mobile service support structure's fall zone satisfies this requirement. 
(2)  The applicant shall comply with all federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations (including laws and ordinances relating to health and radio frequency emissions) in connection with the use of the permit granted hereunder and the operation, maintenance, construction and/or installation of the mobile service support structure and facilities. The applicant's construction plan shall be approved by the village zoning administrator and building inspector to ensure compliance. 
(3)  The applicant shall maintain and repair the mobile service support structure and facilities in a safe and workmanlike condition. 
(4)  If the applicant ceases using the mobile service support structure and facilities, the applicant shall remove the mobile service support structure and facilities within 30 of the date upon which its use ceases. Such removal shall be done in a workmanlike and careful manner. 
(Ord. No. 16-5, § 3(106-1202), 5-2-2016) 
Sec. 133-1203. - Class 1 collocation. 
(a)  Application process . 
(1)  A village zoning permit is required for a class 1 collocation. A class 1 collocation is a conditional use in the village obtainable with this permit. 
(2)  A written permit application must be completed by any applicant and submitted to the village. The application must contain the following information: 
a.  The name and business address of, and the contact individual for, the applicant. 
b.  The location of the affected support structure. 
c.  The location of the proposed mobile service facility. 
d.  A construction plan which describes the proposed modifications to the support structure and the equipment and network components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and related equipment associated with the proposed modifications. 
(3)  A permit application will be provided by the village upon request to any applicant. 
(4)  If an applicant submits to the village an application for a permit for a class I collocation and the application contains all of the information required under this section, the village shall consider the application complete. If the village does not believe that the application is complete, the village shall notify the applicant, in writing, within 10 days of receiving the application that the application is not complete. The written notification shall specify in detail the required information that was incomplete. An applicant may resubmit an application as often as necessary until it is complete. 
(5)  Within 90 days of its receipt of a complete application, the village shall complete all of the following or the applicant may consider the application approved, except that the applicant and the village may agree in writing to an extension of the 90 day period: 
a.  Review the application to determine whether it complies with all applicable aspects of the village's building code and this section. 
b.  Make a final decision whether to approve or disapprove the application. 
c.  Notify the applicant, in writing, of its final decision. 
d.  If the decision is to disapprove the application, include with the written notification substantial evidence which supports the decision to disapprove. 
(6)  If an applicant provides the village with an engineering certification showing that the existing mobile service support structure is designed to collapse within a smaller area than the set back or fall zone required in this section, then the village may not disapprove the application based on a violation of the fall zone unless the village provides the applicant with substantial evidence that the engineering certification is flawed. 
(7)  The fee for the permit shall be $3,000.00. 
(8)  To ensure compliance with this section, including, but not limited to, the requirements set forth in subsection (b), the applicant shall provide a letter of credit or surety bond in an amount to be determined when the application is filed, but which amount shall not exceed $20,000.00. 
(b)  Requirements . The following requirements shall apply to a class 1 collocation: 
(1)  The applicant shall comply with all federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations (including laws and ordinances relating to health and radio frequency emissions) in connection with the use of the permit granted hereunder and the operation, maintenance, construction and/or installation of the mobile service facilities on the existing mobile service support structure. The applicant's construction plan shall be approved by the village zoning administrator and building inspector to ensure compliance. 
(2)  The applicant shall maintain and repair the mobile service facilities in a safe and workmanlike condition. 
(3)  If the applicant ceases using the mobile service support facilities, the applicant shall remove the mobile service support facilities within 30 of the date upon which its use ceases. Such removal shall be done in a workmanlike and careful manner. 
(Ord. No. 16-5, § 3(106-1203), 5-2-2016) 
Sec. 133-1204. - Class 2 collocation. 
(a)  Application process . 
(1)  A village zoning permit is required for a class 2 collocation. A class 2 collocation is a permitted use in the village but still requires the issuance of the village permit. 
(2)  A written permit application must be completed by any applicant and submitted to the village. The application must contain the following information: 
a.  The name and business address of, and the contact individual for, the applicant. 
b.  The location of the affected support structure. 
c.  The location of the proposed mobile service facility. 
(3)  A permit application will be provided by the village upon request to any applicant. 
(4)  A class 2 collocation is subject to the same requirements for the issuance of a building permit to which any other type of commercial development or land use development is subject, pursuant to the Code. 
(5)  If an applicant submits to the village an application for a permit for a class 2 collocation and the application contains all of the information required under this section, the village shall consider the application complete. If any of the required information is not in the application, the village shall notify the applicant, in writing, within five days of receiving the application, that the application is not complete. The written notification shall specify in detail the required information that was incomplete. An applicant may resubmit an application as often as necessary until it is complete. 
(6)  Within 45 days of its receipt of a complete application, the village shall complete all of the following or the applicant may consider the application approved, except that the applicant and the village may agree in writing to an extension of the 45 day period: 
a.  Make a final decision whether to approve or disapprove the application. 
b.  Notify the applicant, in writing, of its final decision. 
c.  If the application is approved, issue the applicant the relevant permit. 
d.  If the decision is to disapprove the application, include with the written notification substantial evidence which supports the decision to disapprove. 
(7)  The fee for the permit shall be $500.00. 
(8)  To ensure compliance with this section, including, but not limited to, the requirements set forth in subsection (b), the applicant shall provide a letter of credit or surety bond in an amount to be determined when the application is filed, but which amount shall not exceed $20,000.00. 
(b)  Requirements . The following requirements shall apply to a class 2 collocation: 
(1)  The applicant shall comply with all federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations (including laws and ordinances relating to health and radio frequency emissions) in connection with the use of the permit granted hereunder and the operation, maintenance, construction and/or installation of the mobile service facilities on the existing mobile service support structure. The applicant's construction plan shall be approved by the village zoning administrator and building inspector to ensure compliance. 
(2)  The applicant shall maintain and repair the mobile service facilities in a safe and workmanlike condition. 
(3)  If the applicant ceases using the mobile service support facilities, the applicant shall remove the mobile service support facilities within 30 of the date upon which its use ceases. Such removal shall be done in a workmanlike and careful manner. 
(Ord. No. 16-5, § 3(106-1204), 5-2-2016) 
Sec. 133-1205. - Aggrieved parties. 
    A party who is aggrieved by a final decision of the village under this article XIII may bring an action in Dane County Circuit Court. 
(Ord. No. 16-5, § 3(106-1205), 5-2-2016) 
Sec. 133-1206. - Penalties. 
    Any person, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity that fails to comply with the provisions of this article XII shall be subject to penalty pursuant to section 1-15 of the Code. In addition, the village may seek injunctive relief from a court of record to enjoin further violations. 
(Ord. No. 16-5, § 3(106-1206), 5-2-2016) 
Sec. 133-1207. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this article XIII or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this article XII that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are severable. 
(Ord. No. 16-5, § 3(106-1207), 5-2-2016) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1988 CODE TO 1998 CODE 
    This table gives the location within the 1998 Code of those sections of the 1988 Code, as updated through the supplement of March 1993, which are included therein. 
1988 Code 
Section Section 

1998 Code 1-1-1, 1-1-2 1-1, 1-2 1-1-2(c) 1-4 1-1-2(k) 1-13 1-1-3 1-3 1-1-4 1-26 1-1-5(b) 1-11 1-1-6 1-15 1-1-7 1-9 1-2-1, 1-2-2 1-17 1-2-3-1-2-7 1-19-1-23 2-1-1-2-1-4 2-1-2-4 2-2-1-2-2-4 2-31-2-34 2-2-5(a) 2-35 2-2-6 2-36 2-2-8-2-2-15 2-37-2-44 2-2-17-2-2-21 2-46-2-50 2-3-1(a)-2-3-1(d) 2-76-2-79 2-3-2(a)-2-3-2(c) 2-111-2-113 2-3-3 2-171-2-174 2-3-4(a), 2-3-4(b) 2-141, 2-142 2-3-5(a), 2-3-5(b) 58-61, 58-62 2-3-6(a), 2-3-6(b) 38-66, 38-67 2-3-7 102-96-102-99 2-3-8(a)-2-3-8(c) 2-231-2-233 2-3-9(a), 2-3-9(b) 98-51, 98-52 2-3-10(a)-2-3-10(c) 2-201-2-203 2-3-11, 2-3-12 30-27, 30-28 2-3-13(a)(1) 18-56 2-3-13(a)(2), (3) 18-57 2-3-13(b) 18-58 2-3-13(d)-2-3-13(i) 18-59-18-64 2-3-14 2-80 2-3-15(b) 2-81 2-3-16-2-3-19 2-82-2-85 2-4-1(a) 90-26 2-4-1(b)(1), 
2-4-1(b)(2) 90-27, 90-28 2-4-1(c) 90-29 2-4-3(a)-2-4-3(d) 74-56-74-59 2-4-4(a)-2-4-4(d) 74-26-74-29 2-4-5(a), 2-4-5(b) 62-26, 62-27 2-4-6 78-31 2-4-7(a)-2-4-7(i) 98-81-98-89 2-4-11 2-361 2-4-12(a), 2-4-12(b) 2-362, 2-363 2-5-1-2-5-4 2-301-2-304 3-1-2, 3-1-3 2-451, 2-452 3-1-5 2-453 3-1-7, 3-1-8 2-454, 2-455 3-1-10-3-1-13 2-456-2-459 3-1-14(a) 2-460 3-3-1 2-557 3-3-3-3-3-8 2-558-2-563 3-4-1, 3-4-2 2-591, 2-592 5-1-1, 5-1-2 58-26, 58-27 5-1-4 58-62 5-1-5, 5-1-6 58-28, 58-29 5-1-7 58-63 5-1-8 58-30 5-2-1, 5-2-2 38-31, 38-32 5-2-5-5-2-9 38-33-38-37 5-3-1 38-96 5-3-2 38-161 5-3-3 38-162 5-3-4 38-1 5-5-1-5-5-6 2-501-2-506 6-1-1-6-1-3 82-76-82-78 6-2-1 82-1 6-2-2(a)-6-2-2(e) 82-41-82-45 6-2-3(a)-6-2-3(e) 82-141-82-145 6-2-3(f)(1), 
6-2-3(f)(2) 82-146, 82-147 6-2-3(g), 6-2-3(h) 82-148, 82-149 6-2-4(a)-6-2-4(i) 82-150-82-158 6-2-5(a)-6-2-5(c) 82-92-82-94 6-2-5(d), (e) 82-95 6-2-5(f) 82-96 6-2-6 82-2 6-2-7(a)-6-2-7(g) 82-281-82-287 6-2-8-6-2-13 82-3-82-8 6-2-15-6-2-17 82-9-82-11 6-3-1(a)-6-3-1(d) 82-216-82-219 6-3-2(a)-6-3-2(e) 82-246-82-250 6-4-1-6-4-7 102-26-102-32 6-4-9-6-4-14 102-34-102-39 7-1-1(a) 14-41 7-1-1(b) 14-1 7-1-2 14-42 7-1-3(a), 7-1-3(b) 14-43, 14-44 7-1-4 14-45 7-1-5-7-1-13 14-2-14-10 7-1-19 14-11 7-1-21-7-1-23 14-12-14-14 7-2-1, 7-2-2 6-1, 6-2 7-2-3, 7-2-4 6-36, 6-37 7-2-5(b) 6-37 7-2-6-7-2-14 6-38-6-46 7-2-15 6-8 7-2-16-7-2-18 6-47-6-49 7-2-19 6-4 7-2-20 6-50 7-2-30-7-2-36 6-81-6-87 7-2-40 6-3 7-3-2 22-2 7-4-1-7-4-4 22-61-22-64 7-4-6 22-66 7-4-7(a), 7-4-7(b) 22-67, 22-68 7-4-8-7-4-10 22-69-22-71 7-5-1(a) 10-27 7-5-1(b) 10-26 7-5-1(d) 10-28 7-5-5 22-65 7-7-1(a)-7-7-1(e) 38-126-38-130 7-8-1(a)-7-8-1(f) 82-316-82-321 7-8-1(g) 82-1322 7-8-1(h), 7-8-1(i) 82-323, 82-324 7-9-1-7-9-5 10-56-10-60 7-10-1-7-10-7 34-96-34-102 7-11-1(a) 10-87 7-11-1(b) 10-86 7-11-1(c) 10-88 7-11-1(d)(1)- 
7-11-1(d)(5) 10-89-10-93 7-11-1(d), (e) 10-94 7-11-2 10-121 7-12-1 22-1 7-13-1 22-31 8-1-3(a) 14-76 8-1-3(b) 14-15 8-1-4 78-1 8-1-5 102-66 8-1-7 102-1 8-2-2 66-96 8-3-1-8-3-18 78-61-78-78 8-3-19 78-1 8-3-20-8-3-30 78-80-78-90 9-1-49-9-1-52 98-151-98-154 9-2-1(a)-9-2-1(d) 98-181-98-184 9-2-2 98-185 9-2-3, 9-2-4 98-216, 98-217 9-2-5 98-276 9-2-6(a)-9-2-6(e) 98-246-98-250 9-2-7 98-219 9-2-8-9-2-12 98-277-98-281 9-2-13 98-186 9-2-14 98-218 9-2-15(a), 9-2-15(b) 98-311, 98-312 9-3-1-9-3-3 98-116-98-118 9-3-20 98-117 9-3-30 98-118 10-1-1(a) 94-1 10-1-1(c), (d) 94-1 10-1-2 94-2 10-1-3(a)- 
10-1-3(d) 94-116-94-119 10-1-4-10-1-7 94-5-94-8 10-1-11, 10-1-12 94-41, 94-42 10-1-20-10-1-32 94-76-94-88 10-1-40 66-93 10-1-42(a)(1), 
10-1-42(a)(2) 94-256, 94-257 10-1-42(b) 94-258 10-1-43 94-259 10-1-44 94-9 10-1-45(a) 94-44 10-1-50, 10-1-51 94-10, 94-11 10-2-1 94-221 10-2-4 94-222 10-2-7-10-2-9 94-223-94-225 10-3-1 94-181 10-3-3-10-3-11 94-182-94-190 10-4-1, 10-4-2 94-3, 94-4 10-4-4 94-43 10-5-1(a) 94-147 10-5-1(b) 94-146 10-5-1(c), (d) 94-147 10-5-2-10-5-8 94-148-94-154 10-6-1(a), 10-6-1(b) 82-109, 82-110 10-6-2(a)- 
10-6-2(p) 82-115-82-130 11-1-1 66-1 11-2-1 66-196 11-2-2(d) 66-197 11-2-3 66-198 11-2-4 66-91 11-2-7 82-12 11-2-8 66-92 11-2-9(a), 11-2-9(b) 34-56, 34-57 11-2-9(c)(1)- 
11-2-9(c)(7) 34-58-34-64 11-2-9(d) 34-65 11-2-10(c) 66-93 11-2-11, 11-2-12 66-94, 66-95 11-2-13 66-31 11-2-14(a), 
11-2-14(b) 34-131, 34-132 11-3-2, 11-3-3 66-61, 66-62 11-3-5 66-63 11-3-11 66-64 11-4-1 6-5 11-4-9 6-6 11-5-1(a)-11-5-1(f) 66-161-66-166 11-5-5-11-5-7 66-126-66-128 11-5-8-11-5-10 66-130-66-132 11-6-4 34-26 11-6-6, 11-6-7 34-27, 34-28 12-1-1(a) 70-26, 70-27 12-1-1(b) 70-28 12-1-2-12-1-7 70-29-70-34 13-2-1-13-2-4 42-1-42-4 13-2-10-13-2-12 42-5-42-7 13-2-14 42-8 13-2-20-13-2-23 42-161-42-164 13-2-30-13-2-38 42-71-42-79 13-2-40-13-2-43 42-191-42-194 13-2-50-13-2-52 42-221-42-223 13-2-60-13-2-63 42-131-42-134 13-2-70-13-2-74 42-251-42-255 13-2-80-13-2-86 42-36-42-42 13-2-90 42-43 13-2-100 42-44 13-2-110 42-9 15-1-1-15-1-16 18-91-18-106 15-1-18 18-107 15-2-1-15-2-6 18-226-18-231 15-2-8 18-232 15-3-1, 15-3-2 18-191, 18-192 15-7-1, 15-7-2 54-56, 54-57 15-7-3 54-58-54-60 15-7-4, 15-7-5 54-61, 54-62  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1998 CODE-ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within the 1998 Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1988 Code, as updated through the supplement of March 1993. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section Section 
1998 Code 92-7  5-18-92 I 2-34 12-20-93(Ord.) 1 66-1 2 1-20 3 66-129 94-9  3-21-94 2 18-92 94-10  3-21-94 1 18-92 94-13  5- 2-94 2 78-75 94-16  8-15-94 1 2-34 2 2-43 94-18  9- 6-94 94-78 95-2  3- 6-95 2-34 95-3  3- 6-95 2-34 74-26 74-29 95-4  4- 3-95 94-6 95-4  9-18-95(Res.) 18-106 18-232 95-7  8- 7-95 2-34 95-8 10-16-95 15-4-1-15-4-27 18-136-18-162 95-10 12-18-95 98-185 98-219 96-2 10-21-96 I, II 50-27, 50-28 IV-VIII 50-29-50-33 96-3  3-18-96 2 2-34 96-4  3-18-96 2 2-37 96-8  9- 3-96 1 66-126-66-128 66-130-66-132 66-166 96-10 10-21-96 1 90-26 2(2-4-1(d)) 90-30 97-3  4- 7-97 1(5-3-5) 38-2 97-4  5- 5-97 I(3-2-14(b))- 
I(3-2-14(g)) 70-62-70-67 I(3-2-14) 70-61 97-5  5- 5-97 1 2-34 4 90-26 6 74-26 74-29 8 98-81 98-89 97-11 11- 3-97 13-1-1-13-1-6 106-1-106-6 13-1-7(b), (c) 106-7 13-1-8 106-8 13-1-10-13-1-18 106-9-106-17 13-1-20-13-1-22 106-146-106-148 13-1-23(a)- 
13-1-23(d) 106-176-106-179 13-1-24(a)- 
13-1-24(e) 106-206-106-210 13-1-25(a)- 
13-1-25(e) 106-241-106-245 13-1-26(a)- 
13-1-26(e) 106-276-106-280 13-1-27(a)- 
13-1-27(e) 106-311-106-315 13-1-28(a)- 
13-1-28(e) 106-346-106-350 13-1-29(a)- 
13-1-29(e) 106-381-106-385 13-1-30(a)- 
13-1-30(f) 106-416-106-421 13-1-31(a)- 
13-1-31(e) 106-451-106-455 13-1-32(a)- 
13-1-32(f) 106-486-106-491 13-1-33(a)- 
13-1-33(f) 106-521-106-526 13-1-34(a)- 
13-1-34(e) 106-556-106-560 13-1-35(a)- 
13-1-35(e) 106-591-106-595 13-1-36(a)- 
13-1-36(c) 106-626-106-628 13-1-37(a)- 
13-1-37(c) 106-661-106-663 13-1-38(a)- 
13-1-38(e) 106-691-106-695 13-1-39 106-726 13-1-40(a)- 
13-1-40(g) 106-756-106-762 13-1-50-13-1-56 106-801-106-807 13-1-60-13-1-73 106-841-106-854 13-1-80-13-1-83 106-886-106-889 13-1-90-13-1-96 106-921-106-927 13-1-100-13-1-112 106-956-106-968 13-1-120-13-1-127 106-996-106-1003 13-1-130-13-1-133 106-1036-106-1039 13-1-140-13-1-145 106-1071-106-1076 13-1-170-13-1-177 106-46-106-53 13-1-180-13-1-183 106-81-106-84 13-1-190-13-1-195 106-111-106-116 13-1-200 106-18 97-12 11- 3-97 14-1-1-14-1-3 86-1-86-3 14-1-5, 14-1-6 86-4, 86-5 14-1-10 86-6 14-1-20(a)-14-1-20(e) 86-7-86-11 14-1-21, 14-1-22 86-12, 86-13 14-1-30-14-1-35 86-101-86-106 14-1-40-14-1-42 86-136-86-138 14-1-50-14-1-67 86-166-86-183 14-1-70-14-1-74 86-211-86-215 14-1-80-14-1-84 86-246-86-250 14-1-90(a), 
14-1-90(b) 86-71, 86-72 14-1-90(c), (d) 86-73 14-1-90(e) 86-74 14-1-91 86-42 14-1-100 86-41 98-2  3-30-98 2 2-364 3 106-19 4(13-1-41) 106-769 4(13-1-42) 106-775 4(13-1-43) 106-782 4(13-1-44(a))- 
4(13-1-44(c)) 106-788-106-790 4(13-1-44(d)-(s)) 106-791 4(13-1-44(t))- 
4(13-1-44(v)) 106-792-106-794 5 106-12 7 86-14 98-3  4- 6-98 1-3 26-75-26-77 4-46 26-79-26-121 47 26-78 98-4  4- 6-98 2(15-5-20)- 
2(15-5-29) 18-361-18-370 2(15-5-31) 18-371 98-7  5- 4-98 1(15-5-1)-1(15-5-11) 18-326-18-336 98-8  5- 4-98 1 2-34 2 98-81 98-10  9- 8-98 1 106-16(c) 98-11  9-21-98 1-8 Adopting ordinance, p. xi 98-12 10- 6-98 1 2-457 98-14 11- 2-98 1 106-16(b) 98-15 11- 2-98 1 106-10(2) 2 106-244 3 106-279 4 106-314 5 106-349 6 106-384 99-1  1-18-99 1 98-81-98-89 99-3  2-15-99 1 1-2 99-4  3- 1-99 1 94-10 99-5  3- 1-99 1 106-19(c)(3) 99-6  4- 5-99 1, 2 2-363 99-8  5-17-99 1 94-2(a) 99-10  6-21-99 1 106-12(a)(7) 2 106-51(b) 3 106-83(a) 4 106-209(13) 5 106-592(12) 6 106-627 7 106-844(c) 99-11  7-19-99 1 106-923(16) 2 106-923(8) 99-12  7-19-99 1 106-10(5) 2 86-13(c) 99-14  8-16-99 1-6       Added 34-151-34-156 99-17  9- 7-99 1 ch. 18, art. VII(tit.) 2, 3 18-261, 18-262 4 18-263(tit.) 5 18-263(c) 6-9       Rnbd 18-270-18-273       as 18-272-18-275 10, 11       Added 18-270, 18-271 99-18  9- 7-99 1       Rnbd 6-37(c)-(h)       as 6-37(d)-(i)       Added 6-37(c) 6-37(f)(1) 99-19  9- 7-99 1 90-26 99-20  9-20-99 1 78-86(b) 99-21 11-15-99 1-5 18-106(1)-(5) 6 18-197 7 18-252(a) 99-22 12- 6-99 1 106-148(a) 00-2  2- 7-00 1       Added 106-957(4m) 2 106-957(19) 3, 4 106-958, 106-959 5-9 106-959(7)-(9) 10 106-960(b)(7) 11 106-960(c)(8) 12 106-965(3) 13       Added 106-965(4) 00-3  2-21-00 1 26-95(b) 00-4  2-21-00 1 74-26 00-5  2-21-00 1       Added 66-97 00-6  3- 6-00 1, 2 2-111 3 2-112 4       Rpld 2-113(16), (17) 5       Rpld 2-171-2-174 6       Added 2-171-2-174 7       Added 2-185-2-188 00-7  7- 6-00 1       Rnbd 66-131       as 66-98 2 66-94(a) 00-10  7- 5-00 1 2-362 00-14 12-18-00 1, 2 82-281, 82-282 3 82-285 4 102-1(e) 5       Rpld 102-1(f), (g) 6 102-66(b) 7 102-66(c) 01-01  2- 5-01 1 106-957 2 106-959 3 106-959(7) 4 106-959(16) 5 106-960(b)(7) 6 106-960(b)(8) 7 106-960(c)(8) 8 106-960(c)(9) 9 106-961(b) 10 106-965(1)a. 11 106-965(3)b. 01-02  3- 5-01 1       Rpld 106-115(b)(2) 2 106-115(b)(3) 01-03  4- 2-01 1 106-762(b) 01-04  4- 2-01 1 106-51(g) 2 106-923(8) 3 106-51(d)(5) 01-05  4- 2-01 1       Added 106-855 2 106-627 01-9  5-21-01 1 82-247(3) 01-10  7- 2-01 1 106-558 2 106-593 01-14 10-15-01 1-4 70-61-70-64 5 70-67 6       Added 70-68 01-15 11- 5-01 1 98-118(a) 2       Rpld 98-118(b) 3 98-279 4 78-75(d) 01-16 11-19-01 1 86-250(d) 02-02  3-11-02 1 6-37(c) 02-03  5-20-02 1 90-1-90-56 02-06  8- 5-02 1 ch. 18(tit.) 2-13       Added 18-372-18-399 02-07  8- 5-02 1-5       Added 106-783-106-787 02-10 10- 2-03 1       Rpld 18-328       Added 18-328 2-15 18-329 16       Rpld 18-330       Added 18-330 17       Rpld 18-332       Added 18-332 18       Rpld 18-333(a)       Added 18-333(a) 19       Rpld 18-333(b)       Added 18-333(b) 20       Rpld 18-334(a)       Added 18-334(a) 21       Rpld 18-334(b)       Added 18-334(b) 22       Rpld 18-334(c)(3)       Added 18-334(c)(3) 23       Rpld 18-335       Added 18-335 24       Rpld 18-336(4)       Added 18-336(4) 02-11 10-21-02 1       Rpld 18-361-18-371       Added 18-361-18-374 02-12 11-11-02 1       Rpld 98-118(a)       Added 98-118(a) 02-13 11-18-02 1       Added 2-201 02-14 12-16-02       Rpld 2-37       Added 2-37 02-15 12-16-03 1       Added 2-5 03-02  3-17-03 1       Rpld 70-62(b)(1)       Added 70-62(b)(1) 03-04  4- 7-03 1       Rpld 106-51(a)(1)       Added 106-51(a)(1) 2       Rpld 106-51(a)(2)       Added 106-51(a)(2) 3       Rpld 106-51(b)       Added 106-51(b) 03-05  4- 7-03 1       Rpld 2-38(a)       Added 2-38(a) 03-06  4- 7-03 1       Rpld 38-96(3)       Added 38-96(3) 03-08  6-16-03 1 94-84(d) 03-09  6-23-03 1       Rpld 42-8       Added 42-8 03-12  8-18-03 1 106-1075(b) 03-13 10-20-03 1 94-45 2003-14 12-15-03 1 14-41-14-43 2003-15 12-15-03 1-3 2-6 04-01  1- 5-04 1 22-191-22-200 04-03  3- 1-04 1 22-136-22-162 106-1100-106-1106 04-07  4-19-04 1       Rpld 98-51, 98-52 2 98-82(b), (c) 04-10  4-19-04 1 70-62(a) 2 70-62(b)(1) 04-16 10- 4-04 1 86-211(l) 2 86-211(x) 04-18 12-20-04 1       Added 6-38(f) 2       Rpld 6-42(b) 2       Added 6-42(b) 3       Added 6-42(c) 05-03  3-21-05 1 70-62(a) 2 70-62(b)(1) 05-04  4- 4-05 1 70-62 2 70-63 3 70-64 4 70-66(a) 05-05  6-20-05 1       Added 106-960(d) 2 106-963 05-06  6-20-05 1 106-18(42) 2 106-18(79) 3       Added 106-20 05-07  6-20-05 1       Added 106-21 2       Rpld 106-51(d)(5) 05-10  9- 6-05 106-21(4)a. 05-11  9- 6-05 106-20 05-12  9- 6-05 1 106-924(b)(1) 2 106-924(d) 3       Rpld 106-924(h) 06-04  6- 5-06 1 70-62(a) 70-62(b)(1) 06-05  6- 5-06 1       Rpld 18-326-18-336       Rpld 18-361-18-373 2       Added 18-326-18-336       Added 18-361-18-373 06-06  6- 5-06 1, 2 2-34(b)(8) 06-10 10-16-06 1 66-1 2 66-128 3 66-98(g) 06-11 11-20-06 1 106-53 2       Added 106-795 07-02  4- 2-07 1 18-106(2)b. 2 86-41(a) 3       Rpld 86-41(d)-(g) 4 86-41(j) 5 86-180(c) 6 86-211(p) 7 86-213(e) 8       Added 106-11(k) 9       Added 106(b)(6) 10 106-18(16) 11 106-18(42) 12       Added 106-18(62.1), (62.2), (62.3) 13 106-18(93)-(95) 14 106-53 15 106-923(8) 16 106-960(a)(3) 17       Added 106-961(d) 18 106-964(b)(4) 19       Added 106-964(b)(7) 20 106-1074(a) 21 106-1076(c) 07-03A  5- 7-07 1 70-62(a) 2 70-62(b)(1) 07-04  5-21-07 2 106-19 3 106-788, 106-789 106-792, 106-793 106-794 4 106-12(c) 6 86-14 07-06  7-18-07       Added 18-92(q) 07-07  8- 6-07       Rpld 6-38 07-09  8-20-07 30-27(b) 07-12  9-17-07 1 70-31(a) 07-13 11- 5-07 1 94-84 08-01  1- 7-08       Added 106-664-106-667 08-03  1-21-08 1 70-62 08-04  2-18-08 1 106-51 08-05  3- 3-08 1 70-62(b)(3) 2 70-66 08-06  3-17-08 1 2-37 08-08  5- 5-08 1 106-522 106-523 2 106-923(8) 08-9  6-16-08 1 70-62(a) 2 70-62(b)(1) 08-13 11- 3-08       Added 18-361(e) 08-14 12-15-08 1       Rpld 42-1-42-255 2       Added 42-1-42-208       Added 43-1-43-252 09-05  6- 1-09 1 70-62(a) 2 70-62(b)(1) 09-06  7-20-09 1 Art. X(title) 2       Rpld 106-1037       Added 106-1037 3 106-1038 4 106-1038(a) 5 106-1038(a)(3) 6 106-1039(f) 7       Added 106-1040 8 106-960(a)(3) 9 106-965(2) 10       Added 106-969 11       Rpld 106-51(a)(29)       Added 106-51(a)(29), (30) 12       Rpld 106-627 12       Added 106-627 13       Rpld 106-628 13       Added 106-628 14       Added 106-629 15       Rpld 106-662 15       Added 106-662 16       Rpld 106-663       Added 106-663 17       Added 106-663.1 09-07  7-20-09 1 2-458 2 2-459(a), (b) 3       Added 2-459(d) 09-08  7-20-09       Added 94-46 09-09  9- 8-09 1       Rpld 2-34(b)(8) 2       Added 2-365 09-10  9-21-09 1       Added 70-28(2) 10-1  2-15-10 1       Rnbd 102-27(2)-(9)       as 102-27(4)-(11)       Added 102-27(2), (3) 2 102-30(b)(1) 3 102-33(f) 4 102-34(d) 5       Added 102-34(e) 6 102-37(b) 10-2  3- 1-10 1 2-459(d) 10-4  5- 3-10 1 70-62(a) 2 70-62(b)(1) 10-7  6-21-10 1 30-27(f)(2) 10-9  8-16-10 1       Rpld 38-37       Added 38-37 10-10  8-16-10 1 106-146 2       Added 106-331-106-335 4 106-148(a) 10-11 11- 1-10 1       Added 14-3(e) 2 14-9 3 14-10(c) 4 14-13 10-13 12- 6-10       Added 86-15 10-14 12-20-10 1       Added 106-209(14), (15) 11-2  5-16-11 1 70-62(a) 2 70-62(b)(1) 11-3  5-16-11 1 62-26(a) 11-7  8-15-11 1 30-27(c) 11-9  8-15-11 34-151-34-159 11-15 10-17-11 1 66-1 2       Added 66-199 12-2  5-16-12 1 70-62(a) 2 70-62(b)(1) 12-3  5- 7-12 1       Added 106-12(a)(8) 2 106-51(a)(1) 3 106-51(a)(2) 4 106-51(b) 5       Added 106-51(d)(7) 6 106-83(a) 7       Rpld 106-115(d) 12-9 10- 1-12 1 2-38 12-10 10- 1-12 1 2-34(a), (b) 13-2  2- 4-13 38-37(e) 13-5  4-15-13 1 70-62(a) 2 70-62(b) 13-6  4-15-13       Added 98-157 13-7  4-15-13       Rpld 98-151       Added 98-151 13-8  4-15-13       Added 98-219(i), (j) 13-9  5- 6-13 1 106-791(b) 13-11  6-17-13 1 6-8(a) 13-12 10- 7-13 66-128 13-13 11- 4-13 1       Rpld 14-3       Added 14-3 2       Added 14-3.5 3 14-4(b) 4 14-16 5       Rpld 14-5, 14-7-14-9 13-14 11-18-13 1 2-37 14-1  2- 3-14 1       Added 2-364(e) 14-5  3-17-14 1 70-62(a) 2 70-62(b)(1) 14-6  4-21-14       Added 82-13 14-10  9-22-14 1 42-5(b) 2 42-183 14-11 10- 6-14 1       Added 2-364(d)(1), (2) 14-15 11-17-14 1 106-775(c) 2       Added 106-775(e)(1)c 14-16 12-15-14       Added 106-856 14-17 12-15-14 1, 2 43-8 3       Added 43-300-43-309 14-18 12-15-14 1       Added 86-16 2       Added 86-17 15-1  2- 2-15 1 2-365 15-2  2-16-15 1       Added 22-231-22-238 15-3  2-16-15       Added 106-928  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1988 CODE TO 2016 CODE 
    This table gives the location within the 2016 Code of sections of the 1988 Code, as supplemented through the supplement of March 1993. 
1988 Code 
Section Section 

2016 Code 1-1-1 1-1 1-1-2 1-2 - 1-3 1-1-2(c) 1-4 1-1-2(k) 1-13 1-1-4 1-35 1-1-5(b) 1-11 1-1-6 1-32 1-1-7 1-9 1-2-1 1-60 1-2-2 1-60 1-2-3 1-61 1-2-4 1-62 1-2-5 1-63 1-2-6 1-64 1-2-7 1-59 2-1-1 2-1-2-4 2-2-2 2-31-2-36 2-2-9 2-61 2-2-10 2-62-2-72 2-3-1(a) 2-103-2-106 2-3-2(b) 2-138 - 2-139 2-3-2(c) 2-233 2-3-4(a) 2-162 - 2-163 2-3-5(a) 38-51 - 38-50 2-3-5(b) 38-51 2-3-6(a) 30-54 - 30-55 2-3-7 78-88-78-90 2-3-8(a) 2-274-2-276 2-3-10(a) 2-253 - 2-254 2-3-11 22-21 - 22-22 2-3-13(a)(1) 105-44 - 105-45 2-3-13(a)(3) 105-45-105-52 2-3-14 2-107-2-112 2-4-1(a) 62-21 - 62-22 2-4-1(b)(2) 2-330 2-4-3(a) 101-56-101-59 2-4-4(a) 101-23-101-26 2-4-5(a) 42-19-2-304 2-4-6 54-21 2-4-11 2-327-2-329 2-5-1 2-301-2-304 3-1-3 2-352-2-355 3-1-10 2-356-2-359 3-1-14(a) 62-1 3-3-1 2-408-2-414 3-4-1 2-442, 2-443 5-1-1 38-19-38-22 5-1-4 38-51 5-1-7 38-52 5-1-8 38-23 5-2-1 30-23-30-25 5-2-9 30-2 5-3-1 30-84 5-3-4 26-1 6-1-1 58-72-58-74 6-2-1 58-1 6-2-2(a) 58-45-58-49 6-2-3(a) 58-212 - 58-213 6-2-3(c) 58-212 6-2-3(d) 58-214 - 58-215 6-2-3(f)(1) 58-185 6-2-3(f)(2) 58-216-58-218 6-2-4(a) 58-186-58-194 6-2-5(a) 58-92-58-95 6-2-5(e) 58-95 - 58-96 6-2-6 58-2 6-2-7(a) 58-320-58-326 6-2-8 58-3 - 58-4 6-3-1(a) 58-267-58-270 6-3-2(a) 58-289-58-293 6-4-1 78-22 6-4-2 78-21 6-4-3 78-23-78-27 6-4-9 78-29 6-2-10 58-5-58-11 6-4-10 78-30-78-34 7-1-1(a) 14-45 7-1-1(b) 14-1 7-1-2 14-46-14-49 7-1-5 14-3 7-1-7 14-6 - 14-7 7-2-1 6-2 7-2-2 6-1 7-2-3 6-35-6-40 7-3-2 18-2 7-4-1 18-60 7-4-2 18-23 7-4-3 18-25 7-4-4 18-61 7-4-6 18-63 7-4-7(a) 18-27 - 18-28 7-4-8 18-26 7-4-9 18-64 7-5-5 18-62 7-7-1(a) 30-112-30-116 7-8-1(a) 58-356-58-363 7-9-1 10-19 - 10-20 7-9-3 10-22 - 10-23 7-9-5 10-21 7-10-2 26-86-26-91 7-11-1(a) 10-76 7-11-1(b) 10-50 7-11-1(c) 10-77-10-80 7-11-1(d)(4) 10-51 7-11-1(d)(5) 10-81 - 10-82 7-11-1(e) 10-82 7-1-13 14-8-14-10 7-12-1 18-1 7-1-22 14-11 - 14-12 7-2-10 6-41-6-44 7-2-15 6-8 7-2-16 6-45 7-2-18 6-47 7-2-19 6-4 7-2-20 6-46 7-2-30 6-68-6-74 7-2-40 6-3 7-4-10 18-24 8-1-3(a) 14-72 8-1-3(b) 14-13 8-1-4 54-1 8-1-5 78-57 8-1-7 78-1 8-2-2 46-75 8-3-1 54-46 8-3-2 54-49 8-3-3 54-47 8-3-4 54-53-54-70 8-3-19 54-1 8-3-23 54-48 8-3-24 54-71 8-3-25 54-51 8-3-26 54-72-54-74 8-3-29 54-52 8-3-30 54-50 9-1-49 74-101 9-1-51 74-103 9-1-52 26-2 - 74-104 9-2-1(a) 74-126-74-128 9-2-2 74-124 9-2-3 74-157 - 74-158 9-2-5 74-221 9-2-6(a) 74-187-74-191 9-2-7 74-255 9-2-8 74-222 - 74-223 9-2-10 74-256-74-258 9-2-13 74-125 9-2-14 74-159 9-2-15(a) 74-280 - 74-281 9-3-1 74-76-74-78 10-1-1(a) 70-2 10-1-1(c) 70-2 10-1-1(d) 70-2 - 70-3 10-1-3(a) 70-50-70-52 10-1-4 70-30 10-1-5 70-4 10-1-7 70-49 10-2-1 70-207 10-2-4 70-209-70-211 10-2-9 70-208 10-3-1 70-177-70-182 10-4-1 70-5 10-4-2 70-81 10-4-4 70-80 10-5-1(a) 70-148 10-5-1(b) 70-147 - 70-148 10-5-1(d) 70-148-70-154 10-5-8 26-3 10-6-1(a) 58-122 10-6-1(b) 58-121 10-6-2(a) 58-143-58-158 10-1-11 70-78 10-1-20 70-116-70-123 10-1-29 70-85 10-1-30 70-115 10-1-31 70-124 10-1-32 70-114 10-1-40 46-72 10-1-42(a)(2) 70-231-70-233 10-1-45(a) 70-82 10-1-50 70-1 10-1-51 70-29 10-3-10 70-183 - 70-184 11-1-1 46-1 11-2-1 46-160 - 46-161 11-2-4 46-70 11-2-7 58-12 11-2-8 46-71 11-2-9(a) 26-47-26-56 11-2-10(c) 46-72 11-2-11 46-73 - 46-74 11-2-13 46-21 11-2-14(a) 26-111 - 26-112 11-3-2 46-47 11-3-5 26-4 11-3-11 46-46 11-4-1 6-5, 6-6 11-5-1(a) 46-133-46-138 11-5-5 46-98-46-101 11-5-9 46-77 11-5-10 46-102 11-6-4 26-27-26-29 12-1-1(a) 50-19 - 50-20 12-1-1(b) 50-22-50-24 12-1-4 50-21 12-1-5 50-25 - 50-26 15-1-1 105-78 15-1-2 105-81 15-1-3 105-79 - 105-80 15-1-5 105-84 - 105-85 15-1-8 105-88 15-1-9 105-83 15-2-2 105-250 - 105-251 15-2-4 105-249 15-2-5 105-252-105-254 15-3-2 105-216 15-7-1 34-20 15-7-2 34-19 15-7-3 34-23 - 34-24 15-7-4 34-21 - 34-22 15-1-10 105-86 15-1-11 105-89 15-1-12 105-87 15-1-13 105-90-105-92 15-1-16 105-82 15-1-18 105-1  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1998 CODE TO 2016 CODE 
    This table gives the location within the 2016 Code of sections of the 1998 Code, as supplemented through February 16, 2015. 
1998 Code 
Section Section 

2016 Code 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-4 1-4 1-5 1-5 1-6 1-6 1-7 1-7 1-8 1-8 1-9 1-9 1-10 1-10 1-11 1-11 1-12 1-12 1-13 1-13 1-14 1-14 1-15 1-32 1-16 1-32 1-17 1-60 1-19 1-61 1-20 1-62 1-21 1-63 1-22 1-64 1-23 1-59 1-24 1-33 1-25 1-34 1-26 1-35 1-27 1-32 1-28 1-32 2-1(a) 2-1 2-2 2-2 2-3 2-3 2-4 2-4 2-5 2-5 2-6 2-6 2-32 2-31 2-33 2-32 2-34 2-33 2-35 2-34 2-36 2-35 2-37 2-36 2-38 2-61 2-39 2-62 2-40 2-63 2-41 2-64 2-42 2-65 2-43 2-66 2-44 2-67 2-46 2-68 2-47 2-69 2-48 2-70 2-49 2-71 2-50 2-72 2-76 2-103 2-77 2-104 2-78 2-105 2-79 2-106 2-80 2-107 2-81 2-108 2-82 2-109 2-83 2-110 2-84 2-111 2-85 2-112 2-112 2-138 2-113 2-139 - 2-233 2-141 2-162 2-142 2-163 2-171 2-195 2-172 2-196 2-173 2-197 2-174 2-198 2-185 2-215 2-186 2-216 2-187 2-217 2-188 2-218 2-201 2-253 2-202 2-254 2-204 2-255 2-231 2-274 2-232 2-275 2-233 2-276 2-301 2-301 2-302 2-302 2-303 2-303 2-304 2-304 2-361 2-327 2-362 2-328 2-363 2-329 2-364 101-2 2-365 2-331 2-452 2-352 2-453 2-353 2-454 2-354 2-455 2-355 2-456 2-356 2-457 2-357 2-458 2-358 2-459 2-359 2-460 62-1 2-557 2-408 2-558 2-409 2-559 2-410 2-560 2-411 2-561 2-412 2-562 2-413 2-563 2-414 2-591 2-442 2-592 2-443 6-1 6-2 6-2 6-1 6-3 6-3 6-4 6-4 6-5 6-5 6-6 6-6 6-7 6-7 6-8 6-8 6-36 6-35 6-37 6-36 6-38 6-37 6-39 6-38 6-40 6-39 6-41 6-40 6-42 6-41 6-44 6-42 6-45 6-43 6-46 6-44 6-47 6-45 6-49 6-47 6-50 6-46 6-81 6-68 6-82 6-69 6-83 6-70 6-84 6-71 6-85 6-72 6-86 6-73 - 6-74 10-56 10-19 10-57 10-20 10-58 10-22 10-59 10-23 10-60 10-21 10-86 10-50 10-87 10-76 10-88 10-77 10-89 10-78 10-90 10-79 10-91 10-80 10-92 10-51 10-93 10-81 10-94 10-82 14-1 14-1 14-2 14-3 14-4 14-6 14-6 14-7 14-10 14-8 14-11 14-9 14-12 14-10 14-13 14-11 14-14 14-12 14-15 14-13 14-41 14-45 14-42 14-46 14-43 14-47 14-44 14-48 14-45 14-49 14-76 14-72 15-2 14-2 15-3 14-5 15-4 14-4 18-56 105-44 18-57 105-45 18-58 105-46 18-59 105-47 18-60 105-48 18-61 105-49 18-62 105-50 18-63 105-51 18-64 105-52 18-91 105-78 18-92 105-81 18-93 105-79 18-94 105-80 18-95 105-84 18-96 105-85 18-98 105-88 18-99 105-83 18-100 105-86 18-101 105-89 18-102 105-87 18-103 105-90 18-104 105-91 18-105 105-92 18-106 105-82 18-107 105-1 18-137 105-114 18-138 105-115 18-139 105-150 18-140 105-151 18-141 105-152 18-142 105-153 18-143 105-154 18-144 105-155 18-145 105-156 18-146 105-116 18-147 105-117 18-153 105-157 18-154 105-183 18-155 105-184 18-156 105-185 18-157 105-186 18-158 105-118 18-159 105-115 18-160 105-187 18-161 105-188 18-162 105-113 18-192 105-216 18-193 105-217 18-194 105-215 18-195 105-218 18-196 105-219 18-197 105-220 18-227 105-250 18-228 105-251 18-229 105-249 18-230 105-252 18-231 105-253 18-232 105-254 18-261 105-274 18-262 105-272 18-263 105-275 18-264 105-276 18-265 105-277 18-266 105-278 18-267 105-279 18-268 105-280 18-269 105-281 18-270 105-282 18-271 105-283 18-272 105-284 18-273 105-285 18-274 105-286 18-275 105-273 18-326 109-20 18-327 109-21 18-328 109-22 18-329 109-19 18-330 109-25 18-331 109-26 18-332 109-56 18-333 109-57 18-334 109-23 18-335 109-24 18-336 109-58 18-361 109-91 18-362 109-92 18-363 109-90 18-364 109-93 18-365 109-96 18-366 109-97 18-367 109-98 18-368 109-99 18-369 109-100 18-370 109-94 18-371 109-95 18-372 109-101 18-373 109-102 18-380 109-134 18-381 109-135 18-382 109-133 18-383 109-136 18-384 109-139 18-385 109-140 18-386 109-141 18-387 109-142 18-388 109-137 18-389 109-138 22-1 18-1 22-2 18-2 22-61 18-60 22-62 18-23 22-63 18-25 22-64 18-61 22-65 18-62 22-66 18-63 22-67 18-27 22-69 18-26 22-70 18-64 22-71 18-24 22-101 18-89 22-102 18-87 22-103 18-111 22-104 18-112 22-105 18-113 22-106 18-91 22-107 18-114 22-108 18-90 22-109 18-111 22-110 18-88 22-136 18-143 22-137 18-142 22-138 18-145 22-139 18-176 22-140 18-177 22-141 18-178 22-142 18-179 22-143 18-181 22-144 18-209 22-145 18-210 22-146 18-211 22-147 18-212 22-148 18-213 22-149 18-214 22-150 18-215 22-151 18-216 22-152 18-217 22-153 18-218 22-154 18-180 22-155 18-146 22-156 18-182 22-157 18-184 22-158 18-185 22-159 18-144 22-160 18-144 22-162 18-183 22-191 18-247 22-192 18-248 22-193 18-245 22-194 18-275 22-195 18-276 22-196 18-277 22-197 18-278 22-198 18-279 22-199 18-280 22-200 18-246 22-231 18-343 22-232 18-309 22-233 18-311 22-234 18-344 22-235 18-345 22-236 18-312 22-237 18-346 22-238 18-310 26-75 66-19 26-76 66-20 26-77 66-21 26-78 66-22 26-79 66-23 26-80 66-24 26-81 66-25 26-82 66-26 26-83 66-27 26-84 66-28 26-85 66-29 26-86 66-30 26-87 66-31 26-88 66-32 26-89 66-33 26-90 66-34 26-91 66-35 26-92 66-36 26-93 66-37 26-94 66-38 26-95 66-39 26-96 66-40 26-97 66-41 26-98 66-42 26-99 66-43 26-100 66-44 26-101 66-45 26-102 66-46 26-103 66-47 26-104 66-48 26-105 66-49 26-106 66-50 26-107 66-51 26-108 66-52 26-109 66-53 26-110 66-54 26-111 66-55 26-112 66-56 26-113 66-57 26-114 66-58 26-115 66-59 26-116 66-60 26-117 66-61 26-118 66-62 26-119 66-63 26-120 66-64 26-121 66-65 30-26 22-1 30-27 22-21 30-28 22-22 34-26 26-27 34-27 26-28 34-28 26-29 34-56 26-47 34-57 26-48 34-59 26-49 - 26-50 34-60 26-51 34-61 26-52 34-62 26-53 34-63 26-54 34-64 26-55 34-65 26-56 34-97 26-86 34-98 26-87 34-99 26-88 34-100 26-89 34-101 26-90 34-102 26-91 34-131 26-111 34-132 26-112 34-151 26-138 34-152 26-139 34-153 26-140 34-154 26-141 34-155 26-142 34-156 26-143 34-157 26-144 34-158 26-145 38-1 26-1 38-2 30-1 38-31 30-23 38-33 30-24 38-34 30-25 38-37 30-2 38-66 30-54 38-67 30-55 38-96 30-84 38-126 30-112 38-127 30-113 38-128 30-114 38-129 30-115 38-130 30-116 42-1 113-1 42-2 113-2 42-3 113-3 42-4 113-4 42-5 113-5 42-6 113-6 42-26 113-31 42-27 113-32 42-28 113-33 42-29 113-34 42-56 113-57 42-57 113-58 42-58 113-59 42-59 113-60 42-86 113-79 42-87 113-80 42-88 113-81 42-116 113-106 42-117 113-107 42-118 113-108 42-119 113-109 42-146 113-132 42-147 113-133 42-148 113-134 42-176 113-152 42-177 113-153 42-178 113-154 42-179 113-155 42-180 113-156 42-181 113-157 42-182 113-158 42-183 113-159 42-206 113-187 42-207 113-188 43-1 125-1 43-2 125-2 43-3 125-3 43-4 125-4 43-5 125-5 43-6 125-6 43-7 125-7 43-8 125-8 43-36 125-35 43-37 125-36 43-38 125-37 43-39 125-38 43-40 125-39 43-41 125-40 43-42 125-41 43-43 125-42 43-44 125-43 43-161 125-92 43-162 125-93 43-163 125-94 43-164 125-95 43-251 125-119 43-252 125-120 43-300 125-139 43-301 125-140 43-302 125-141 43-303 125-142 43-304 125-143 43-305 125-144 43-306 125-145 43-307 125-146 43-308 125-147 43-309 125-148 50-27 117-3 50-28 117-1 50-29 117-5 50-30 117-4 50-31 117-6 50-32 117-7 50-33 117-2 54-56 34-20 54-57 34-19 54-58 34-23 54-59 34-24 54-60 34-25 54-61 34-21 54-62 34-22 58-26 38-19 58-27 38-20 58-28 38-21 58-29 38-22 58-30 38-23 58-61 38-50 58-62 38-51 58-63 38-52 62-26 42-19 62-27 42-20 66-1 46-1 66-31 46-21 66-61 46-47 66-63 26-4 66-64 46-46 66-91 46-70 66-92 46-71 66-93 46-72 66-94 46-73 66-95 46-74 66-96 46-75 66-97 46-76 66-98 46-77 66-126 46-98 66-127 46-99 66-128 46-100 66-129 46-100 66-130 46-101 66-132 46-102 66-161 46-133 66-162 46-134 66-163 46-135 66-164 46-136 66-165 46-137 66-166 46-138 66-196 46-160 66-197 46-161 66-199 46-162 70-26 50-20 70-27 50-19 70-28 50-22 70-29 50-23 70-30 50-24 70-31 50-21 70-32 50-25 70-33 50-26 70-61 121-19 70-62 121-20 70-64 121-22 70-65 121-23 70-66 121-24 70-67 121-25 74-26 101-23 74-27 101-24 74-28 101-25 74-29 101-26 74-56 101-56 74-57 101-57 74-58 101-58 74-59 101-59 78-1 54-1 78-31 54-21 78-61 54-46 78-62 54-49 78-63 54-47 78-64 54-53 78-65 54-54 78-66 54-55 78-67 54-56 78-68 54-57 78-69 54-58 78-70 54-59 78-71 54-60 78-72 54-61 78-73 54-62 78-74 54-63 78-75 54-64 78-76 54-65 78-77 54-66 78-78 54-67 78-80 54-68 78-81 54-69 78-82 54-70 78-83 54-48 78-84 54-71 78-85 54-51 78-86 54-72 78-87 54-73 78-88 54-74 78-89 54-52 78-90 54-50 82-1 58-1 82-2 58-2 82-3 58-3 82-4 58-4 82-5 58-5 82-6 58-6 82-7 58-7 82-8 58-8 82-9 58-9 82-10 58-10 82-11 58-11 82-12 58-12 82-41 58-45 82-42 58-46 82-43 58-47 82-44 58-48 82-45 58-49 82-76 58-72 82-77 58-73 82-78 58-74 82-92 58-92 82-93 58-93 82-94 58-94 82-95 58-95 82-96 58-96 82-109 58-122 82-110 58-121 82-115 58-143 82-116 58-144 82-117 58-145 82-118 58-146 82-119 58-147 82-120 58-148 82-121 58-149 82-122 58-150 82-123 58-151 82-124 58-152 82-125 58-153 82-126 58-154 82-127 58-155 82-128 58-156 82-129 58-157 82-130 58-158 82-141 58-212 82-142 58-213 82-143 58-212 82-144 58-214 82-145 58-215 82-146 58-185 82-147 58-216 82-148 58-217 82-149 58-218 82-150 58-186 82-151 58-187 82-152 58-188 82-153 58-189 82-154 58-190 82-155 58-191 82-156 58-192 82-157 58-193 82-158 58-194 82-216 58-267 82-217 58-268 82-218 58-269 82-219 58-270 82-246 58-289 82-247 58-290 82-248 58-291 82-249 58-292 82-250 58-293 82-281 58-320 82-282 58-321 82-283 58-322 82-284 58-323 82-285 58-324 82-286 58-325 82-287 58-326 82-316 58-356 82-317 58-357 82-319 58-358 82-320 58-359 82-321 58-360 82-322 58-361 82-323 58-362 82-324 58-363 86-1 129-4 86-2 129-5 86-3 129-3 86-5 129-1 86-6 129-2 86-7 129-6 86-8 129-7 86-9 129-9 86-10 129-10 86-11 129-8 86-12 129-11 86-13 129-12 86-14 129-13 86-15 129-14 86-16 129-15 86-17 129-16 86-41 129-36 86-42 129-37 86-71 129-63 86-72 129-64 86-73 129-65 86-74 129-66 86-101 129-91 86-102 129-92 86-103 129-93 86-104 129-94 86-105 129-95 86-106 129-96 86-136 129-121 86-137 129-122 86-138 129-123 86-166 129-145 86-167 129-146 86-168 129-147 86-169 129-148 86-170 129-149 86-171 129-150 86-172 129-151 86-173 129-152 86-174 129-153 86-175 129-154 86-176 129-155 86-177 129-156 86-178 129-157 86-179 129-158 86-180 129-159 86-181 129-160 86-182 129-161 86-183 129-162 86-211 129-193 86-212 129-194 86-213 129-195 86-214 129-196 86-215 129-197 86-246 129-245 86-247 129-246 86-248 129-247 86-249 129-248 86-250 129-249 90-26 62-21 90-27 62-22 90-28 2-330 90-30 62-23 90-46 62-50 90-47 62-51 90-48 62-52 90-49 62-53 90-50 62-54 90-51 62-55 90-52 62-56 90-53 62-57 90-54 62-58 90-55 62-59 90-56 62-60 94-1 70-2 94-2 70-3 94-3 70-5 94-4 70-81 94-5 70-30 94-6 70-4 94-8 70-49 94-10 70-1 94-11 70-29 94-41 70-78 94-43 70-80 94-44 70-82 94-45 70-83 94-46 70-84 94-76 70-116 94-77 70-117 94-78 70-118 94-80 70-119 94-81 70-120 94-82 70-121 94-83 70-122 94-84 70-123 94-85 70-85 94-86 70-115 94-87 70-124 94-88 70-114 94-116 70-50 94-117 70-51 94-119 70-52 94-146 70-147 94-147 70-148 94-148 70-149 94-149 70-150 94-150 70-151 94-151 70-152 94-152 70-153 94-153 70-154 94-154 26-3 94-181 70-177 94-182 70-178 94-183 70-179 94-184 70-180 94-185 70-181 94-188 70-182 94-189 70-183 94-190 70-184 94-221 70-207 94-222 70-209 94-223 70-210 94-224 70-211 94-225 70-208 94-257 70-231 94-258 70-232 94-259 70-233 98-81 74-44 98-82 74-45 98-83 74-46 98-84 74-47 98-85 74-48 98-86 74-49 98-87 74-50 98-88 74-51 98-89 74-52 98-116 74-76 98-117 74-77 98-118 74-78 98-150 74-100 98-151 74-101 98-153 74-103 98-154 26-2 - 74-104 98-155 74-105 98-156 74-106 98-157 74-107 98-181 74-126 98-182 74-127 98-183 74-128 98-185 74-124 98-186 74-125 98-216 74-157 98-217 74-158 98-218 74-159 98-219 74-255 98-246 74-187 98-247 74-188 98-248 74-189 98-249 74-190 98-250 74-191 98-276 74-221 98-277 74-222 98-278 74-223 98-279 74-256 98-280 74-257 98-281 74-258 98-311 74-280 98-312 74-281 102-1 78-1 102-9 78-88 102-26 78-22 102-27 78-21 102-28 78-23 102-29 78-24 102-30 78-25 102-31 78-26 102-32 78-27 102-33 78-28 102-34 78-29 102-35 78-30 102-36 78-31 102-37 78-32 102-38 78-33 102-39 78-34 102-66 78-57 102-98 78-88 - 78-89 102-99 78-90 106-1 133-3 106-2 133-1 106-3 133-4 106-4 133-5 106-5 133-6 106-6 133-7 106-7 133-8 106-8 133-9 106-9 133-10 106-10 133-11 106-11 133-12 106-12 133-13 106-13 133-14 106-14 133-15 106-15 129-218 106-16 133-16 106-17 133-17 106-18 133-2 106-19 133-18 106-20 133-19 106-46 133-42 106-47 133-43 106-48 133-44 106-49 133-45 106-50 133-46 106-51 133-47 106-52 133-48 106-53 133-49 106-81 133-72 106-82 133-73 106-83 133-74 106-84 133-75 106-111 133-94 106-112 133-95 106-113 133-96 106-114 133-97 106-115 133-98 106-116 133-99 106-146 133-127 106-147 133-128 106-148 133-129 106-176 133-157 106-177 133-158 106-178 133-159 106-179 133-160 106-206 133-189 106-207 133-190 106-208 133-191 106-209 133-192 106-210 133-193 106-241 133-225 106-242 133-226 106-243 133-227 106-244 133-228 106-245 133-229 106-276 133-252 106-277 133-253 106-278 133-254 106-279 133-255 106-280 133-256 106-311 133-276 106-312 133-277 106-313 133-278 106-314 133-279 106-315 133-280 106-331 133-309 106-332 133-310 106-333 133-311 106-334 133-312 106-335 133-313 106-346 133-345 106-347 133-346 106-348 133-347 106-349 133-348 106-350 133-349 106-381 133-372 106-382 133-373 106-383 133-374 106-384 133-375 106-385 133-376 106-416 133-396 106-417 133-397 106-418 133-398 106-419 133-399 106-420 133-400 106-421 133-401 106-451 133-431 106-452 133-432 106-453 133-433 106-454 133-434 106-455 133-435 106-486 133-454 106-487 133-455 106-488 133-456 106-489 133-457 106-490 133-458 106-491 133-459 106-521 133-487 106-522 133-488 106-523 133-489 106-524 133-490 106-525 133-491 106-526 133-492 106-556 133-523 106-557 133-524 106-558 133-525 106-559 133-526 106-560 133-527 106-591 133-548 106-592 133-549 106-593 133-550 106-594 133-551 106-595 133-552 106-626 133-583 106-627 133-584 106-628 133-585 106-629 133-586 106-661 133-606 106-662 133-607 106-663 133-608 106-663.1 133-609 106-664 133-637 106-665 133-638 106-666 133-639 106-667 133-640 106-691 133-669 106-692 133-670 106-693 133-671 106-694 133-672 106-695 133-673 106-726 133-705 106-756 133-724 106-757 133-725 106-758 133-726 106-759 133-727 106-760 133-728 106-761 133-729 106-762 133-730 106-769 133-759 106-775 133-787 106-782 133-813 106-783 133-835 106-784 133-836 106-785 133-837 106-786 133-838 106-787 133-839 106-788 133-858 106-789 133-859 106-790 133-857 106-791 133-860 106-792 133-861 106-793 133-862 106-794 133-863 106-795 133-864 106-801 133-892 106-802 133-893 106-803 133-894 106-804 133-895 106-805 133-896 106-806 133-897 106-807 133-898 106-841 133-930 106-842 133-931 106-843 133-932 106-844 133-933 106-845 133-934 106-846 133-935 106-847 133-936 106-848 133-937 106-849 133-938 106-850 133-939 106-851 133-940 106-852 133-941 106-853 133-942 106-854 133-943 106-855 133-944 106-856 133-945 106-886 133-964 106-887 133-965 106-888 133-966 106-889 133-967 106-921 133-993 106-922 133-994 106-923 133-995 106-924 133-996 106-925 133-997 106-926 133-998 106-927 133-999 106-956 133-1030 106-957 133-1029 106-958 133-1031 106-959 133-1032 106-960 133-1033 106-961 133-1034 106-962 133-1035 106-963 133-1036 106-964 133-1037 106-965 133-1038 106-966 133-1039 106-969 133-1040 106-996 133-1066 106-997 133-1067 106-998 133-1068 106-999 133-1069 106-1000 133-1070 106-1001 133-1071 106-1002 133-1072 106-1003 133-1073 106-1036 133-1100 106-1037 133-1101 106-1038 133-1102 106-1039 133-1103 106-1040 133-1104 106-1071 133-1132 106-1072 133-1133 106-1073 133-1134 106-1074 133-1135 106-1075 133-1136 106-1076 133-1137 106-1100 133-1168 106-1101 133-1169 106-1102 133-1170 106-1103 133-1171 106-1104 133-1172 106-1105 133-1173 106-1106 133-1174  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2016 CODE-LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within this 2016 Code of those ordinances which are included herein. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
2016 Code Ord. No. 92-7 5-18-1992 I 2-33 Ord. of 12-20-1993 12-20-1993 1 46-1 2 1-62 - 46-100 Ord. No. 94-9 3-21-1994 2 105-81 Ord. No. 94-10 3-21-1994 1 105-81 Ord. No. 94-13 5-2-1994 2 54-64 Ord. No. 94-16 8-15-1994 1 2-33 2 2-66 Ord. No. 94-18 9-6-1994 - 70-118 Ord. No. 95-2 3-6-1995 - 2-33 Ord. No. 95-3 3-6-1995 - 2-33 - 101-23 - 101-26 Ord. No. 95-4 4-3-1995 - 70-4 Ord. No. 95-7 8-7-1995 - 2-33 Res. No. 95-4 9-18-1995 - 105-82 - 105-254 Ord. No. 95-8 10-16-1995 15-4-2 105-114 15-4-3 105-115 15-4-4 105-150 15-4-5 105-151 15-4-6 105-152 15-4-7 105-153 15-4-8 105-154 15-4-9 105-155 15-4-10 105-156 15-4-11 105-116 15-4-12 105-117 15-4-18 105-157 15-4-19 105-183 15-4-20 105-184 15-4-21 105-185 15-4-22 105-186 15-4-23 105-118 15-4-24 105-115 15-4-25 105-187 15-4-26 105-188 15-4-27 105-113 Ord. No. 95-10 12-18-1995 - 74-124 - 74-255 Ord. No. 96-3 3-18-1996 2 2-33 Ord. No. 96-4 3-18-1996 2 2-36 Ord. No. 96-8 9-3-1996 1 46-77 - 46-98-46-102 - 46-138 Ord. No. 96-10 10-21-1996 1 62-21 2(2-4-1(d)) 62-23 Ord. No. 96-2 10-21-1996 I 117-3 II 117-1 IV 117-5 V 117-4 VI 117-6 VII 117-7 VIII 117-2 Ord. No. 97-3 4-7-1997 1(5-3-5) 30-1 Ord. No. 97-4 5-5-1997 I(3-2-14(b)) 121-20 I(3-2-14(d)) 121-22 I(3-2-14(e)) 121-23 I(3-2-14(f)) 121-24 I(3-2-14(g)) 121-25 I(3-2-14) 121-19 Ord. No. 97-5 5-5-1997 1 2-33 4 62-21 6 101-23 - 101-26 Ord. No. 97-11 11-3-1997 13-1-1 133-3 13-1-2 133-1 13-1-3 133-4 13-1-4 133-5 13-1-5 133-6 13-1-6 133-7 13-1-7(b), (c) 133-8 13-1-8 133-9 13-1-10 133-10 13-1-11 133-11 13-1-12 133-12 13-1-13 133-13 13-1-14 133-14 13-1-15 133-15 13-1-16 129-218 13-1-17 133-16 13-1-18 133-17 13-1-20 133-127 13-1-21 133-128 13-1-22 133-129 13-1-23(a) 133-157 13-1-23(b) 133-158 13-1-23(c) 133-159 13-1-23(d) 133-160 13-1-24(a) 133-189 13-1-24(b) 133-190 13-1-24(c) 133-191 13-1-24(d) 133-192 13-1-24(e) 133-193 13-1-25(a) 133-225 13-1-25(b) 133-226 13-1-25(c) 133-227 13-1-25(d) 133-228 13-1-25(e) 133-229 13-1-26(a) 133-252 13-1-26(b) 133-253 13-1-26(c) 133-254 13-1-26(d) 133-255 13-1-26(e) 133-256 13-1-27(a) 133-276 13-1-27(b) 133-277 13-1-27(c) 133-278 13-1-27(d) 133-279 13-1-27(e) 133-280 13-1-28(a) 133-345 13-1-28(b) 133-346 13-1-28(c) 133-347 13-1-28(d) 133-348 13-1-28(e) 133-349 13-1-29(a) 133-372 13-1-29(b) 133-373 13-1-29(c) 133-374 13-1-29(d) 133-375 13-1-29(e) 133-376 13-1-30(a) 133-396 13-1-30(b) 133-397 13-1-30(c) 133-398 13-1-30(d) 133-399 13-1-30(e) 133-400 13-1-30(f) 133-401 13-1-31(a) 133-431 13-1-31(b) 133-432 13-1-31(c) 133-433 13-1-31(d) 133-434 13-1-31(e) 133-435 13-1-32(a) 133-454 13-1-32(b) 133-455 13-1-32(c) 133-456 13-1-32(d) 133-457 13-1-32(e) 133-458 13-1-32(f) 133-459 13-1-33(a) 133-487 13-1-33(b) 133-488 13-1-33(c) 133-489 13-1-33(d) 133-490 13-1-33(e) 133-491 13-1-33(f) 133-492 13-1-34(a) 133-523 13-1-34(b) 133-524 13-1-34(c) 133-525 13-1-34(d) 133-526 13-1-34(e) 133-527 13-1-35(a) 133-548 13-1-35(b) 133-549 13-1-35(c) 133-550 13-1-35(d) 133-551 13-1-35(e) 133-552 13-1-36(a) 133-583 13-1-36(b) 133-584 13-1-36(c) 133-585 13-1-37(a) 133-606 13-1-37(b) 133-607 13-1-37(c) 133-608 13-1-38(a) 133-669 13-1-38(b) 133-670 13-1-38(c) 133-671 13-1-38(d) 133-672 13-1-38(e) 133-673 13-1-39 133-705 13-1-40(a) 133-724 13-1-40(b) 133-725 13-1-40(c) 133-726 13-1-40(d) 133-727 13-1-40(e) 133-728 13-1-40(f) 133-729 13-1-40(g) 133-730 13-1-50 133-892 13-1-51 133-893 13-1-52 133-894 13-1-53 133-895 13-1-54 133-896 13-1-55 133-897 13-1-56 133-898 13-1-60 133-930 13-1-61 133-931 13-1-62 133-932 13-1-63 133-933 13-1-64 133-934 13-1-65 133-935 13-1-66 133-936 13-1-67 133-937 13-1-68 133-938 13-1-69 133-939 13-1-70 133-940 13-1-71 133-941 13-1-72 133-942 13-1-73 133-943 13-1-80 133-964 13-1-81 133-965 13-1-82 133-966 13-1-83 133-967 13-1-90 133-993 13-1-91 133-994 13-1-92 133-995 13-1-93 133-996 13-1-94 133-997 13-1-95 133-998 13-1-96 133-999 13-1-100 133-1030 13-1-101 133-1029 13-1-102 133-1031 13-1-103 133-1032 13-1-104 133-1033 13-1-105 133-1034 13-1-106 133-1035 13-1-107 133-1036 13-1-108 133-1037 13-1-109 133-1038 13-1-110 133-1039 13-1-120 133-1066 13-1-121 133-1067 13-1-122 133-1068 13-1-123 133-1069 13-1-124 133-1070 13-1-125 133-1071 13-1-126 133-1072 13-1-127 133-1073 13-1-130 133-1100 13-1-131 133-1101 13-1-132 133-1102 13-1-133 133-1103 13-1-140 133-1132 13-1-141 133-1133 13-1-142 133-1134 13-1-143 133-1135 13-1-144 133-1136 13-1-145 133-1137 13-1-170 133-42 13-1-171 133-43 13-1-172 133-44 13-1-173 133-45 13-1-174 133-46 13-1-175 133-47 13-1-176 133-48 13-1-177 133-49 13-1-180 133-72 13-1-181 133-73 13-1-182 133-74 13-1-183 133-75 13-1-190 133-94 13-1-191 133-95 13-1-192 133-96 13-1-193 133-97 13-1-194 133-98 13-1-195 133-99 13-1-200 133-2 Ord. No. 97-12 11-3-1997 14-1-1 129-4 14-1-2 129-5 14-1-3 129-3 14-1-6 129-1 14-1-10 129-2 14-1-20(a) 129-6 14-1-20(b) 129-7 14-1-20(c) 129-9 14-1-20(d) 129-10 14-1-20(e) 129-8 14-1-21 129-11 14-1-22 129-12 14-1-30 129-91 14-1-31 129-92 14-1-32 129-93 14-1-33 129-94 14-1-34 129-95 14-1-35 129-96 14-1-40 129-121 14-1-41 129-122 14-1-42 129-123 14-1-50 129-145 14-1-51 129-146 14-1-52 129-147 14-1-53 129-148 14-1-54 129-149 14-1-55 129-150 14-1-56 129-151 14-1-57 129-152 14-1-58 129-153 14-1-59 129-154 14-1-60 129-155 14-1-61 129-156 14-1-62 129-157 14-1-63 129-158 14-1-64 129-159 14-1-65 129-160 14-1-66 129-161 14-1-67 129-162 14-1-70 129-193 14-1-71 129-194 14-1-72 129-195 14-1-73 129-196 14-1-74 129-197 14-1-80 129-245 14-1-81 129-246 14-1-82 129-247 14-1-83 129-248 14-1-84 129-249 14-1-90(a) 129-63 14-1-90(b) 129-64 14-1-90(c), (d) 129-65 14-1-90(e) 129-66 14-1-91 129-37 14-1-100 129-36 Ord. No. 98-2 3-30-1998 2 101-2 3 133-18 4(13-1-41) 133-759 4(13-1-42) 133-787 4(13-1-43) 133-813 4(13-1-44(a)) 133-858 4(13-1-44(b)) 133-859 4(13-1-44(c)) 133-857 4(13-1-44(d)-(s)) 133-860 4(13-1-44(t)) 133-861 4(13-1-44(u)) 133-862 4(13-1-44(v)) 133-863 5 133-13 7 129-13 Ord. No. 98-3 4-6-1998 1 66-19 2 66-20 3 66-21 4 66-23 5 66-24 6 66-25 7 66-26 8 66-27 9 66-28 10 66-29 11 66-30 12 66-31 13 66-32 14 66-33 15 66-34 16 66-35 17 66-36 18 66-37 19 66-38 20 66-39 21 66-40 22 66-41 23 66-42 24 66-43 25 66-44 26 66-45 27 66-46 28 66-47 29 66-48 30 66-49 31 66-50 32 66-51 33 66-52 34 66-53 35 66-54 36 66-55 37 66-56 38 66-57 39 66-58 40 66-59 41 66-60 42 66-61 43 66-62 44 66-63 45 66-64 46 66-65 47 66-22 Ord. No. 98-8 5-4-1998 1 2-33 Ord. No. 98-10 9-8-1998 1 133-16 Ord. No. 98-12 10-6-1998 1 2-357 Ord. No. 98-14 11-2-1998 1 133-16 Ord. No. 98-15 11-2-1998 1 133-11 2 133-228 3 133-255 4 133-279 5 133-348 6 133-375 Ord. No. 99-1 1-18-1999 1 74-44-74-52 Ord. No. 99-3 2-15-1999 1 1-2 Ord. No. 99-4 3-1-1999 1 70-1 Ord. No. 99-5 3-1-1999 1 133-18 Ord. No. 99-6 4-5-1999 1 2-329 2 2-329 Ord. No. 99-8 5-17-1999 1 70-3 Ord. No. 99-10 6-21-1999 1 133-13 2 133-47 3 133-74 4 133-192 5 133-549 6 133-584 7 133-933 Ord. No. 99-11 7-19-1999 1 133-995 Ord. No. 99-12 7-19-1999 1 133-11 2 129-12 - 129-12 Ord. No. 99-17 9-7-1999 2 105-274 3 105-272 4 105-275 5 105-275 6 105-284 7 105-285 8 105-286 9 105-273 10 105-282 11 105-283 Ord. No. 99-18 9-7-1999 1 6-36 Ord. No. 99-19 9-7-1999 1 62-21 Ord. No. 99-20 9-20-1999 1 54-72 Ord. No. 99-21 11-15-1999 1-5 105-82 6 105-220 7 105-254 Ord. No. 99-22 12-6-1999 1 133-129 Ord. No. 00-2 2-7-2000 1 133-1029 2 133-1029 3 133-1031 4-9 133-1032 10 133-1033 11 133-1033 12 133-1038 13 133-1038 Ord. No. 00-3 2-21-2000 1 66-39 Ord. No. 00-4 2-21-2000 1 101-23 Ord. No. 00-5 2-21-2000 1 46-76 Ord. No. 00-6 3-6-2000 3 2-138 4 2-139 - 2-233 6 2-195-2-198 7 2-215-2-218 Ord. No. 00-7 3-6-2000 1 46-77 2 46-73 Ord. No. 00-10 7-5-2000 1 2-328 Ord. No. 00-14 12-18-2000 1 58-320 2 58-321 3 58-324 4 78-1 5 78-1 6 78-57 Ord. No. 01-01 2-5-2001 1 133-1029 2-4 133-1032 5-8 133-1033 9 133-1034 10 133-1038 11 133-1038 Ord. No. 01-02 3-5-2001 1 133-98 2 133-98 Ord. No. 01-03 4-2-20012 1 133-730 Ord. No. 01-04 4-2-2001 1 133-47 2 133-995 3 133-47 Ord. No. 01-05 4-2-2001 1 133-944 2 133-584 Ord. No. 01-9 5-21-2001 1 58-290 Ord. No. 01-10 7-2-2001 1 133-525 2 133-550 Ord. No. 01-14 10-15-2001 1 121-19 2 121-20 4 121-22 5 121-25 Ord. No. 01-15 11-5-2001 1 74-78 2 74-78 3 74-256 4 54-64 Ord. No. 01-16 11-19-2001 1 129-249 Ord. No. 02-02 3-11-2002 1 6-36 Ord. No. 02-03 5-20-2002 1 62-50-62-60 Ord. No. 02-06 8-5-2002 3 109-134 4 109-135 5 109-133 6 109-136 7 109-139 9 109-141 10 109-142 11 109-137 12 109-138 Ord. No. 02-07 8-5-2002 1 133-835 2 133-836 - 133-837 4 133-838 5 133-839 Ord. No. 02-12 11-11-2002 1 74-78 Ord. No. 02-13 11-28-2002 1 2-255 Ord. No. 02-14 12-16-2002 1 2-36 Ord. No. 02-15 12-16-2002 1 2-5 Ord. No. 03-02 3-17-2003 1 121-20 Ord. No. 03-04 4-7-2003 1-3 133-47 Ord. No. 03-05 4-7-2003 1 2-61 Ord. No. 03-06 4-7-2003 1 30-84 Ord. No. 03-08 6-16-2003 1 70-123 Ord. No. 03-12 8-18-2003 1 133-1136 Ord. No. 03-13 10-20-2003 1 70-83 Ord. No. 2003-14 12-15-2003 - 14-45-14-47 - 14-49 Ord. No. 2003-15 12-15-2003 1-3 2-6 Ord. No. 04-01 1-5-2004 1 18-245-18-248 - 18-275-18-280 Ord. No. 04-03 3-1-2004 1 133-1168-133-1174 22-111 18-143 - 18-217 - 18-218 22-112 18-142 22-113 18-145 22-114 18-176 22-115 18-177 22-116 18-178 22-117 18-179 22-118 18-181 22-119 18-209 22-120 18-210 22-121 18-211 22-122 18-212 22-123 18-213 22-124 18-214 22-125 18-215 22-126 18-216 22-129 18-180 22-130 18-146 22-131 18-182 22-132 18-184 22-133 18-185 22-134 18-144 22-135 18-144 22-137 18-183 Ord. No. 04-07 4-19-2004 2 74-45 Ord. No. 04-10 4-19-2004 1, 2 121-20 Ord. No. 04-16 10-4-2004 1, 2 129-193 Ord. No. 04-18 12-20-2004 1 6-37 2 6-41 Ord. No. 05-03 3-21-2005 1 121-20 2 121-20 Ord. No. 05-04 4-4-2005 1 121-20 3 121-22 4 121-24 Ord. No. 05-05 6-20-2005 1 133-1033 2 133-1036 Ord. No. 05-06 6-20-2005 1 133-2 2 133-2 3 133-19 Ord. No. 05-07 6-20-2005 2 133-47 Ord. No. 05-11 9-6-2005 - 133-19 Ord. No. 05-12 9-6-2005 1-3 133-996 Ord. No. 06-04 6-5-2006 1 121-20 2 121-20 Ord. No. 06-05 6-5-2006 2 109-19-109-26 - 109-56-109-58 - 109-90-109-102 Ord. No. 06-06 6-5-2006 1 2-33 2 2-33 Ord. No. 06-10 10-16-2006 1 46-1 2 46-100 3 46-77 Ord. No. 06-11 11-20-2006 1 133-49 2 133-864 Ord. No. 07-02 4-2-2007 1 105-82 2-4 129-36 5 129-159 6 129-193 7 129-195 8 133-12 9 133-13 10-13 133-2 14 133-49 15 133-995 16 133-1033 17 133-1034 18 133-1037 19 133-1037 20 133-1135 21 133-1137 Ord. No. 07-03A 5-7-2007 1 121-20 2 121-20 Ord. No. 07-04 5-21-2007 2 133-18 3 133-858 - 133-859 - 133-861-133-863 4 133-13 6 129-13 Ord. No. 07-06 7-18-2007 - 105-81 Ord. No. 07-09 8-20-2007 - 22-21 Ord. No. 07-12 9-17-2007 1 50-21 Ord. No. 07-13 11-5-2007 1 70-123 Ord. No. 08-01 1-7-2008 133-637-133-640 Ord. No. 08-03 1-21-2008 1 121-20 Ord. No. 08-04 2-18-2008 1 133-47 Ord. No. 08-05 3-3-2008 1 121-20 2 121-24 Ord. No. 08-06 3-17-2008 1 2-36 Ord. No. 08-08 5-5-2008 1 133-488 - 133-489 2 133-995 Ord. No. 08-9 6-16-2008 2 121-20 Ord. No. 08-13 11-3-2008 109-91 Ord. No. 08-14 12-15-2008 2 125-1-125-8 - 125-35-125-43 - 125-92-125-95 - 125-119 - 125-120 Ord. No. 2008-15 12-15-2008 7.0 113-152 42-1.1 113-1 42-1.2 113-2 42-1.3 113-3 42-1.4 113-4 42-1.5 113-5 42-2.1 113-31 42-2.3 113-32 42-2.4 113-34 42-2.c 113-33 42-3.1 113-57 42-3.2 113-58 - 113-59 42-3.4 113-60 42-4.1 113-79 42-4.2 113-80 42-4.3 113-81 42-5.1 113-106 42-5.2 113-107 42-5.3 113-108 42-5.4 113-109 42-6.1 113-132 42-6.2 113-133 42-6.3 113-134 42-7.1 113-153 42-7.2 113-154 42-7.3 113-155 42-7.4 113-156 42-7.5 113-157 42-7.6 113-158 42-8.1 113-187 - 113-188 42-9.0 113-159 42-10.0 113-6 Ord. No. 09-05 6-1-2009 1 121-20 2 121-20 Ord. No. 09-06 7-20-2009 2 133-1101 3 133-1102 4 133-1102 6 133-1103 7 133-1104 8 133-1033 9 133-1038 10 133-1040 11 133-47 12 133-584 13 133-585 14 133-586 15 133-607 16 133-608 17 133-609 Ord. No. 09-07 7-20-2009 1 2-358 2 2-359 3 2-359 Ord. No. 09-08 7-20-2009 70-84 Ord. No. 09-09 9-8-2009 1 2-33 2 2-331 Ord. No. 09-10 9-21-2009 1 50-22 Ord. No. 10-1 2-15-2010 1 78-21 2 78-25 3 78-28 4 78-29 5 78-29 6 78-32 Ord. No. 10-02 3-1-2010 1 2-359 Ord. No. 10-4 5-3-2010 1 121-20 2 121-20 Ord. No. 10-7 6-21-2010 1 22-21 Ord. No. 10-10 8-16-2010 1 133-127 2 133-309-133-313 4 133-129 Ord. No. 10-9 8-16-2010 1 30-2 Ord. No. 10-11 11-1-2010 3 14-8 4 14-11 Ord. No. 10-13 12-6-2010 - 129-14 Ord. No. 10-14 12-20-2010 1 133-192 Ord. No. 11-2 5-16-2011 1 121-20 2 121-20 Ord. No. 11-3 5-16-2011 1 42-19 Ord. No. 11-7 8-15-2011 1 22-21 Ord. No. 11-9 8-15-2011 - 26-138-26-145 Ord. No. 11-15 10-17-2011 1 46-1 2 46-162 Ord. No. 12-3 5-7-2012 1-5 133-47 1 133-13 6 133-74 7 133-98 Ord. No. 12-2 5-16-2012 1 121-20 2 121-20 Ord. No. 12-10 10-1-2012 1 2-33 Ord. No. 12-9 10-1-2012 1 2-61 Ord. No. 13-2 4-15-2013 - 30-2 Ord. No. 13-5 4-15-2013 1 121-20 2 121-20 Ord. No. 13-6 4-15-2013 - 74-107 Ord. No. 13-7 4-15-2013 - 74-101 Ord. No. 13-8 4-15-2013 - 74-255 Ord. No. 13-9 5-6-2013 1 133-860 Ord. No. 13-11 6-17-2013 1 6-8 Ord. No. 13-12 10-7-2013 - 46-100 Ord. No. 13-13 11-4-2013 1 14-4 2 14-5 3 14-6 4 14-2 Ord. No. 13-14 11-18-2013 1 2-36 Ord. No. 14-01 2-3-2014 1 101-2 Ord. No. 14-05 3-17-2014 1 121-20 2 121-20 Ord. No. 14-06 4-21-2014 - 58-13 Ord. No. 14-10 9-22-2014 1 113-5 2 113-159 Ord. No. 14-11 10-6-2014 1 101-2 Ord. No. 14-15 11-17-2014 1 133-787 2 133-787 Ord. No. 14-16 12-15-2014 - 133-945 Ord. No. 14-17 12-15-2014 1 125-8 2 125-8 3 125-139-125-148 Ord. No. 14-18 12-15-2014 1 129-15 2 129-16 Ord. No. 15-1 2-2-2015 1 2-331 Ord. No. 15-2 2-16-2015 1(22-101) 18-343 1(22-101) 18-344 1(22-102) 18-309 1(22-103) 18-311 1(22-105) 18-345 1(22-106) 18-312 1(22-107) 18-346 1 (22-108) 18-310 Ord. No. 15-3 2-16-2015 - 133-1000 Ord. No. 15-5  3-16-2015 1(70-62) 121-20(a) 2(70-62) 121-20(b)(1) Ord. No. 15-10  5-18-2015 2-7       Added 105-21 Ord. No. 15-11  5-18-2015 18-336 109-58 Ord. No. 16-1  2-15-2016 1(42-5) 113-5(b) Ord. No. 16-3  4- 4-2016 1(70-62) 121-20(a) 2(70-62) 121-20(b)(1) Ord. No. 16-4  4- 4-2016 1(106-957) 133-1029 1(106-960) 133-1033 Ord. No. 16-5  5- 2-2016 1(106-11) 133-12(l) 2(106-18(39a)) 133-2 3(Ch. 106)       Added 133-1200-133-1207 Ord. No. 16-9 10-17-2016 1(90-46) 62-50 2(90-47) 62-51(a)(2)b.2. 3(90-52) 62-56(b) 4(2-366)       Added 2-332 Ord. No. 16-10 11- 7-2016 1(106-957(3m)) 133-1029 2(106-970) 133-1041 Ord. No. 16-12 12-19-2016 Adopt. Ord. Pg. xi Ord. No. 17-3  7-24-2017 1       Rpld 74-100       Added 74-100 Ord. No. 17-4  7-24-2017 1 30-2(e) 2 105-89(b) Ord. No. 17-6 12-18-2017 1 133-859 2 133-860(12) Ord. No. 18-2  2-5-2018 1 121-20 2 121-22 Ord. No. 18-4  2-19-2018 1       Added 62-2 Ord. No. 18-5  3-12-2018 1 133-489(c) 2 133-491(1) Ord. No. 18-6  3-12-2018 1 133-585(7) 2       Added 133-946 Ord. No. 18-7  3-19-2018 109-56(c)(4), (c)(5) Ord. No. 18-19 10-15-2018 1 133-374(11) 2 133-376(1) 3 133-458(6) 4 133-459(1) 5 133-525(24) 6 133-527(1) 7 133-585(5) 8 133-608(4) 9 133-491(4) 10 133-12(d)  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this 2016 Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Wisconsin Statutes (Wis. Stats.). 
Wis. Stats. 
Section Section 

in Code 5.02(21) 2-31 - 2-32 6.36 2-4 6.55 2-4 6.78 2-2 7.23 2-413 7.30(1) 2-5 8.10 2-31 - 2-32 12.04 133-1032 - 133-1033 13.48(13) 113-5 - 125-5 - 125-143 15.01(7) 18-25 16.61(3)(e) 2-413 16.61(7)(a) 2-414 17.03 2-109 17.035 2-109 17.13(2) 2-110 17.16 2-110 17.24 2-109 19.01 et seq. 2-108 19.01 2-218 - 2-254 - 70-29 19.01(4)(c) 22-21 19.21 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 19.21 2-111 19.21(4)(a) 2-413 19.32 2-408 19.33(a) 2-409 19.34 2-410 19.35 2-411 19.35(1) 2-255 19.35(2) 2-410 19.36 2-412 19.37 2-411 19.59 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 9 19.81 et seq. 2-61-2-63 19.81 2-327 19.84 2-327 19.85 2-63 19.89 2-327 23.10 14-1 23.32(1) 129-2 23.33 70-5 ch. 27 78-23 27.09 78-34 ch. 29 14-9 29.038(3)(b)3 46-160 ch. 30 113-33 - 113-58 - 113-59 - 125-93 30.11 113-6 - 125-8 30.12(4)(a) 125-5 30.121 125-119 30.20 125-93 30.2022 113-5 ch. 31 113-33 - 113-58 - 125-93 34.05 et seq. 2-354 ch. 43 42-19 - 42-20 43.52 Ch. 42 (note) 43.54 Ch. 42, Art. II - 42-19 43.58 42-20 48.01 et seq. 46-102 48.62 133-2 - 133-860 49.26(1)(h) 46-100 ch. 50 18-142 59.69 113-1 - 113-5 - 113-152 - 113-188 59.69(10) 113-132 59.692 113-1 - 113-5 - 113-152 - 125-146 59.692(1)(bn) 125-140 59.692(1v) 109-96 59.694 113-1 - 113-5 - 113-155 ch. 61 Ch. 2 (note) - 2-1 - 2-103 - 2-301 - 74-128 61.19 2-32 - 2-107 - 2-253 61.193 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 61.195 2-253 61.197 2-195 - 2-215 - 2-253 61.197(f) Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 7 61.20 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 61.20 2-31 61.21 2-253 61.22 2-112 61.23 2-109 - 2-253 61.24 2-31 - 2-32 61.25 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 4 - 2-197 61.26 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 5 - 2-217 61.261 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 4 - Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 5 61.27 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 7 61.32 2-36 - 2-61-2-65 61.325 2-31 61.34 2-34 - 26-139 - 109-134 61.35 26-139 - Ch. 101, Art. II - 109-91 - 113-1 - 113-5 - 125-1 - 125-6 - 125-139 - Ch. 133 (note) - 133-3 61.351 125-1 - 125-92 - 125-119 - 125-120 61.351(6) 125-95 61.353 125-139 - 125-146 - 125-148 61.354 109-20 - 109-91 - 109-134 61.36 2-35 61.51 2-355 61.54 2-358 61.55 2-358 61.65 Ch. 38, Art. II 61.65(1)(b)2 2-329 61.65(1)(am) 38-50 62.07(7)(d)2 Ch. 133, Art. II, 
Div. 2 62.15 2-358 - Ch. 58 (note) 62.16 Ch. 58 (note) - Ch. 58, Art. III 62.22 Ch. 58 (note) 62.23 26-139 - 26-143 - Ch. 101, Art. II - 101-26 - 101-56 - 113-1 - 113-5 - 113-188 - 125-6 - 129-2 - 133-94 62.23(1) 101-24 - 101-25 62.23(7) 113-152 - Ch. 133 (note) - 133-3 62.23(7)(d)2 125-42 62.23(7)(d)2m 133-75 62.23(7)(e) Ch. 101, Art. III - 109-24 - 109-95 - 113-155 62.23(7)(e)4-(7)(e)8 Ch. 133, Art. II, 
Div. 3 62.23(7)(e)10-15 105-276 62.23(7)(e)10 133-99 62.23(7)(e)15 129-37 62.23(7)(h) 113-132 - 125-120 62.23(7)(ham) Ch. 133, Art. VI 62.23(7a) 133-18 62.23(8) 109-23 - 109-94 62.231 125-92 62.232(7)(e)2 101-56 - 101-58 62.25 2-61 65.90 2-352 - 74-255 65.90(5)(a) 2-353 ch. 66 Ch. 2 (note) - 2-1 66.0103 1-1 66.0107(1)(bp) 46-77 66.0109 1-32 66.0111 1-32 - 70-184 66.0113(3) 1-64 66.0113(3)(d) 1-61 66.0114 1-32 - 70-184 66.0114(1)(b) 70-29 - 70-184 66.0115 1-32 66.0119 26-89 - 74-101 - 105-49 - 105-275 66.0139 Ch. 2, Art. VII - 2-443 66.0301 et seq. 30-23 66.0407 Ch. 78, Art. III - 78-57 66.0409 46-160 66.0413 105-88-105-90 - 105-284 66.0415 26-139 66.0420 et seq. Ch. 66, Art. II 66.0423 Ch. 18, Art. II 66.0425 Ch. 58 (note) - 58-2 - 58-93 66.0511 Ch. 38, Art. II 66.0513 Ch. 38, Art. II 66.0515 2-356 - Ch. 62, Art. III 66.0517 Ch. 78, Art. III, 
Div. 2 66.0517(3)(b) 78-57 66.0601 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 66.0607(4) 74-50 66.0615 62-51 - 62-56 66.0615(4) 62-56 66.0617 Ch. 121 (note) - 121-19 - 121-25 - 121-20 66.0617(1) 121-20 66.0617(4) 121-22 66.0617(7) 121-20 66.0627 Ch. 58, Art. VIII - 58-1 - 58-2 - 109-23 - 109-94 - 109-98 - 109-100 - 109-137 - 109-139 66.0701 58-11 66.0703 58-11 66.0801 et seq. Ch. 74 (note) - 74-44 - Ch. 74, Art. III - Ch. 74, Art. IV - Ch. 74, Art. V 66.0805 Ch. 74, Art. II, 
Div. 2 - 74-44 66.0809 74-256 66.0809(3) 74-78 66.0907 Ch. 58, Art. VIII - 58-48 - 58-325 66.0909 58-48 66.1011 34-20 ch. 68 74-159 68.01-68.14 78-33 - 105-218 - 105-252 68.02 74-159 68.03 74-159 68.11(2) 74-159 68.11(3) 18-179 68.13 18-179 - 74-159 70.27 129-7 - 129-37 70.27(1) 129-96 70.46 Ch. 62, Art. II - 62-22 70.47 Ch. 62, Art. II - 62-22 70.47(7)(af) 2-255 70.49 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 7 - 2-254 71.09(11) 133-157 71.613 133.860 73.02 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 7 73.09 2-254 77.51(4)(a) 62-50 77.52(2)(a)l 62-51 77.54(9a) 62-51 84.07(4) 58-149 85.13 70-29 86.03 78-34 87.30 113-1 - 113-5 87.30 125-1 - 125-6 - 125-43 87.30(2)(a) 113-159 ch. 91 101-57 - 133-94 91.01(b) 133-860 91.01(1) 133-860 91.01(2) 133-860 91.44(f) 133-860 91.48 133-860 ch. 95 Ch. 14 (note) 95.21 14-3 95.21(2) 14-46 ch. 98 18-245 - 18-247 ch. 101 Ch. 30 (note) 101.01 30-1 101.023 105-80 101.123 26-111 101.123(2)(c) 26-112 101.13 133-995 101.132 34-26 101.145 105-87 - 105-277 101.60 et seq. 105-79 101.645 105-87 - 105-277 101.80 et seq. Ch. 105, Art. IV 101.91(2) 34-19 101.935 133-964 102.31 66-60 103.70 46-100 103.72 46-100 106.50 34-25 106.50(1m) 34-19 106.50(2) 34-23 106.50(2m) 34-24 106.50(2r) 34-26 106.50(5m) 34-21 - 133-835 106.52 14-13 106.52(3)(am) 50-22 110.075 70-3 111.32(13m) 34-19 111.321 6-40 - 6-72 111.322 6-40 - 6-72 111.323 6-40 - 6-72 111.325 6-40 - 6-72 111.335 6-40 - 6-72 114.013(3) 133-2 114.195 50-25 118.105 70-85 118.15(1)(d) 46-100 118.16(4) 46-100 118.163 46-100 124.12 et seq. 6-47 ch. 125 Ch. 6 (note) - 6-1 - 6-2 - 6-35 125.02(1) 6-6 125.04 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II 125.04(3) 6-37 125.04(10) 6-43 125.04(12) 50-26 125.07(1)-(4) 6-3 125.07(3)(a)10 6-4 125.09(2) 6-3 125.10 Ch. 6 (note) 125.12 6-47 - 18-1 125.12(2)(d) 6-72 125.17 Ch. 6, Art. II, 
Div. 2 125.17(1) 6-68 125.17(5) 6-71 125.25 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II - 6-36 125.26(6) 6-45 125.32(2) Ch. 6, Art. II, 
Div. 2 125.32(3) 6-8 125.51 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II 125.51(3r) 6-5 - 6-8 125.51 6-36 125.68(2) Ch. 6, Art. II, 
Div. 2 134.65 18-2 134.66 46-101 ch. 145 Ch. 105, Art. VI - 105-251 145.04(3) 105-51 157.07 129-7 160.07 109-90 160.09 109-90 160.15 109-90 167.10 Ch. 30, Art. IV 167.10(1) 30-112 167.10(2) 30-113 167.10(3) 30-114 167.31 46-160 ch. 169 14-8 chs. 172-174 Ch. 14 (note) 173.03 14-1 173.13 et seq. 14-6 174.02 14-2 174.05 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II 174.05-174.09 14-47 174.053 14-48 174.056 14-13 175.25 26-4 ch. 194 70-119 196.01(5) 58-13 196.171 74-158 196.81 58-13 196.941 133-158 202.12 18-311 ch. 236 109-134 - 113-153 - Ch. 129 (note) - 129-6 - 129-14 - 129-92 -- 129-147 - 129-193 236.01 129-4 236.02(12) 113-6 236.02 129-2 - 129-4 236.02(12) 129-9 236.10 et seq. Ch. 129, Art. III 236.12 129-94 236.13(5) 129-37 236.15 129-122 236.15(1) 129-7 236.15(1)(b) 129-66 236.20 et seq. 129-94 236.20 129-122 236.20(1) 129-7 236.20(2)(g) 129-246 236.21 129-122 236.21(2)(a) 129-123 236.29(3) 129-92 236.293 129-2 236.30 129-37 236.31 129-37 236.32 129-37 236.34 129-9 - 129-16 - 129-95 - 129-123 236.34(1)(ar) 129-15 236.40-236.44 129-96 236.45 Ch. 129 (note) - 129-4 - 129-13 254.92 46-101 ch. 281 Ch. 74 (note) - Ch. 74, Art. IV - Ch. 74, Art. V - 105-249 281.01(18) 109-90 281.31 125-1 - 125-95 281.31(2m) 125-92 281.33 Ch. 109 (note) 281.33(3)(b) 109-22 - 109-93 281.33(3)(c) 109-96 281.45 74-158 281.62(2)(a)5 Ch. 26, Art. VI - 26-139 283.33 109-90 - 109-91 - 109-134 chs. 287-289 Ch. 54 (note) 287.07 et seq. Ch. 54, Art. III 287.09 Ch. 54, Art. III 287.10 Ch. 54, Art. III 287.21 46-47 ch. 289 26-88 ch. 291 26-88 291.02 54-47 292.41 26-1 ch. 293 Ch. 26, Art. IV - 26-88 302.46(1) 1-62 chs. 340-348 70-2 chs. 340-350 Ch. 70 (note) 340.01 58-121 340.01(35) 26-3 340.01(40) 46-100 340.01(27h) 70-84 340.01(73) 133-861 chs. 341-348 70-1 341.04(3) 70-3 341.26(3)(b) 133-861 341.265 26-3 341.266 26-3 341.266(4) 133-861 341.30 133-861 341.45(b) 70-3 342.40 26-3 - Ch. 70, Art. V 343.28 70-29 345.11 70-29 - 70-184 345.26 70-184 345.26(1)(a) 70-29 345.27(2) 70-29 345.28(4) 70-29 ch. 346 70-116 346.16 70-79 346.23 et seq. Ch. 70, Art. VIII 346.37 et seq. Ch. 70, Art. II, 
Div. 2 346.41 70-52 346.485(5)(b) 70-30 346.50 et seq. Ch. 70, Art. IV 346.503 133-995 346.56 133-995 346.71-346.73 70-29 346.77 70-208 346.82(1) 70-208 346.94(13) Ch. 70, Art. V ch. 347 70-3 ch. 349 Ch. 70 (note) 349.07 70-78 349.13 Ch. 70, Art. IV - 70-116 - 70-117 349.17 70-79 349.185 58-122 349.26 70-84 ch. 350 Ch. 70, Art. VI 350.02 70-177 - 70-182 350.03 70-177 350.04 70-177 - 70-182 350.045 70-177 - 70-182 350.047 70-177 350.05 70-177 350.07 70-177 350.08 70-177 350.09 70-177 - 70-178 350.095 70-177 350.10 70-177 350.10(6) 70-181 350.101 70-177 350.102 70-177 350.1025 70-177 350.103 70-177 350.104 70-177 350.106 70-177 350.107 70-177 350.11 70-177 350.12 70-177 350.13 70-177 - 70-182 350.135 70-177 350.15 70-177 350.155 70-177 350.17 70-177 350.19 70-177 350.99 70-177 423.203(1)(c) 18-28 440.41 18-25 ch. 442 2-413 443.03 109-133 443.04 109-133 443.06 109-133 460.19 18-91 ch. 703 129-2 - 129-12 - 133-11 703.02(4) 34-19 703.09 133-16 703.27(1) 129-8 704.17 34-21 ch. 755 Ch. 22, Art. II - 22-21 755.03 22-21 755.12-755.14 22-22 757.05 1-62 766.18 22-22 778.25(1)(a) 46-101 ch. 788 66-33 800.09 1-32 800.093 1-61 800.095 1-32 800.10 1-62 813.12 34-21 813.12(1)(am) 34-19 813.122 34-21 813.123 34-21 813.125 34-21 ch. 814 1-61 814.65 1-32 - 22-21 ch. 823 Ch. 26, Art. II 823.02 74-158 887.01-887.03 6-37 893.80 66-60 895.20 1-4 906.03 6-37 ch. 938 46-77 938.01 et seq. 46-102 - 46-138 938.02 46-98 938.17(2) 46-98 - 46-99 938.19 46-102 938.34(5g) 46-100 938.343 46-99 - 46-138 938.344 46-99 938.37 46-100 939.22 46-162 940.225 34-19 940.32 34-19 941.23 46-162 941.235 46-162 943.01(1) 46-46 943.13(1m)(c)4 46-162 ch. 944 18-113 - 18-114 946.10 2-303 946.11 et seq. 2-105 946.11 2-303 946.12 2-303 946.13 2-303 946.71 46-102 946.715 46-102 948.02 34-19 948.025 34-19 ch. 951 Ch. 14 (note) ch. 954 et seq. 46-1 ch. 961 46-73 961.01(4) 34-19 961.11 et seq. 18-91 - 18-113 - 18-114 961.515(2) 46-77 961.573(2) 46-77 961.574(1) 46-77 961.575(1) 46-77 967.02(5) 14-1 973.055(1) 1-62 ch. 985 113-6 - 121-25 - 133-74 -- 133-96 985.02(2)(a) 2-62 990.001(4) 1-4 990.001(11) 1-35 990.001(24) 1-2 990.002 1-2  
